CITY CODE
of
SAVANNA, ILLINOIS
1977
Code current through:
Ord. 2376, passed 8-26-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREAMBLE
   This code of the City of Savanna, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 2376, passed August 26, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ADOPTING 1977 CODE
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF SAVANNA, ILLINOIS
   BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Savanna,
Illinois, an Illinois Municipal Corporation.
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City
Code of the City of Savanna, Illinois, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
under the direction of the governing body of the City, containing all
ordinances of a general nature in effect at the time of such codification,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code and Law
of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding to or deleting
provisions of the Official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and
is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such new
provision shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance and the
insertion of the proper replacement pages in the copies of the Code, three (3)
copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified
as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said
office is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said Official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed to be included in the Official City Code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this Section shall be punished as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of the City Code of Savanna, Illinois.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with
law, as printed and published in book form by order of the Mayor and City
Council.
         INTRODUCED: 11 Jan. 1977   
         PASSED: 11 Jan. 1977   
         APPROVED: 11 Jan. 1977   
         /s/ Donald H. Nehrkorn   
   Mayor
ATTEST: 11 Jan. 1977
/s/ Laud A. Castle
City Clerk
RECORDED: 12 Jan. 1977
PUBLISHED: 18 Jan. 1977
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Interpretations
1-1-5: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the council this code is hereby declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official code of the city of Savanna. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the SAVANNA CITY CODE, and it is hereby
published by authority of the council and shall be kept up to date as provided
in section
1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the city attorney, acting for the
said city council. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein
shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (1977 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1977 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(1977 Code)
1-1-4: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order
to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
   (B)   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section
of this code prohibit the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person
shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.
(1977 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain said code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the city clerk.
Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to
the office of the clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council.
(1977 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following sections), from which are
excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the city; and all special ordinances. (1977 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance
or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1977 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable, if
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein
repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (1977 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words
importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be
deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be
repugnant thereto. (1977 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The city of Savanna, county of Carroll, state of Illinois.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Savanna".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
KNOWINGLY: The word "knowingly" imports only a knowledge that the facts exist
which brings the act or omission within the provisions of this code. It does
not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
NEGLIGENT: The word "negligent", as well as "neglect", "negligence" and
"negligently" imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in
acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Savanna".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PUBLIC HEALTH OFFICER: The term "public health officer" or "health officer"
when used in this code shall mean the Carroll County environmental health
director or their designee.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the
whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The word "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1846, 7-25-2006)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalties
1-4-2: License
1-4-3: Application
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-5: Returned Check Charges
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTIES:
   (A)   Fine: Except as otherwise provided, any person convicted of a
violation of any section or provision of this Code shall be fined a sum not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) for any one offense 1 . (Ord. 2039, 5-28-2013)
   (B)   Prompt Admission Of Guilt And Payment Of Fine: Any person charged with
a violation of a City ordinance and served with a citation, may, in lieu of
having a court hearing, sign a plea of guilty to the ordinance violation and
pay a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the City. To exercise this
option, both the plea of guilty and fine must be delivered to the Savanna
Police Department, 333 Chicago Avenue, Savanna, Illinois, within forty eight
(48) hours of issuance of the violation. (Ord. 2229, 7-24-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.
1-4-2: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this Code, any
license previously issued to him by the City may be revoked by a court of
competent jurisdiction or by the City Council. (1977 Code)
1-4-3: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where any duty
is prescribed or violation imposed, or where any action which is of a
continuing nature is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this Code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this Code, and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1977 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of
the Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1977
Code)
1-4-5: RETURNED CHECK CHARGES:
Customers whose checks are returned for insufficient funds shall pay a returned
check fee of thirty dollars ($30.00). (Ord. 2230, 7-24-2018)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election And Term Of Office
1-5-2: Bond And Oath
1-5-3: Supervisory Powers
1-5-4: Designation Of Duties
1-5-5: Appointments
1-5-6: Removal Of Officers
1-5-7: Licenses
1-5-8: Signature
1-5-9: Peace Officer
1-5-10: Mayor Pro Tem
1-5-11: Salary
1-5-1: ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE:
The mayor shall be elected for a term of four (4) years. He shall be mayor of
the city council as provided by statute 1 . (1977 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/6-3-3, 5/6-3-4.
1-5-2: BOND AND OATH:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the mayor shall have a surety
bond conditioned upon his faithful performance of his duties, in the sum of
three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). He shall take the oath of office prescribed
by statute, and shall receive such compensation as may be set from time to time
by the council. (1977 Code)
1-5-3: SUPERVISORY POWERS:
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and shall perform
all such duties as may be required of him by statute or ordinance. He shall
have general supervision over all the executive officers of the city and over
all of the employees of the city. He shall have the power and authority to
inspect all books and records kept by any city officer or employee at any
reasonable time. (1977 Code)
1-5-4: DESIGNATION OF DUTIES:
The mayor shall settle any question as to the respective powers or duties of
any appointed officer or employee of the city. He shall have the power to
delegate to any such officer any duty which is to be performed when no specific
officer has been directed to perform the duty. (1977 Code)
1-5-5: APPOINTMENTS:
The mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the city
council, all officers whose appointment is not otherwise provided for by law;
and whenever a vacancy occurs in any office, which by law or ordinance he is
empowered and required to fill, he shall, within thirty (30) days after the
happening of such vacancy, communicate to the council the name of his appointee
to such office, and pending the concurrence of the council in such appointment,
he may designate some suitable person to discharge the functions of such
office. All city officials appointed by the mayor shall be appointed for a term
of four (4) years but in no event shall such appointment exceed the unexpired
term of the mayor. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1803, 7-12-2005)
1-5-6: REMOVAL OF OFFICERS:
The mayor shall have the power to remove any officer appointed by him on any
formal charge whenever he is of the opinion that the interests of the city
demand such removal. He shall report the reasons for such removal to the
council at a meeting to be held not less than five (5) days, nor more than ten
(10) days after such removal. If the mayor shall fail or refuse to file with
the clerk a statement of the reasons for such removal or if the council, by a
two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members authorized by law to be elected, by
"yeas" and "nays", to be entered upon its record, disapprove of such removal,
such officer shall thereupon become restored to the office from which he was
removed, but he shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer
shall be removed a second time for the same offense. (1977 Code)
1-5-7: LICENSES:
The mayor shall grant licenses for the purposes authorized by this code to such
persons as he may deem proper, unless the council shall otherwise provide, and
he may revoke the same for cause. (1977 Code)
1-5-8: SIGNATURE:
The Mayor shall sign all City warrants, commissions, permits and licenses
granted by authority of the Council, except as otherwise provided, and such
other acts and deeds as law or ordinance may require his official signature.
(1977 Code)
1-5-9: PEACE OFFICER:
The Mayor may exercise within the City limits the powers conferred upon
sheriffs by law to suppress disorder and keep the peace. (1977 Code)
1-5-10: MAYOR PRO TEM:
During the temporary absence or disability of the Mayor, the Council shall
elect one of its number to act as Mayor Pro Tem, who during the absence or
disability of the Mayor shall perform the duties of the office. On such
occasions, the City Clerk will open all regular and special Council meetings
with the first order of business being to elect a Mayor Pro Tem. (1977 Code;
amd. Ord. 1814, 9-27-2005)
1-5-11: SALARY:
The salary of the elected Mayor of the City of Savanna is twelve thousand five
hundred dollars ($12,500) per annum; in addition, he/she shall receive fifty
and 00/100 Dollars ($50.00) per annum as Liquor Commissioner, provided he/she
also serves as Liquor Commissioner; in addition, salary of the elected Mayor of
the City of Savanna shall be reviewed every four (4) years. (Ord. 2226, 7-24-
2018; amd. Ord. 2279, 8-25-2020)
CHAPTER 6
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election And Functions
1-6-2: Vacancies
1-6-3: Oath And Salary
1-6-4: Meetings
1-6-5: Presiding Officer
1-6-6: Mayor's Vote
1-6-7: Mayor's Veto Power
1-6-8: Passage Over Veto, Reconsideration
1-6-9: Rules And Order Of Business
1-6-10: Committees
1-6-11: Rescinded Action
1-6-12: Resolutions
1-6-13: Personnel Regulations
1-6-14: Right Of City Employees
1-6-15: Presentation Of Proposed Expenditures To The Budget Committee
1-6-1: ELECTION AND FUNCTIONS:
The City Council, consisting of eight (8) members, shall be elected to office
for a four (4) year term, according to the method provided by statute 1 . The
Council shall be the Legislative Department of the City government, and shall
perform such duties and have such powers as may be delegated by statute to it.
(1977 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/6-3-3, 5/6-3-4.
1-6-2: VACANCIES:
If a vacancy occurs in the office of a Council member, the vacancy shall be
filled for the remainder of the term at the next City election, unless a
special election is called. Until such election is held, the vacancy may be
filled by the appointment of a Council member by the Mayor and the remaining
Council members voting jointly. (1977 Code)
1-6-3: OATH AND SALARY:
The members of the City Council shall take the oath of office prescribed by
statute, and shall receive such compensation as provided by ordinance.
   (A)   Aldermen: The salary of the elected aldermen of the city of Savanna is
fifty dollars ($50.00) per regular council meeting attended in person or
electronically and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each special council
meeting attended. Each alderman shall be allowed three (3) absences per
calendar year for any cause without loss of compensation at the foregoing rate.
In addition, each councilman shall receive twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
attendance as a committee member at a scheduled committee meeting. (Ord. 2052,
7-23-2013; amd. Ord. 2272, 7-14-2020)
1-6-4: MEETINGS:
   (A)   Regular Meetings: The regular stated meeting of the Mayor and City
Council shall be held in the Council Chamber of the City Municipal Building on
the second and fourth Tuesdays, in each and every month at the hour of six
o’clock (6:00) P.M. When the regularly scheduled meeting falls on a City
holiday or on the date of a local, state or national election the meeting will
take place the Wednesday following.
   (B)   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the Mayor upon at
least a twenty four (24) hour written notice personally served on all members.
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2189, 12-27-2016; Ord. 2271, 6-23-2020; Ord. 2337, 1-23-
2024)
1-6-5: PRESIDING OFFICER:
The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of regular and special meetings of the
City Council and when the Council meets as a Committee of the Whole. In the
Mayor's absence, the Mayor Pro Tem shall preside at all such meetings.
At the first regular Council meeting of January, or as soon thereafter as is
practical, the Council shall elect one Council member to serve as the Mayor Pro
Tem for that calendar year. The Mayor Pro Tem shall receive Council member
compensation while in attendance at regular, special and committee meetings.
(Ord. 1888, 2-12-2008)
1-6-6: MAYOR'S VOTE:
The Mayor shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution or motion except:
   (A)   Where the vote of the Council has resulted in a tie; or
   (B)   Where one-half (1/2) of the council members have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution or motion even though there is no tie; or
   (C)   Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities is
required by state statute to adopt an ordinance, resolution or motion.
In the latter situation, however, the mayor may not vote where a vote is being
taken to override his veto. In the instances specified, the mayor must vote.
Nothing in this section shall deprive the mayor pro tem from voting in his
capacity as council member, but he shall not be entitled to another vote in his
capacity as mayor pro tem. (1977 Code)
1-6-7: MAYOR'S VETO POWER:
All resolutions and motions which create any liability against the city, or
which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, or the sale of
any city property, and all ordinances passed by the city council shall be
deposited with the clerk. If the mayor approves of any one of them, he shall
sign it, and if he disapproves, he shall return it to the council with his
written objections at the next regular meeting of the council occurring not
less than five (5) days after its passage. The mayor may disapprove of any one
or more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolution, or motion making an
appropriation, and if so, the remainder shall be effective. The mayor may
disapprove entirely of an ordinance, resolution or motion making an
appropriation. If the mayor fails to return any ordinance or any specified
resolution with his written objections within the designated time, it shall
become effective despite the absence of his signature. (1977 Code)
1-6-8: PASSAGE OVER VETO, RECONSIDERATION:
Every resolution and motion specified in section
1-6-7 of this chapter and every ordinance which is returned to the council by
the mayor shall be reconsidered by the council. If, after such reconsideration,
two-thirds (2/3) of all the members elected to the council shall agree to pass
an ordinance, resolution or motion, notwithstanding the mayor's refusal to
approve it, it shall be effective. The vote on the question of passage over the
mayor's veto shall be by "yeas" and "nays", and shall be recorded in the
journal. (1977 Code)
1-6-9: RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS:
Hereafter, and until further order of the council, the rules and order of
business of the mayor and city council shall be as follows: (1977 Code)
   (A)   Order Of Business:
      1.   Roll call;
      2.   Establishment of quorum;
      3.   Approval of agenda (though it is not recommended, in exigent
circumstances, new business items may be added to the agenda at the meeting and
can be discussed, but cannot be acted on);
      4.   Approval of minutes;
      5.   Reports of standing committees;
      6.   Approval of consent agenda (if applicable);
      7.   Warrants/bills;
      8.   Petitions;
      9.   Communications;
      10.   Appointments;
      11.   Bids;
      12.   Monthly reports;
      13.   Unfinished business;
      14.   New business;
      15.   Citizens' comments (3 minutes per speaker and no more than 15
minutes as an item);
      16.   Council members' comments;
      17.   Motion for executive session (when applicable);
      18.   Adjournment. (Ord. 1850, 9-12-2006)
   (B)   Rules Of Procedure:
      1.   The mayor shall take the chair at the hour to which the council
shall have adjourned, and call the members to order. If a quorum be present, he
shall cause the minutes of the last meeting to be read, unless a majority
present at the meeting vote to dispense with the reading of said minutes. A
majority of all the members elected to the office of mayor and to the city
council shall constitute a quorum.
      2.   The mayor shall preserve order and decorum, may speak only to points
of order and in preference to any member and decide questions of order subject
to an appeal to the mayor and council members by any two (2) members, on which
appeal no member may speak more than once, unless by leave of the mayor and
council members.
      3.   Every question or motion, when seconded, shall be stated by the
mayor distinctly before it is open for debate. When a question is put, if the
mayor is in doubt or a division is called for by any member, the council shall
decide. The mayor may call any member to perform the duties of the chair; but
such substitution shall not extend beyond an adjournment.
      4.   Every member, previous to his speaking, shall arise from his seat
and address the chair, and say, "Mr. Mayor", and shall not proceed with his
remarks until named and recognized by the chair.
      5.   If any member is speaking, or otherwise transgresses the rules of
the mayor and council, the mayor shall, or any member may, call him to order,
and the member called to order shall immediately sit down, unless permitted to
explain and the council, if appealed to, shall decide without debate. If the
decision be in favor of the member called to order, he shall be at liberty to
proceed. If against him and the case required it, he shall be liable to the
censure of the council.
      6.   No person shall speak more than twice on the same question, unless
permitted by the council, and no member of the council shall leave his seat to
speak to any other member of the council or any other person in the hall
without first obtaining permission of the mayor.
      7.   Every member, when a question is taken, shall vote unless excused by
the mayor and council, unless he be directly interested in the question, in
which event no member shall vote, and every motion shall be reduced to writing
if the mayor or any member desires it.
      8.   After a report is made or a motion stated by the mayor, it shall be
deemed as in possession of the mayor and city council, but it may be amended or
laid on the table, or withdrawn at any time before the question is taken.
      9.   When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received but to
adjourn, lay on the table the previous question, postpone to a certain day, to
commit, to amend, or postpone indefinitely; which several motions shall have
precedence in the order in which they are arranged. A motion to adjourn shall
always be in order and decided without debate.
      10.   A motion for the previous question to lay the question on the
table, or commit it until it is decided, shall preclude all amendment and
debate on the main question and a motion to postpone a question indefinitely or
to adjourn to a certain day shall, until it is decided, preclude all amendments
to the main question.
      11.   The "previous question" shall be as follows: "Shall the main
question now be put?" (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1850, 9-12-2006)
      12.   In voting on all ordinances and on all resolutions or motions
creating liabilities or for expenditure of funds, the "ayes" and "nays" of each
member must be taken and recorded in the minutes of the council. A concurrence
of a majority of all the members elected to the office of mayor and the city
council shall be necessary to the passage of any ordinance, resolution or
motion. All other council matters may be taken and recorded by a simple voice
vote. Any council member may move that a matter otherwise authorized to be
recorded by voice vote be voted on by "ayes" and "nays" either before or after
consideration of the matter. (Ord. 1920, 8-11-2009)
      13.   Every ordinance shall be numbered when introduced, and published
when ordered by the mayor and city council.
      14.   When an ordinance is introduced, it shall be read and laid over
until the next regular meeting, unless the rules are suspended. If the rules
are suspended, it shall be read the second time, by title only, and put upon
its passage, and at any regular meeting of the mayor and city council
thereafter said ordinance may be read a third time by title only and put upon
its passage.
      15.   When any standing or special committee shall be appointed, the
clerk shall deliver the names of the committee members to the chairman of the
same on the day of and after their appointment, and the chairman shall call
them together and when a quorum of the committee is present, it shall transact
such business as may come before it.
      16.   All standing and select committees to whom any matter is referred
shall report there in writing at the next regular meeting, giving facts and
their opinions thereof, and said report shall be signed by a majority of said
committee, permitting also a minority report.
      17.   Any report of a committee to the mayor and city council shall be
deferred for final action thereon until the next regular meeting of the same
after the report is made upon request of any two (2) council members present.
      18.   When a motion contains several distinct propositions, any member
may call for a division of the question, so as to take the vote on each
proposition separately.
      19.   All petitions addressed to the mayor and city council shall be in
writing and filed with the clerk at least ten (10) days before being presented
to the mayor and city council at a regular or special meeting, and no action
shall be taken on said petition until the next regular meeting, or any meeting
thereafter following the date the aforesaid petition is filed. All petitions
shall be accompanied by an affidavit, acknowledged by a notary public, by the
person or persons circulating said petitions and stating that the signatures on
the petition are the true and genuine signatures signing same and that they
were signed by said petitioners in the presence of the circulator.
      20.   In all cases where a resolution or motion shall be entered on the
minutes of the mayor and city council, the name of the member moving the same
shall be entered on the minutes.
      21.   All reports made by committees, and all resolutions adopted by the
mayor and city council shall be held and preserved by the clerk. (1977 Code;
amd. Ord. 1850, 9-12-2006)
      22.   On taking the "ayes" and "nays" on any question, the names of the
members shall be called, and the senior member's name shall be called first.
Each member shall answer to his name which shall be entered on the proceedings.
      23.   When the mayor and city council are in session, or when a member is
speaking or the clerk is reading any paper to the mayor and city council, no
member shall enter into a private conversation, or in any way disturb the
proceedings of the mayor and council.
      24.   No chairman of a standing or select committee shall contract any
liability against the city until a majority of the committee have recommended
such expenditure, and have so reported to the mayor and city council.
      25.   All the new business introduced at any meeting shall be referred to
the appropriate committee, and laid over until the next regular meeting. (Ord.
2169, 5-24-2016)
      26.   (a) Standing Committees: The following standing committees shall be
annually appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent and approval of the
city council:
            (1)   Finance committee.
      (2)   Public Works Committee.
      (3)   Housing Committee.
      (4)   Public Safety Committee.
      (5)   Grant Review Committee.
      (6)   Hotel/Motel Tax Committee.
      (7)   TIFF Investment and Business Development District Committee.
      (8)   Personnel Committee.
      (b)   The Chairman of each committee shall have power to act on routine
matters under his or her committee’s jurisdiction.
      (c)   Special Committees: The mayor may also appoint special committees
to aid in the handling of problems that can be disposed of in a relatively
short time. Members of special committees shall be appointed by the mayor by
and with the consent and approval of the city council and serve u until the
committee submits its report or until the problem that led to the committee
formation is resolved.
   27.   No application for abatement or revision of any fine shall be allowed
except by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of members elected.
   28.   The “ayes” and “nays” shall be taken upon the passage of all
resolutions or propositions to create any liability against the city or the
expenditure or appropriation of any money, and in all other cases at the
request of any member, and shall be entered upon the minutes of its
proceedings, and a concurrence of a majority of all the members present at the
meeting shall be necessary for the passage of any such resolution or
proposition; and all city officers shall bring in their reports in writing.
   29.   No motion for reconsideration of any ordinance or other matter shall
be entertained by the chair unless made before adjournment of the mayor and
council at the meeting it is acted on and then only when the same number of
members are present and the motion made by a member having voted with the
majority.
   30.   No person, other than the mayor or a member of the council, shall be
permitted to speak on any subject at a meeting of said council unless called
upon by the mayor, or unless such person shall have first received permission
of the council to be heard, stating the subject upon which he desires to be
heard and the clerk shall get his name and address.
   31.   The above rules of procedure and order of business shall be adhered to
invariably by the mayor and council unless the same shall be temporarily
suspended by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all members elected to the office of
mayor and to the council.
   32.   The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in “Robert’s Rules of
Order” shall govern the council in all cases in which they are applicable and
in which they are not inconsistent with the standing rules and orders of the
council. (Ord. 2169, 5-24-2016; amd. Ord. 2351, 4-23-2024)
1-6-10: COMMITTEES:
Each standing and special committee shall consist of three (3) members, unless
the Council shall otherwise direct. Members of committees shall be appointed by
the Mayor. The Mayor shall be an ex officio member of each committee. (1977
Code)
1-6-11: RESCINDED ACTION:
No vote or action of the Council shall be rescinded at any special meeting of
the Council unless there is present at such special meeting as many members of
the Council as were present at the meeting when such vote or action was taken,
as provided by statute. (1977 Code)
1-6-12: RESOLUTIONS:
On request of any two (2) members of the Council, any resolution submitted to
the Council shall be reduced to writing before being voted upon. (1977 Code)
1-6-13: PERSONNEL REGULATIONS:
The Mayor and City Council, together with department heads will formulate all
personnel regulations for both City officials and City employees. Such
regulations will be documented in the form of a resolution and will cover wage
scales, salaries, leaves of absence, sick pay, vacation pay, holiday pay,
longevity promotions, hospitalization and insurance benefits as well as rules
relevant to discipline, suspensions and removal from the City roster. (1977
Code)
1-6-14: RIGHT OF CITY EMPLOYEES:
No member of the City Council, including the position of Mayor, shall have the
right to hold an existing City position other than the office to which he was
elected. (Ord. 1734, 7-8-2003)
1-6-15: PRESENTATION OF PROPOSED EXPENDITURES TO THE BUDGET COMMITTEE:
   (A)   All motions to expend or appropriate funds of the City shall be
referred to the Budget Committee for study and shall not be considered by the
City Council until reported out by the Budget Committee, unless the City
Council by a two-thirds (2/3) vote otherwise directs.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to expenditures or motions related to
expenditures not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) by the Mayor in
accordance with the budget as approved. (Ord. 1695, 6-11-2002)
CHAPTER 7
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Officers And Employees
1-7-2: Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
1-7-1: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
   (A)   Effect: The provisions of this chapter shall apply alike to all
officers and employees of the city regardless of the time of the creation of
the office or position or the time of the appointment of the officer or
employee.
   (B)   Appointments: All officers other than elective officers, shall be
appointed by the mayor by and with the consent of the council as provided by
statute. Employees of the city shall, in the absence of any provisions to the
contrary, be appointed or selected by the mayor. The services of any employee
may be terminated at any time by the mayor at his discretion. (1977 Code)
   (C)   Term Of Office: Every appointive officer of the city shall hold office
for a term of up to four (4) years or until his successor is appointed and
qualified, unless it is otherwise provided by ordinance. In no event shall such
appointment exceed the unexpired term of the mayor. In case of a vacancy, it
shall be filled in the same manner in which appointments or selections are
made, in absence of provisions to the contrary. (Ord. 1835, 4-11-2006)
   (D)   Oath: Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon his
duties, take the oath prescribed by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-4-9.
   (E)   Bond: Every officer and employee shall, if required by the council,
upon entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond in such amount and
with such sureties as may be determined by the council, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the duties of his office or position.
   (F)   Salaries: All officers and employees of the city shall receive such
salary as may be from time to time provided by ordinance or resolution.
   (G)   Assignment Of Duties: The council shall have the power to assign to
any appointive officer any duty which is not assigned by law or ordinance to
some other specific officer. The council shall also determine disputes or
questions relating to the respective powers or duties of officers.
   (H)   Records: All records kept by any officer of the city shall be open to
inspection by the mayor or any member of the council at all reasonable times,
whether or not such records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance.
   (I)   Conservators Of The Peace: The mayor, members of the council and every
member of the police department are declared to be conservators of the peace
with such powers to make arrests as are given to conservators of the peace by
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-9-4.
   (J)   Delivery Of Records: Every officer and employee of the city shall,
upon the expiration of his term for any reason, deliver to his successor all
books and records which may be the property of the city, and if no successor is
appointed within one week after the termination of office, such property shall
be delivered to the clerk or treasurer. (1977 Code)
   (K)   Retiring Employees With Fifteen Or More Years Of Service: All officers
and employees who retire from municipal service with fifteen (15) or more years
of service to the city shall be provided with a gift of cash in an amount not
to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), a plaque of recognition
identifying their years of service and a retirement reception at city hall.
(Ord. 1733, 7-8-2003)
1-7-2: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND:
The city council elects that the city shall participate in the Illinois
municipal retirement fund. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 8
CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-8-1: Qualifications
1-8-2: Duties
1-8-3: Minutes And Notices; Council Meetings
1-8-4: Record Of Ordinances
1-8-5: Publication Of Ordinances
1-8-6: Preparing Documents
1-8-7: Notices Of Elections
1-8-8: Record Of Elections
1-8-9: Deputy Clerk
1-8-10: Bond
1-8-11: Salary
1-8-1: QUALIFICATIONS:
The clerk shall be a qualified elector of the city who shall have resided
within the city at least one year next preceding his election, and no person
shall be eligible to the office who is a defaulter to the city. (1977 Code)
1-8-2: DUTIES:
The clerk shall devote such time to his office as the duties of the office
shall require; subject to the direction of the mayor and council. He shall
superintend the work of any assistants furnished his office. (1977 Code)
1-8-3: MINUTES AND NOTICES; COUNCIL MEETINGS:
The clerk shall attend all meetings of the council and shall keep in a suitable
book, to be furnished by the city, a full and faithful record of its
proceedings. He shall issue and cause to be served upon all aldermen notices of
all special meetings of the council. (1977 Code)
1-8-4: RECORD OF ORDINANCES:
The clerk shall, within thirty (30) days after their passage, record and
properly index in a book for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the
council, and at the foot of the record of each ordinance recorded, he shall
make a memorandum of the date of its passage, the action of the mayor thereon,
and of the publication of the ordinance. He shall furnish copies of all
ordinances amending this code in any manner whatsoever and enacted by council
for inclusion in the official code books supplied to the city officials and
shall distribute same as soon as possible. (1977 Code)
1-8-5: PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES:
The clerk shall cause all ordinances passed by the council imposing any fine,
penalty, imprisonment, forfeiture, or making any appropriation, or any other
documents which by law are required to be published in a newspaper, to be
published within ten (10) days after their passage in some newspaper published
within the city, and he shall file and preserve in his office the certificate
of the publisher as to such publication. (1977 Code)
1-8-6: PREPARING DOCUMENTS:
The clerk shall prepare all commissions and other official documents required
to be issued under the laws of the city except as otherwise specially provided
for, and shall attest the same with the corporate seal; and he shall, in like
manner, attest all deeds for the sale of real estate owned and conveyed by the
city. (1977 Code)
1-8-7: NOTICES OF ELECTIONS:
The clerk shall, within five (5) days after the result of any election is
declared or appointment is made, notify all persons elected or appointed. (1977
Code)
1-8-8: RECORD OF ELECTIONS:
The clerk shall keep a record of the election or appointment and confirmation
of all officers of the city and the record shall exhibit the name of the
officer, to what office elected or appointed, the date or confirmation of
election, the date of his commission, and the date of death, resignation,
removal from office, or expiration of term of office. (1977 Code)
1-8-9: DEPUTY CLERK:
The city clerk is authorized to appoint in writing one deputy clerk from and
among the regular employees of his office and may empower such deputy clerk to
affix his authenticated signature to any and all necessary documents including
certificates. Upon such appointment the clerk shall report the same to the
Council and shall require the genuine signature of such Deputy Clerk to be
inserted in the journal of proceedings. (1977 Code)
1-8-10: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of this office, the City Clerk shall execute
and file with the City Treasurer a bond in a penal sum as may be required by
the Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties. (Ord.
1756, 1-13-2004)
1-8-11: SALARY:
The salary of the elected City Clerk of the City of Savanna is two thousand
eight hundred dollars ($2,800.00) per annum. (Ord. 2190, 12-27-2016)
CHAPTER 9
CITY BUDGET OFFICER (TREASURER-COMPTROLLER)
SECTION:
1-9-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-9-2: Bond
1-9-3: Duties
1-9-4: Documents, Custody
1-9-5: Signature
1-9-6: Estimate Of Expenses
1-9-7: Ex Officio City Collector
1-9-8: Warrants; Bonds
1-9-9: Disbursements
1-9-10: Special Assessments
1-9-11: Accounting System
1-9-12: Additional Duties
1-9-13: Administrative Fee
1-9-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
   (A)   There hereby is created the office of city budget officer as an
executive office of the city. The city budget officer shall be appointed by the
mayor subject to the advice and consent of the city council. The city budget
officer shall serve ex officio as the city treasurer and city comptroller and
shall perform all functions and comply with all duties of each in accordance
with this Code and Sections 3.1-35-40 through 3.1-35-85 and Sections 3.1-35-100
through 3.1-35-130 of the Illinois Municipal Code. All references to the city
comptroller, comptroller, city treasurer, or treasurer within this code shall
mean and apply to the office of city budget officer.
   (B)   Statutory Authority And Duties Of The City Budget Officer: The City
Budget Officer shall, in addition to those provided in subsection
1-9-1(A), perform the duties of a municipal budget officer as that position is
defined in Sections 8-2-9.2 of the Illinois Municipal Code. (Ord. 1624, 10-27-
1998; amd. ord. 2376, 8-26-2025)
1-9-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city comptroller shall
execute and file with the city treasurer a bond in the penal sum of twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and with such sureties as may be required by the
council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties. (1977 Code)
1-9-3: DUTIES:
The comptroller shall direct, coordinate and be responsible for the collection,
investment and disbursement of all city funds; he shall file, record and be
familiar with all contracts involving the city; he shall assign and supervise
the work of clerical people in the recording, receipting and posting to proper
accounts, revenue received by the comptroller's office. He shall receive all
invoices from suppliers and check with department heads to see that all items
on the purchase orders have been delivered to the city before preparing
vouchers for payment. He shall be familiar with all contracts of the city and
the term of contracts and inform the clerk in sufficient time so that renewal
of the contracts may be negotiated by the city. (1977 Code)
1-9-4: DOCUMENTS, CUSTODY:
The city comptroller shall have custody and control of all such municipal
documents, books and papers which he is required by statute or ordinance to
keep. (1977 Code)
1-9-5: SIGNATURE:
The city comptroller may designate, in writing, one or more persons who shall
have authority to affix his signature as comptroller to any written instrument
which is required to be signed by the comptroller. When the comptroller's
signature is so affixed to a written instrument at the comptroller's direction,
the instrument in all respects shall be as binding on the city as if signed by
the comptroller in person. When the comptroller designates a person for this
purpose, however, he shall notify the city council to that effect and state in
the notice the specific instruments which he has authorized the person to sign.
(1977 Code)
1-9-6: ESTIMATE OF EXPENSES:
On or before May 15 of each year, and before the annual budget ordinance is
prepared by the corporate authorities, the comptroller shall submit to the
corporate authorities a report of his estimate, as nearly as may be, of the
money necessary to defray the expenses of the municipality during the current
fiscal year. For the purpose of making this report, he is authorized to require
all officers of the city to submit statements of the condition and expenses of
their offices or departments with any proposed municipal improvements and the
probable expenses thereof; a statement of all unperformed contracts, and the
amount of all unexpended appropriations of the preceding year. His report shall
also:
   (A)   Classify the different objects and purposes of such estimated
expenditures giving as nearly as may be, the amounts required for each;
   (B)   Show the aggregate income of the preceding fiscal year, from all
sources;
   (C)   Show the amount of liabilities on which interest is to be paid;
   (D)   Show the bonds and debts due and payable and dates when such are due
and payable; and
   (E)   Give such other information regarding the financial situation of the
city as the council may require so that the corporate authorities may fully
understand the demands upon the municipality for the current fiscal year. (1977
Code)
1-9-7: EX OFFICIO CITY COLLECTOR:
The city comptroller shall be ex officio city collector and shall perform the
following duties:
   (A)   He shall preserve all warrants returned to him.
   (B)   He shall keep such books and accounts as the city council may direct.
   (C)   He shall keep all warrants, books, vouchers and papers pertaining to
the office of collector open for the inspection by the mayor or any member or
committee of the city council.
   (D)   He is prohibited from keeping the city's money in his possession or in
the possession of any person for his use beyond the time prescribed and its
payment to the city treasurer.
   (E)   Upon completion of each fiscal year, he shall place on file with the
city council, a financial statement showing:
      1.   All revenue collected during the year and the account on which
collected;
      2.   Disbursements against each account;
      3.   Cash balance of each account;
      4.   All money invested in each account.
   (F)   He shall make such additional reports to the council or to any officer
designated by the council of the city's financial status as the council may
request or require by ordinance. (1977 Code)
1-9-8: WARRANTS; BONDS:
The city comptroller shall keep a record of all warrants or orders filed with
him or paid by him and all vouchers as is required by statute.
The comptroller shall keep in his office, in books used solely for that
purpose, a correct list of all the outstanding bonds of the city showing the
number and amount of each, and the agent for whom and to whom the bonds were
issued. He shall also show therein when any city bonds are purchased, paid or
cancelled. In his annual report the city comptroller shall describe every item
of expense incurred therewith. (1977 Code)
1-9-9: DISBURSEMENTS:
No payment of any money shall be made out of any fund except upon warrants duly
executed by the mayor and countersigned by the city treasurer and this rule
shall apply to any principal and interest of bonds and temporary loans,
provided that all payments of money from any fund must be authorized by the
city council. (1977 Code)
1-9-10: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
The city comptroller shall keep all money received on any special assessment in
a separate fund, to be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the
assessment was made, and the money shall be used for no other purpose, except
to reimburse the city for money expended for such improvement. (1977 Code)
1-9-11: ACCOUNTING SYSTEM:
The city comptroller shall accept and put in use the accounting system provided
for the city by the current city auditors, and shall follow as nearly as
possible the system provided for the keeping of such books as recommended by
said auditors. (1977 Code)
1-9-12: ADDITIONAL DUTIES:
The city treasurer-comptroller shall possess all powers and perform all duties
imposed by Illinois statutes upon municipal treasurers. In addition, the city
treasurer-comptroller shall have such additional powers and perform such
additional duties as the city council, by ordinance or resolution, deems
necessary and proper. (Ord. 1624, 10-27-1998)
1-9-13: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
The treasurer-comptroller is authorized to include and collect a ten dollar
($10.00) administrative fee on all city accounts receivable invoices. (Ord.
2119, 2-24-2015)
CHAPTER 10
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-10-1: Authorization To Employ; Appointment
1-10-2: Bond
1-10-3: Compensation
1-10-4: Chief Administrator
1-10-5: Acting Administrator
1-10-6: Appointment Power
1-10-7: Powers And Duties
1-10-8: Matters Directed To Administrator's Attention
1-10-9: Removal
1-10-1: AUTHORIZATION TO EMPLOY; APPOINTMENT:
The mayor and city council are hereby authorized to employ a city administrator
for employment periods up to four (4) years but in no event longer than the
term of the mayor. Such administrator shall be appointed by the mayor, by and
with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 2141, 9-22-2015)
1-10-2: BOND:
The city administrator shall furnish a bond in such amount and with such surety
as may be approved by the corporate authorities, such bond to be conditioned
upon the faithful performance of his or her duties. The cost of the bond shall
be paid by the city. The bond of the city administrator may be part of a
blanket bond. (Ord. 2141, 9-22-2015)
1-10-3: COMPENSATION:
The city administrator shall receive such compensation as the corporate
authorities shall, from time to time, establish. The city council may enter
into an employment agreement which specifies in writing provisions, including,
but not limited to, establishing the level of compensation of the city
administrator, specifying benefits including levels of support for the city
administrator's continuing professional education and association activities,
determining separation pay upon termination of the city administrator's
employment and defining other conditions of employment. (Ord. 2141, 9-22-2015)
1-10-4: CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR:
The city administrator, under and subject to the direction of the corporate
authorities, shall be the chief administrator of the city, and shall be
responsible to the corporate authorities for the proper administration of the
affairs of the city and policies adopted by the city council. (Ord. 2141, 9-22-
2015)
1-10-5: ACTING ADMINISTRATOR:
Whenever the city administrator is absent from the city for personal reasons,
or on account of city business, or is otherwise unable to perform the duties
and responsibilities of city administrator due to short term illness or
disability, the city administrator, with the consent of the mayor, may
designate in writing a member of the city's senior administrative staff to
serve as acting administrator and to carry out the duties of the administrator
during the administrator's absence. In the event of a prolonged absence, as
determined by either the city administrator or the mayor and city council, then
the mayor by and with the advice and consent of the city council, shall appoint
an acting administrator, whose office shall be temporary and who shall serve
only until such time as the city administrator is able to resume the duties of
his office. (Ord. 2141, 9-22-2015)
1-10-6: APPOINTMENT POWER:
The city administrator, with the approval of the mayor, with the advice and
consent of the city council, may appoint such assistants, department heads, or
employees as are necessary to the proper functioning of the city, except that
the city administrator may not appoint those city officers which are by state
statute required to be appointed by the mayor. (Ord. 2141, 9-22-2015)
1-10-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city administrator shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Provide for the enforcement of all laws and ordinances within the
city.
   (B)   Create the agenda for and attend all meetings of the city council and
other official city boards and commissions as directed by the city council.
Attend all meetings of the city council except those from which the city
council determined that attendance is not required because of a conflict or
other reason. The city administrator shall have the right to take part in the
discussion of all matters coming before the city council or other official city
boards and commissions, but shall have no right to vote. The city administrator
shall be entitled to notice of all special and regular meetings of the city
council.
   (C)   Recommend to the city council such measures as, in his or her
judgment, he or she deems to be in the best interest of the city.
   (D)   Employ, discipline, suspend and terminate, subject to appeal of the
termination to the city council, any and except when otherwise provided by law
or contract and to the extent permitted by law and subject to the city
administrator's discretion and direct supervision, to delegate to any employee
any of these powers with respect to any subordinates of that employee.
   (E)   Propose to the mayor and city council such personnel rules and
regulations as the administrator deems necessary to manage the personnel of the
city. These rules may cover procedures and policies to govern the following:
      1.   The administration of the position description, classification and
pay plans;
      2.   Recruitment, selection, promotion, evaluation, transfer, discipline
and separation of city personnel;
      3.   Establishment of hours of work, attendance, leave regulations and
working conditions;
      4.   Rules covering the outside employment, nepotism and political
activity of city personnel;
      5.   Maintenance and use of necessary records and forms;
      6.   System of handling all grievances.
   (F)   Supervise and administer the conduct of all collective bargaining
processes of the city and recommend to the city council collective bargaining
agreements for consideration and approval by the city council, and administer
all employee organization contracts reached through the collective bargaining
process.
   (G)   Direct, supervise and coordinate the activities of all departments,
offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by law, and to
administer the affairs of the city to ensure that all city business is
accomplished efficiently and economically.
   (H)   Recommend to the city council the creating, consolidating and
combining of offices, positions, departments or units of the administrative and
executive departments of the city.
   (I)   Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the
administration of the government of the city and services maintained by the
public utilities in the city, and see that all franchises, permits and
privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed.
   (J)   It shall be the duty of the city administrator to ensure that all
franchises granted by, and all contracts with, the city are faithfully kept and
performed by all parties hereto.
   (K)   Keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of the city
and location of such property. The city administrator shall be responsible for
the care and custody of all city property which is not assigned to some other
officer or body for care and control.
   (L)   Prepare and submit to the mayor and city council by the date set by
the council a recommended annual budget for city operations and recommended
capital programs; and administer the approved budget after adoption.
   (M)   Supervise and administer the procurement of commodities and services
for all city departments, offices and agencies, and promulgate purchasing rules
implementing city ordinances and which are consistent with state law, which
shall be followed by employees in the procurement of goods and services.
   (N)   Report to the city council periodically the financial condition of the
city.
   (O)   Submit to the mayor and city council and make available to the public
a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as
of the end of each fiscal year.
   (P)   Represent the city in its dealings with other governmental agencies
and officials, businesses, not for profit organizations, residents, and the
general public as necessary.
   (Q)   Cause to be prepared grant and/or loan applications on behalf of the
city; administer grant and/or loan funds and shall have caused the preparation
of relevant reports to the corporate authorities and all appropriate agencies.
   (R)   Evaluate city projects, programs, agreements and services and make
recommendations on modifications and improvements thereto.
   (S)   Devote his or her entire time to the discharge of his or her official
duties.
   (T)   The city administrator shall perform such other duties as may be
required by the city council consistent with state statutes and the ordinances
of the city.
   (U)   Hold such other appointive offices as may be consistent with law, as
the mayor and city council may determine, and to faithfully and honestly
discharge the duties and powers associated with such office.
   (V)   The powers assigned to the city administrator are not intended to
diminish those powers otherwise assigned to other officers by statute or
ordinance, including, but not limited to, the mayor. (Ord. 2141, 9-22-2015)
1-10-8: MATTERS DIRECTED TO ADMINISTRATOR'S ATTENTION:
All offices and departments shall submit all matters requiring city council
action or attention to the city administrator, who shall submit them to the
city council with recommendations as may be deemed necessary. All departmental
or employee requests shall be submitted to the city administrator who shall
provide instruction as to policy and action. Except as otherwise provided by
state law or city ordinance, elected and appointed city officers shall deal
with the administrative services of the city through the city administrator and
shall not give orders to subordinates of the city administrator, either
publicly or privately. (Ord. 2141, 9-22-2015)
1-10-9: REMOVAL:
The city administrator may be removed in accordance with law. (Ord. 2141, 9-22-
2015)
CHAPTER 11
CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-11-1: Created
1-11-2: Duties Of The City Attorney
1-11-3: Reports
1-11-1: CREATED:
There is hereby established the office of city attorney who shall be an
attorney admitted to the bar and licensed to practice law in the state. He
shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. (1977
Code)
1-11-2: DUTIES OF THE CITY ATTORNEY:
The city attorney shall be the full time legal adviser to the city and shall
advise the mayor and city council or any department head or officer of the city
on all legal matters in which requested and in trying cases. The city attorney
shall prepare all ordinances and resolutions required by the council and shall
attend all meetings of the city council, and when so directed by the mayor,
shall attend meetings of boards and commissions of the city and committees of
the council. All records, papers, files and other documents and materials
prepared or used by the city attorney while so employed are the sole property
of the city. (1977 Code)
1-11-3: REPORTS:
The city attorney shall make frequent reports to the city as may be required by
the mayor and city council, which cover actions handled by him for any given
situation or group of situations. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 12
POLICE DEPARTMENT; CHIEF OF POLICE
SECTION:
1-12-1: Department Established
1-12-2: Appointments
1-12-3: Chief To Devote Entire Time To Duties
1-12-4: Chief Of Police; Powers
1-12-5: Report Of Improper Conduct
1-12-6: Custody Of Police Records And Property
1-12-7: Removal From Office
1-12-8: Rank Structure Of Police Officers
1-12-9: Duties
1-12-9-1: Duty To Abate Nuisances
1-12-9-2: Duties Of The Chief
1-12-9-3: Power To Arrest
1-12-9-4: Power To Serve Process
1-12-9-5: Witness Fees
1-12-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a department of the municipal government of the
city which shall be known as the police department and which shall embrace the
chief of police, who shall be director of the department, and such number of
police officers as the city council may from time to time determine to be
necessary. (1977 Code)
1-12-2: APPOINTMENTS:
The chief of police shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the
city council. He shall, before he enters upon the duties of his office, take
and sign the oath prescribed by law for city officials. All other police
officers shall also be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city
council in accordance with the rules and regulations of the fire and police
advisory board.
Police officers appointed for official duty may take residency outside the
corporate limits of the city but not to exceed a radius of ten (10) miles.
(Ord. 2082, 1-28-2014)
1-12-3: CHIEF TO DEVOTE ENTIRE TIME TO DUTIES:
The chief of police shall devote his entire time to the discharge of the duties
of his office and shall engage in no other duties of employment except those
designated or approved by the mayor, and shall be charged with the preservation
of the peace, order and safety of the city and with the duty of protecting the
rights and property of persons and enforcing all applicable provisions of this
code and laws of this state. (1977 Code)
1-12-4: CHIEF OF POLICE; POWERS:
The chief of police shall, in subordination to the mayor, have the management
and control of the police department and all regulations and orders thereof
shall be promulgated through him. (1977 Code)
1-12-5: REPORT OF IMPROPER CONDUCT:
The chief of police shall promptly report to the mayor any member of the police
department who is guilty of drunkenness, neglect of duty, disobedience of
orders or violation of the rules and regulations of the police department.
(1977 Code)
1-12-6: CUSTODY OF POLICE RECORDS AND PROPERTY:
The chief of police shall have the care, custody and control of all books,
records, equipment and other property belonging to the police department and of
all stolen goods, lost property and contraband seized and retained by police
authority. He shall keep a current inventory showing all real and personal
property of the police department and the usual location of such property. Upon
the expiration of his term of office or his resignation or removal therefrom,
he shall surrender to his successor in office all books, records, equipment and
property of every description in his possession belonging to the city or
appertaining to his office. (1977 Code)
1-12-7: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The chief of police may be discharged by the mayor with the consent of the city
council. All other members of the police department may be discharged by the
chief of police with the consent of the mayor and the city council. (Ord. 2083,
1-28-2014)
1-12-8: RANK STRUCTURE OF POLICE OFFICERS:
Members of the police department may be appointed to serve in such command
positions above the rank of patrolman as the chief of police and the mayor may
from time to time direct for the most effective and efficient operation of the
police department. Appointments to such command positions shall be made by the
chief of police with the consent of the mayor and the city council. The chief,
however, may make temporary appointments to such command positions for periods
of time not to exceed ninety (90) consecutive days. (Ord. 2084, 1-28-2014)
1-12-9: DUTIES:
The chief of police and the police department will perform duties as follows.
(1977 Code)
1-12-9-1: DUTY TO ABATE NUISANCES:
The chief of police shall take notice of all nuisances, obstructions and
defects in streets and alleys or other public places of the city and shall
cause the same to be abated or removed or immediate notice thereof given to the
proper officer whose duty it may be to take action in relation thereto. (1977
Code)
1-12-9-2: DUTIES OF THE CHIEF:
The chief of police shall keep such records and make such reports concerning
the activities of his department as may be required by statute or ordinance or
as directed by the mayor. The chief shall be responsible for the performance by
the police department of all its functions and all persons who are members of
the department shall serve subject to the orders of the chief of police. He
shall attend all meetings, regular and special, of the city council unless
excused therefrom by the mayor. He shall attend such committee meetings as
directed by the mayor. He shall have the privilege of taking part in the
discussion of all matters coming before the council or any committee and shall
be entitled to notice of all meetings, regular, special and committee, of the
council. (1977 Code)
1-12-9-3: POWER TO ARREST:
The chief of police and each member of the police department shall have the
power to arrest, with or without process, all persons within the city who shall
break the peace or violate any provisions of this code or any law of this state
or the United States. (1977 Code)
1-12-9-4: POWER TO SERVE PROCESS:
Each member of the police department shall have the power and authority, within
the limits of the city, to serve and execute warrants or other legal process
for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with or held for the
commission of any crime or misdemeanor or the violation of any provisions of
this code, and while serving or executing or assisting in the serving or
executing of any such warrant or legal process, shall be vested with all the
common laws and statutory powers of sheriffs for such purposes. (1977 Code)
1-12-9-5: WITNESS FEES:
Every member of the police department shall appear as a witness whenever this
is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of any provision of this code or
of a state or federal law; but, no such member shall receive any witness fee
for such services in any action or suit to which the city is a party. All fees
due for such services shall, if paid, be turned over to the city treasurer.
(1977 Code)
CHAPTER 13
FIRE DEPARTMENT; FIRE CHIEF
SECTION:
1-13-1: Establishment
1-13-2: Fire Chief; Duties
1-13-3: Members; Duties
1-13-4: Command At Fires
1-13-5: Enforcement
1-13-6: Use Of Apparatus; Injury
1-13-7: Entering Firehouses
1-13-8: Fire Inspections
1-13-9: Services Rendered To Nonresidents
1-13-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created and established a fire department for the city
consisting of the fire chief, who shall be director of the department, and such
other members as may be provided for by the council. Auxiliary firemen will be
appointed by the fire chief subject to the approval of the mayor on an
individual basis. (1977 Code)
1-13-2: FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES:
   (A)   The fire chief shall have the control, subject to the order and
direction of the mayor, of the fire department and all fire apparatus belonging
to the city. Whenever any fire apparatus needs repairing, the fire chief shall
cause the same to be done without delay.
   (B)   The fire chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all meetings
of the company and the attendance of the members, a record of all fires and,
each year ending in November, file with the comptroller a full report of such
records and attendance and fires, which report shall be under oath.
   (C)   The fire chief shall investigate the causes of all extended or
destructive fires occurring within the city. (Ord. 2048, 7-9-2013)
1-13-3: MEMBERS; DUTIES:
It shall be the function and duty of the fire department and every member
thereof to extinguish accidental or destructive fires and to prevent the
occurrence or spread of such fires. (1977 Code)
   (A)   Residency Requirements: Effective January 1, 2005, and thereafter, new
employees of the fire department shall be residents of the Savanna fire
protection district within ninety (90) days of the completion of their
probationary employment, and shall remain residents of the Savanna fire
protection district thereafter during such employment. (Ord. 1784, 2-8-2005)
1-13-4: COMMAND AT FIRES:
In case of fire, the fire chief and his assistants shall rank in order named
and the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire
department and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire,
in the best manner possible. When it may be necessary for the protection of
other property and to prevent the spread of the conflagration, the officer in
command may cause buildings to be removed, torn down or destroyed in the best
manner possible. (1977 Code)
1-13-5: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of all officers of the fire department and all police
officers of the city to see that the provisions of this chapter are enforced
and to arrest on view, any person who shall be found violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or who shall hinder, resist or refuse to obey any
such officer in the discharge of his duty. To that end, all such officers are
hereby vested with the usual power and authority of the police officers. (1977
Code)
1-13-6: USE OF APPARATUS; INJURY:
Any person who shall use any fire engine, hose, cart or any other apparatus
belonging to the city for any private purpose, other than the extinguishment of
fires, or who shall remove the same or any part thereof from its place of
deposit, or having control thereof, shall permit such engine, hose, cart or
other apparatus to be used for any private purpose other than aforesaid, shall
upon conviction be subject to a fine as specified in section
1-4-1 of this title. (1977 Code)
1-13-7: ENTERING FIREHOUSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than members of the fire department
or its auxiliary members, to enter the fire department house or any place where
the equipment and apparatus of the fire department is stored, at any time
except on business pertaining to the fire department or other city business.
The penalty for the violation of this section shall be as specified in section
1-4-1 of this title. (1977 Code)
1-13-8: FIRE INSPECTIONS:
   (A)   Authority: The fire chief or his designated assistant will conduct
fire inspections as outlined in Illinois rules and regulations for fire
prevention and safety as adopted in section
5-1-1 of this code.
   (B)   Fire Inspections; Frequency: The fire chief shall have the right,
within his area of responsibility, to enter any public building, structure or
premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making an inspection to
determine whether or not there are any violations of these rules and
regulations for the protection of life and property from fire or other
emergency. Such inspections will be conducted annually together with follow up
inspections based on violations that have been cited for correction.
   (C)   Inspection Standards: During the inspection process, the following
requirements will be met:
      1.   General:
         (a)   Roof, overall condition, leakage, etc.
         (b)   Interior walls, holes and deteriorating plaster.
         (c)   Ceiling, holes and deteriorating plaster.
      2.   Housekeeping:
         (a)   Proper waste containers.
         (b)   Excessive combustible materials.
         (c)   General appearance.
      3.   Electrical:
         (a)   Enclosed electrical panel.
         (b)   Cover plates on junction boxes.
         (c)   Cover plates on wall outlets.
         (d)   Proper fuses.
         (e)   Proper use of extension cords.
         (f)   Presence of exposed wiring.
      4.   Heating plant:
         (a)   Type of fuel used and proper fuel storage.
         (b)   Overall condition of unit.
         (c)   Clearance and position from combustible material.
      5.   Fire protection:
         (a)   Availability of proper type fire extinguishers.
         (b)   Dates and tags on fire extinguishers.
         (c)   Sprinkler systems if available.
         (d)   Egress exits.
         (e)   Fire escapes if required.
         (f)   Emergency lighting if required. (Ord. 1182, 11-13-1979)
1-13-9: SERVICES RENDERED TO NONRESIDENTS:
   (A)   From and after the effective date hereof, there may be assessed
against all persons, businesses, and other entities who are not residents of
the Savanna fire protection district, a charge for services rendered to such
nonresidents by personnel and equipment of the Savanna fire department.
The charge shall not be assessed against persons who request fire protection
coverage for an unprotected area and who pay to the Savanna fire protection
district an amount equal to the district's fire protection tax pursuant to
section 4 of the fire protection of unprotected area act 1 . Charges shall
apply to the following services:
      1.   There may be assessed against any person, business or entity to whom
or for which technical rescue services or specialized services are rendered by
the personnel and equipment of Savanna fire protection district a charge for
such services. For purposes of this section, the term technical rescue services
shall include, but not be limited to, motorized vehicles, structural collapse,
high angle, tactical, underwater/water rescue, confined space, below grade and
trench rescue services.
      2.   There may be assessed against any responsible party, as that term is
defined in section 3(c) of the hazardous material response reimbursement act 2
, a charge for such services to reimburse the department for the services
rendered, materials expended and private contractors engaged in connection with
a hazardous materials incident.
      3.   There shall be assessed against any person who is found guilty of
violating section 11-501 of the vehicle code 3  whose operation of a motor
vehicle while in violation of that section (driving under the influence)
proximately caused any incident resulting in an emergency response by the
Savanna fire department a charge for the expense of that emergency response in
the amount of up to the state maximum.
      4.   There shall be assessed against any person who commits a violation
of the methamphetamine control and community protection act in a manner which
requires an emergency response by the Savanna fire department an amount equal
to the reasonable cost of its participation in the emergency response
including, but not limited to, regular and overtime costs and payments made to
private contractors to secure the site of the response.
      5.   There shall be assessed against any person who is liable under
section 15 of the emergency services response reimbursement for criminal
convictions act (public act 96-400) to the Savanna fire department for its
response to a fire resulting from an arson offense in an amount not less than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and not more than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00).
   (B)   The charge for services rendered by the Savanna fire department under
subsections (A)1, (A)2, (A)4, and (A)5 of this section shall be two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) per hour per firefighting or rescue vehicle and seventy
five dollars ($75.00) per hour per firefighter responding to a call for
assistance under those sections, provided, however, that no charge shall be
made for services rendered for which the charge would be less than fifty
dollars ($50.00). In addition to the foregoing charges, a separate charge may
be assessed for extraordinary expenses of materials used in rendering services
by the Savanna fire department to nonresidents including, but not limited to,
in connection with a hazardous material emergency response under subsection
(A)2 of this section or a methamphetamine incident under subsection (A)4 of
this section, the cost of any expendable materials used by the department in
connection with the incident, the charge of any private contractor responding
to the incident, the loss or damage to department equipment.
   (C)   All receipts from charges assessed pursuant to this section shall be
deposited to and become a part of the general fund of the city of Savanna.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, the terms used herein shall have the
meanings and definitions contained in the Illinois fire protection district act
4 , the hazardous material emergency response reimbursement act 5 , the vehicle
code 6 , the methamphetamine control and community protection act 7 , and the
emergency services response reimbursement for criminal convictions act (public
act 96-400) and it shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with those acts.
(Ord. 2128, 4-28-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 70 ILCS 715/4.
2 2. 430 ILCS 55/3(c).
3 3. 625 ILCS 5/11-501.
4 1. 70 ILCS 705.
5 2. 430 ILCS 55.
6 3. 625 ILCS 5.
7 4. 720 ILCS 646/90.
CHAPTER 14
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
SECTION:
1-14-1: Office Created
1-14-2: Duties
1-14-3: Supervision Over Employees
1-14-4: Building Officer
1-14-5: Enforcing Regulations
1-14-6: Reports
1-14-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of superintendent of public works, who shall
be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council. (1977 Code)
1-14-2: DUTIES:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works to
personally inspect, or cause to be inspected, all city connections made to the
sewer system and the water supply system of the city; further, he shall have
charge of all repairs to and maintenance of public improvements and public
works and shall work in cooperation with the consulting engineers as hired by
the city. He shall regulate and control the manner of using the streets,
alleys, highways, easements and other places of the city for the erection,
construction or installation of utilities as authorized by law or the city.
   (B)   He shall provide supervision for landfill activities and the operation
of the city's sewage treatment plant and coordinate these operations with the
environmental protection agency.
   (C)   He shall coordinate the preparation of plans, specifications, and
contract documents for public improvements with consulting engineers.
   (D)   He shall prepare specifications and contract documents for the new
procurement of capital equipment as required by the city. Such actions to be
coordinated with the mayor and council.
   (E)   He shall support consulting engineers with inspections and surveys as
required for public improvements of the city.
   (F)   He shall be responsible for the official files, for maps, charts,
plats, etc., covering installed systems and public improvements of the city.
   (G)   He shall assist the attorney in the preparation, drafting and drawing
of resolutions, ordinances and contracts for all public or special work and in
all litigation regarding public improvements or in matters wherein the city may
be interested, rendering such assistance as may be required of him by the
attorney.
   (H)   He shall make such investigations, inspections, analysis and reports
and shall perform such duties as may be required of him by the mayor and
council in connection with city planning, zoning, traffic, transportation,
buildings and structures or other administrative functions of the city.
   (I)   He shall attend all council meetings, regular and special, unless
excused by the mayor. He will also attend committee meetings upon request of
the mayor or chairmen of the individual committees. He will be given proper
notice of all such meetings.
   (J)   He shall maintain a current inventory showing all real and personal
property, including excess and surplus property, of his departments for which
the city has ownership. Such records will show storage location, acquisition
dates, cost and repair data and such other information as may be appropriate.
   (K)   He shall have the power to appoint and discharge any employee of the
department subject to the approval of the mayor.
   (L)   He shall maintain a strict chain of command procedure within the
city's organization structure. All official actions, for public works
activities, will flow through the office of the mayor. Likewise all council
members will channel their requests through the office of the mayor when action
is desired in the public works work area. (1977 Code)
1-14-3: SUPERVISION OVER EMPLOYEES:
The superintendent of public works shall be the head of the department of
public works and shall have supervision over all employees of the department
and shall be responsible for the performance of their duties and their actions
during working hours. (1977 Code)
1-14-4: BUILDING OFFICER:
The superintendent of public works shall have such duties and be bound by such
provisions as are set forth in the building code of the city. (1977 Code)
1-14-5: ENFORCING REGULATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works to enforce all
regulations of this code relating to the sewer system, the water system, and
perform such other duties as may be required by the enactment of the council or
him. Upon violation of any provisions of this code herein referred to, he shall
make a complaint before the proper court against all persons that he may find
to have violated any such provisions. (1977 Code)
1-14-6: REPORTS:
The superintendent of public works shall, when required by the mayor and
council, inquire into and report upon any matter pertaining to public works and
shall from time to time communicate to the mayor and council any information or
suggestion which he may deem important in relation thereto. He shall, when
required by the mayor and council, report verbally or in writing to them on all
matters under his jurisdiction. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 15
PUBLIC HEALTH OFFICER
(Rep. by Ord. 1847, 7-25-2006)
CHAPTER 16
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-16-1: Elections
1-16-2: Council Election Contests
1-16-1: ELECTIONS:
Elections for municipal offices shall be held as provided by statute and at the
time prescribed by statute 1 . (1977 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS.
1-16-2: COUNCIL ELECTION CONTESTS:
   (A)   Contest Of Election: The election of any council member may be
contested by any elector of the city, and the proceedings shall be in
accordance with the Illinois Compiled Statutes regulating the mode of
contesting elections of county officials, so far as the same may be applicable.
The city council shall be the tribunal before such contest shall be heard, and
its decision shall be final.
   (B)   Statement Of Contest: Whenever any person desires to contest the right
of another to hold the office of councilman, he shall, within thirty (30) days
after the person whose election is to be contested is declared elected, file
with the clerk a statement in writing, briefly stating the points on which he
will contest the election, which statement shall be verified by affidavit.
   (C)   Notice To Respondent: Upon filing such statement, the contestant shall
also serve a copy thereof upon the person whose election he intends to contest,
and in case such person is absent from the city and cannot be found, they by
leaving a copy of the statement at his usual place of abode, with some member
of his family of the age of ten (10) years or upwards, and informing such
person of the contents thereof.
   (D)   Taking The Depositions Of Witnesses: At such time either party may
proceed to take the testimony of any witness in the manner provided by law for
taking depositions in courts of record, before any judge or notary public, at
the time and place so fixed, and continue the same from day to day thereafter,
until the testimony is taken.
   (E)   Proofs Taken And Filed: In all cases of contested elections, the
proofs shall be taken and filed with the clerk within sixty (60) days from the
day fixed by the council. The council may from time to time, upon sufficient
cause shown, extend the time for taking and filing such proofs. No testimony
shall be taken or proof received or produced at the hearing before the council,
except upon the points set forth in the statement filed with the clerk.
   (F)   Council Procedure: When all the evidence has been taken, as provided
in this section, it shall be filed immediately in the office of the clerk, who
shall at once lay the same before the council, which shall, without delay,
refer the same to some appropriate committee to examine and report thereon.
Upon such report being made, the council shall hear the case, and may require
all the testimony and proofs taken to be read in open meeting, and shall, by a
majority vote, upon a call of the "yeas" and "nays", declare as elected the
person who shall appear by the evidence to have been elected; and the clerk
shall enter such decision and declaration in the journal of the council.
   (G)   Respondent Not To Act: In any election contest, the respondent or
person whose election is the subject of the contest shall not take any part in
such contest, so far as the determination thereof is concerned, nor shall he
cast any vote in connection therewith.
   (H)   Legal Disqualification: Whenever it appears that the person receiving
the highest number of votes is ineligible to the office because of any legal
disqualifications, the council shall declare such election null and void and
immediately call a special election to fill the office.
   (I)   Counting Ballots: In the case of a contested election, the parties
thereto shall be entitled to have the package or packages of ballots which have
been returned to the clerk pursuant to law opened in the presence of a
committee of the council and the officer having the custody thereof and to have
said ballots counted; or the same may be brought into open council meeting and
then and there counted by a committee of three (3) members appointed for that
purpose.
   (J)   Ballots To Be Preserved: The clerk shall preserve all ballots returned
to him by the judges of any city election for six (6) months thereafter and at
the expiration of that time, if no contest has been instituted and is still
pending, the clerk shall burn the ballots under the direction of the council.
(1977 Code)
CHAPTER 17
ELECTION WARDS
SECTION:
1-17-1: Wards Established
1-17-1: WARDS ESTABLISHED:
The City is hereby divided into four (4) wards, which shall be designated First
Ward, Second Ward, Third Ward and Fourth Ward, as shown on the Exhibit A
attached to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 2341, 2-27-2024)
CHAPTER 18
CITY DEPOSITORIES
SECTION:
1-18-1: Depositories Designated
1-18-1: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED:
Triumph Community Bank, Savanna-Thomson State Bank, First Savanna Savings Bank,
RIA Federal Credit Union and Blackhawk Area Credit Union are hereby designated
as depositories of municipal funds of the city of Savanna. (Ord. 2107, 11-25-
2014)
CHAPTER 19
MUNICIPAL BUDGET
SECTION:
1-19-1: Adoption Of Annual Budget
1-19-2: Budget Officer
1-19-3: Computation Of Annual Budget
1-19-4: Public Inspection, Notice, Hearing
1-19-5: Revision Of Annual Budget
1-19-1: ADOPTION OF ANNUAL BUDGET:
The city hereby adopts 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through and
including 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.10 providing for an annual
municipal budget in lieu of the passage of an annual appropriation ordinance.
(1977 Code)
1-19-2: BUDGET OFFICER:
The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint a budget
officer who shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities enumerated in
the above sections of the Illinois Compiled Statutes as they are now or may
hereafter be amended. The budget officer shall give a bond in such sum as may
be required by the city council; however, such bond shall not be less than
required by statutes. (1977 Code)
1-19-3: COMPUTATION OF ANNUAL BUDGET:
The budget officer shall compile a budget pursuant to the above sections of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes as they are now, or may hereafter be amended,
containing estimates of the revenues available before the beginning of the
fiscal year to which it applies together with recommended expenditures for the
city and all of its boards, commissions and departments. Said budget shall be
adopted prior to May 1 of each fiscal year. (1977 Code)
1-19-4: PUBLIC INSPECTION, NOTICE, HEARING:
Copies of the tentative annual budget shall be made available for public
inspection in printed or typewritten form in the office of the city clerk for
at least ten (10) days prior to the passage of the annual budget. Not less than
one week after the budget is available for inspection, and prior to final
action on the budget, at least one public hearing shall be held on the budget
by the city council. Notice of this hearing shall be given by publication in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least one week prior to
the time of hearing. (1977 Code)
1-19-5: REVISION OF ANNUAL BUDGET:
The city council may delegate authority to heads of municipal departments,
boards or commissions to delete, add to or change items previously budgeted to
the department, board or commission, subject to such limitation or requirement
for prior approval by the budget officer or executive officer of the city as
the city council upon a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members may establish. The
annual budget may be revised by a vote of two- thirds (2/3) of the city council
by deleting, adding to or changing budgeted items. No revision of the budget
shall be made increasing the budget in the event funds are not available to
effectuate the purpose of the revision. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 20
COMPETITIVE BIDDING
SECTION:
1-20-1: Letting Bids
1-20-2: Laborers, Hourly Wage
1-20-3: Exceptions
1-20-4: Emergency Situation
1-20-5: Advertising For Bids
1-20-6: Disqualification Of Bidders
1-20-7: Deposit Required
1-20-8: Opening Bids Publicly
1-20-9: Purchases And Services Other Than Bids
1-20-1: LETTING BIDS:
All purchase orders or contracts, of whatever nature, for labor, service or
works, materials, equipment, supplies, or other public improvement, except
those which are to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or
special taxation, involving an amount in excess of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00), made by or on behalf of the city, shall be let by free and open
competitive bidding after advertising, to the lowest responsible bidder, except
that any such contract may be entered into without advertising for bids in any
one of the following circumstances:
   (A)   Only one supplier can furnish the items required; or
   (B)   Only one vendor can supply repair parts or standardized equipment
which would be compatible with existing equipment; or
   (C)   An emergency or other extremely urgent need has arisen which precludes
the feasibility of formal bidding; or
   (D)   Equipment, materials or services are available through another
governmental agency; or
   (E)   If authorized by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the aldermen then
holding office. (Ord. 2098, 8-12-2014)
1-20-2: LABORERS, HOURLY WAGE:
Contracts which contain the element of common labor as a part of the cost as
determined in the bid shall require that the hourly wage paid to common
laborers under such contract shall be not less than the hourly wage paid to
employees of the city for common labor. (1977 Code)
1-20-3: EXCEPTIONS:
Contracts which by their nature are not adapted to award by competitive
bidding, such as contracts for services of individuals possessing a high degree
of professional skill where the ability or fitness of the individual plays an
important part and purchases from any federal, state or local government unit
or agency thereof of materials, supplies, commodities or equipment as may be
available through the operation of any legislation heretofore or hereafter
enacted shall not be subject to the competitive bidding requirements of this
chapter. Regular employment contracts in the municipal service, whether with
respect to the classified service or otherwise, shall not be subject to the
requirements of this chapter. (1977 Code)
1-20-4: EMERGENCY SITUATION:
In the case of an emergency affecting the public health or safety, so declared
by the city council at a meeting thereof duly convened, which declaration
requires the affirmative vote of a majority of all the members thereof and
shall set forth the nature of the danger to the public health or safety;
contracts may be let to the extent necessary to resolve such emergency without
public advertisement or competitive bidding. The resolution or ordinance in
which such declaration is embodied shall fix the date upon which such emergency
shall terminate. (1977 Code)
1-20-5: ADVERTISING FOR BIDS:
All proposals to award purchase orders or contracts involving amounts in excess
of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be published at least fifteen
(15) consecutive days in advance of the date announced for the receiving of
bids, in a secular newspaper published in and of general circulation in the
city. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
municipality from placing additional announcements in recognized trade
journals. Advertisements for bids shall describe the character of the proposed
contract or agreement in sufficient detail to enable the bidders thereon to
know what their obligations will be, either in the advertisement itself, or by
reference to detailed plans and specifications on file at the time of the
publication. Such advertisement shall state the time, date and place assigned
for the opening of bids, and no bids shall be received at any time subsequent
to the time indicated in the advertisement. (Ord. 2165, 4-26-2016)
1-20-6: DISQUALIFICATION OF BIDDERS:
The city may disqualify an apparent low bidder or any vendor if, in the
judgment of the city council:
   (A)   The apparent low bidder or vendor's ability, skill, experience,
reputation or financial capacity, or the quality of his product are
substandard; or
   (B)   His business firm is delinquent in any financial obligations to the
city, including business tax, utility bill or other charges. (1977 Code)
1-20-7: DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
Cash, cashier's check or certified check, as a deposit of good faith, in a
reasonable amount, may be required of each bidder on all bids involving amounts
in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) and, if so required, the
advertisement for bids shall so specify. (Ord. 2166, 4-26-2016)
1-20-8: OPENING BIDS PUBLICLY:
All sealed bids shall be publicly opened in the presence of at least two (2)
elected officials of the city at the time and place specified in the
advertisement for bids, and unless opened at a duly convened meeting of the
city council, such bids shall be available for public inspection in the office
of the city clerk for a period of at least forty eight (48) hours before award
is made. (1977 Code)
1-20-9: PURCHASES AND SERVICES OTHER THAN BIDS:
   (A)   Definitions:
 
                        For purposes of this Section only, a sudden and
                        unexpected circumstance creating an imminent threat to
EMERGENCY:              the safety of any person or the security of City
                        property as to which a delay to await Council action
                        cannot be justified.
LIMITED PURCHASE ORDER: An authority to procure small and low value items
                        without a formal purchase order.
PURCHASE ORDER:         A document authorizing the procurement of materials,
                        supplies, equipment or a special service.
REQUISITION:            A demand and need for materials, supplies, equipment or
                        a special service.
 
   (B)   Determination Of Need: City department heads will assume the
responsibility to determine the need for services, supplies, materials and
equipment for their scope of operations. Purchase of items for stock, in
addition to immediate requirements, is authorized but must be based on positive
future demands and past usage experience.
   (C)   Purchase And Service Authorization: Purchases and services exceeding
four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) shall be authorized only on city council
approval. An emergency purchase or service in excess of four thousand dollars
($4,000.00) may be approved by the mayor but brought to the attention of the
city council when monthly warrants covering accounts payable are reviewed and
approved.
   (D)   Limited Purchase Order Authorization: Purchases of two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00) or less may be approved by the department head. Likewise,
services of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or less may be approved by the
department head. A limited purchase order is authorized for this category with
vendors on a monthly basis. The individual who consummates such a purchase must
sign the vendor's invoice. At the end of each month, the department head will
verify all statements from vendors and prepare the limited purchase order
showing appropriate cost code and process through the comptroller for payment.
   (E)   Purchase Approval: Purchases of an item or like items of over two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) to four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) must be
approved by the department head and are subject to review, approval and
signature of the mayor. Similar action must be taken when outside services are
required which are in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
   (F)   Price Quotes: Written price quotations should be obtained on the same
or similar items for purchase when such items are common or present a
competitive situation. The use of the telephone for city purchasing activities
must be held to an absolute minimum.
   (G)   Application Forms:
      1.   Requisition, three (3) part.
      2.   Purchase order, four (4) part, form P-433.
   (H)   Preparation Of Forms:
      1.   Department head will prepare a requisition to cover required
supplies and services and make available to the comptroller. The completion of
the form is self-explanatory and in addition to the information shown thereon,
a notation should be annotated to indicate the exact location, vehicle, etc.,
where the supplies, materials and equipment and services are needed or will be
utilized. An exception to this requirement would be repair to water and sewer
lines, minor street repair, etc. The comptroller will immediately certify the
availability of funds and assign a cost code to the requisition.
      2.   The comptroller, on a daily basis or whatever time period is
required, will present completed requisitions to the mayor for his immediate
review and signature.
      3.   The office of the comptroller will process approved requisitions by
preparing a purchase order for submission to vendor. One copy of each of the
requisitions and purchase orders will be merged together and placed in a dues-
in file awaiting arrival of shipment.
      4.   Department heads must make positive inspections of incoming
shipments peculiar to their organization, to ensure that all items are in a
serviceable condition and meet the requirements of the purchase order. They
will then provide the comptroller with certified information pertinent to
receipt of shipments. The comptroller will process the requisition and purchase
order so as to ask for payment on the next monthly city warrant for accounts
payable.
      5.   Petty cash must be used sparingly and its use is limited for
emergency onetime small purchases, fees, special postage, etc.
Any individual affiliated with the city who violates this section by
authorizing or processing any purchase of materials, supplies, equipment and
services, which are not a requirement of the city, is subject to disciplinary
action which may be recommended by the mayor and approved by the city council.
(Ord. 1213, 1-13-1981; amd. Ord. 1352, 4-25-1989; Ord. 1922, 8-25-2009; Ord.
2368, 2-11-2025)
CHAPTER 21
CITY PROPERTY DISPOSAL
SECTION:
1-21-1: Policy Established
1-21-2: Responsibilities
1-21-3: Methods Of Disposal
1-21-4: Funds
1-21-1: POLICY ESTABLISHED:
A policy and procedure is hereby established to cover the storage, handling and
disposal of all salable, recovered scrap, excess and surplus property
accumulated as a result of city operations and activities. These actions will
apply to public works, law enforcement, fire service and administrative work
areas. (1977 Code)
1-21-2: RESPONSIBILITIES:
It will be the responsibility of each department head to take the following
actions concerning salable scrap, excess and surplus materials and equipment,
both serviceable and unserviceable, which is generated as a result of their
operations:
   (A)   Provide suitable storage until disposal action is authorized.
   (B)   Maintain appropriate records of all items and materials until disposal
action is authorized.
   (C)   Make available periodic listings to the city council of excess and
surplus materials and equipment with recommendations for method of disposal.
City council will take official action authorizing final disposal. (1977 Code)
1-21-3: METHODS OF DISPOSAL:
Based on council decisions, the following methods of disposal of equipment and
materials shall be followed:
   (A)   Through negotiated sale by the department head.
   (B)   Formal advertising for bids. Such bids to be processed and handled as
other competitive bidding as outlined in chapter 20 of this title.
   (C)   Trade in on new equipment.
   (D)   Destruction. (1977 Code)
1-21-4: FUNDS:
The administrative office of the comptroller will maintain a register of all
surplus property sales which will be cross referenced to the official action
authorizing disposal. Funds received from the sale of property will be credited
to the appropriate city operating account. All funds received from this
activity will be subject to the annual municipal audit. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 22
CIVIL DEFENSE NATURAL DISASTER PLAN
(Rep. by Ord. 1476, 2-22-1994)
CHAPTER 23
CITY PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
1-23-1: Job Classifications
1-23-2: Workweek
1-23-3: Responsibilities
1-23-4: Seniority
1-23-5: Promotions And Salary Adjustments
1-23-6: Rest Periods
1-23-7: Vacations/Compensatory Time/Personal Day
1-23-8: Holidays
1-23-9: Sick Leave; Administrative Leave
1-23-10: Layoffs
1-23-11: Leave Of Absence
1-23-12: Military Service
1-23-13: Jury Duty
1-23-14: Records
1-23-15: Disciplinary Actions
1-23-16: Grievance Procedure
1-23-17: Hospitalization, Insurance
1-23-18: Clothing Allowance
1-23-19: Travel, Training, Meal And Lodging Expenses
1-23-20: Pension Plans
1-23-21: Injuries, Disability From Injuries In Line Of Duty
1-23-22: Safety Code
1-23-23: Employment Policy
1-23-24: Police Code Of Ethics
1-23-25: Drug And Alcohol Abuse Policy
1-23-26: Background Checks And License Verification
1-23-27: Part Time Police
1-23-1: JOB CLASSIFICATIONS:
   (A)   The City Comptroller shall establish and maintain an individual job
classification and personnel folder for all City employees. Personnel actions
will include, but not be limited to, the following information for each
employee:
      1.   Employment status.
      2.   Job title and rate of pay.
      3.   Vacation, sick leave and compensatory time.
      4.   Personnel citations.
      5.   Clothing allowance records.
      6.   Insurance status.
      7.   Accidents, injuries and related health documents. (Ord. 1151, 7-25-
1978; amd. Ord. 1423, 10-22-1991)
   (B)   Part time employees will receive no fringe benefits except what
benefits may be required by law. (Ord. 1423, 10-22-1991)
1-23-2: WORKWEEK:
   (A)   The normal workweek for the various City departments shall be as
follows:
 
Administrative 40 hours
Comptroller    40 hours
Fire           48 hours
Fire Chief     40 hours
Police         80 hours (2 week period)
Police Chief   40 hours
Public Works   40 hours
 
   (Ord. 2009, 5-22-2012)
   (B)   Compensation for all work performed in excess of forty (40) hours
shall be in conformance with the overtime requirements of the fair labor
standards for employees of state and local governments. Employees, except
firemen, shall be paid time and one-half (11/2) for hours worked in excess of
forty (40) hours, in a seven (7) day week, or given compensatory time at the
rate of time and one-half (11/2) for every hour of overtime worked. Police
officers will receive time and one-half (11/2) for hours worked in excess of
eighty (80) hours in a two (2) week period. This may be taken as pay or
compensatory time. Employees, other than firemen and policemen, may accumulate
compensatory time up to and including sixty (60) hours (i.e., 40 actual hours
at 11/2 times or 60 hours). Firemen and policemen may accumulate compensatory
time up to seventy two (72) hours (i.e., 48 actual hours at 11/2 times or 72
hours). Any employee who has accrued the maximum amount of compensation time
allowed herein, shall be paid overtime for all additional hours worked. An
employee with accrued compensatory time upon termination shall be paid for each
hour of compensatory time accumulated at an hourly rate calculated as the
average hourly rate of pay received by the employee during the preceding three
(3) years. (Ord. 2050, 7-23-2013)
   (C)   Regular full time police, fire, public works, and administrative
employees called to work in excess of their normal workweek shall be paid a
minimum of two (2) hours (i.e., 2 actual hours at 11/2 times) for work tasks
completed in less than two (2) hours. In the event additional calls to work
occur within the same two (2) hours, it will constitute a single call. Work
hours in excess of two (2) hours shall be computed as follows:
 
Less than 15 minutes     No pay
16 minutes to 45 minutes 1/2 hour at 11/2 times
Over 45 minutes          1 hour at 11/2 times
 
   (Ord. 2042, 6-11-2013)
   (D)   Department heads are not authorized overtime pay for the performance
of city functions. However, they are expected to attend council and committee
meetings, perform out of town travel as may be required or provide direction
and guidance, as required, to their subordinates who may be in an overtime or
other work situation. The workweek for department heads is established on a
forty (40) hour basis and this may be adjusted to compensate for their extra
efforts, providing their personnel can operate in an efficient manner.
   (E)   The normal workweek for employees, except fire department and police
personnel, will be Monday through Friday. The mayor, together with the
department head, has the authority to change an employee's workweek if city
operations so dictate.
   (F)   During duty hours, all employees will be permitted time off for lunch
as established by the department head. Such time must be deducted from their
normal work period, except police officers who will be granted a maximum of
thirty (30) minutes for lunch for each eight (8) hours of their normal workday.
   (G)   As set forth herein, the normal average workweek for firemen excluding
the fire chief shall be forty eight (48) hours. Firemen, excluding the fire
chief, shall be paid biweekly ninety six (96) hours. Hours worked in excess of
the normal scheduled workweek found to be eligible for overtime or compensatory
time will be compensated by payment of the additional time on that pay period
or crediting that employee the compensatory time due.
While it is contemplated that the average normal workweek will be forty eight
(48) hours, it is understood by the parties that hours worked per week may vary
according to the needs of the department. Where circumstances warrant,
alternate work schedules shall be established as required and determined by the
fire chief. (Ord. 1868, 4-24-2007)
1-23-3: RESPONSIBILITIES:
   (A)   All employees are directly responsible to their respective department
heads and the department heads are likewise responsible to the mayor.
   (B)   It will be the responsibility of each department head to keep the
mayor informed at all times of any significant changes in existing procedures
or budget work programs. This will include the proposed purchase of capital
equipment as well as any items or materials not included in the current budget.
The mayor will have the authority to establish guidelines and/or procedures to
be followed for the purchase of supplies, equipment and services required for
city activities and operations.
   (C)   It will be the full responsibility of all city employees to ensure
that proper check and maintenance is applied to all equipment for which the
city has ownership. The department heads will make periodic inspections to
ensure that this requirement is being complied with. Failure to comply with
this regulation will result in immediate disciplinary action. Gross negligence
by an employee in the use and handling of city equipment could result in
reimbursement by the individual to the city upon a full scale investigation by
the mayor and department head and subject to the final approval of the city
council.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of every employee to report immediately to his
supervisor, all injuries while in a working status. The department head will be
responsible that appropriate medical attention is given the employee, as
required, and provide documented information to the comptroller for inclusion
in personnel records.
   (E)   Any employee who has an accident with city equipment, not involving
another person or other property, must immediately report such incident to his
supervisor. The department head must provide a written report to the mayor
outlining the circumstances surrounding such accidents, who will determine if
an adverse personnel action is required. (Ord. 1151, 7-25-1978)
   (F)   Any employee operating a city vehicle who has an accident which
involves another person or property must immediately report such incident to
police authority. The local police will immediately contact state or county law
enforcement, who will carry out their duty in resolving said accident. The
chief of police will apprise the mayor of all such accidents involving city
employees. The driver will notify his department head as soon as possible after
the police have been advised.
   (G)   This section in no way supersedes job requirements, other
responsibilities, etc., for city employees as now established under this title.
(Ord. 1205, 10-14-1980; amd. Ord. 1423, 10-22-1991)
1-23-4: SENIORITY:
   (A)   Seniority shall be computed from the date of most recent employment.
   (B)   All new employees or employees promoted to a higher position shall
serve a twelve (12) month probationary period. (Ord. 1423, 10-22-1991)
   (C)   Seniority shall be terminated by:
      1.   Discharge for just cause.
      2.   Voluntary termination by the employee.
   (D)   Upon satisfactory completion of an employee's probationary period,
seniority will date back to the date of most recent hire. (Ord. 1151, 7-25-
1978)
1-23-5: PROMOTIONS AND SALARY ADJUSTMENTS:
   (A)   Salary Review: In the first quarter of each calendar year, a city
budget will be prepared to cover the ensuing fiscal year which commences on May
1 of each year and ends on April 30 of the following year. During the budget
preparation, the budget committee will review the wages and salaries of all
employees and make recommendations to the city council for any wage and salary
adjustments such as cost of living, promotion, wage and salary increases due to
change of duties and responsibilities, etc., in accordance with the
classification plan. (Ord. 1672, 4-24-2001)
   (B)   New Employees: The hiring of new employees to fill vacancies in the
police and fire organizations will be consummated by the police and fire
commissions. The personnel committee will recommend the starting wage or salary
for all new employees in accordance with the classification plan. No wage or
salary shall be approved that is in excess of that provided in the
classification plan. The city council will make final approval for hiring and
the starting wage or salary for new employees. (Ord. 1877, 7-10-2007)
   (C)   Regular Employee Bonuses: Each regular full time employee is eligible
for a salary bonus which is based upon the employee's work performance.
      1.   A bonus will be granted only for exceptional performance and
achievement.
      2.   Bonuses will be granted by department heads with the approval of the
mayor. Recommendations for employee bonuses shall be submitted by the
department head, in writing, to the mayor. The recommendation shall include the
name of the employee with a description of the employee's exceptional work
performance and achievement. (Ord. 1560, 4-9-1996, eff. 5-1-1996)
      3.   The aggregate amount of bonuses in any one fiscal year for each
department with five (5) or more employees shall not exceed one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
      4.   The aggregate amount of bonuses in any one fiscal year for each
department with less than five (5) employees shall not exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
      5.   No regular full time employee shall receive a total bonus in excess
of eight hundred dollars ($800.00).
      6.   Any bonus will not increase the employee's base salary. (Ord. 1691,
4-9-2002)
   (D)   Department Head Bonuses: Each department head is eligible for a salary
bonus which is based upon the department head's exceptional work performance
and achievement.
      1.   Bonuses to department heads will be granted by the Mayor.
      2.   The aggregate amount of bonuses in any one fiscal year for
department heads shall not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
      3.   No department head shall receive a total bonus in excess of seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) in any one fiscal year.
      4.   Any bonus will not increase the department head's base salary. (Ord.
1669, 2-13-2001)
   (E)   End Of Year Bonus: A bonus may be awarded to all regular full time
employees at the end of each calendar year. The Finance Committee shall review
such bonus at their meeting in November and forward their recommendation to the
City Council. Said recommendation shall indicate whether or not to award such
bonus, and the amount thereof. If awarded, the bonus shall be payable as part
of the first payroll in December.
   (F)   Reclassification During A Fiscal Year: At any time during a fiscal
year, an employee may seek a reclassification which might yield an increased
authorized wage or salary. An employee seeking such reclassification must first
submit to his or her department head a "request for job evaluation". The
department head shall then refer the matter to the Personnel Committee for its
consideration which may: 1) find after consideration of all available
information that the employee should be reclassified and his or her wages or
salary should be adjusted accordingly, or 2) find after consideration of all
available information that the employee should not be reclassified, or 3) find
that sufficient funds for a possible reclassification are not available in the
current budget and that the reclassification should be deferred. (Ord. 1988,
12-13-2011)
1-23-6: REST PERIODS:
All employees shall be granted one 15-minute rest period during each four (4)
hours of workday. Rest periods will be taken at such time as designated by
department heads. (Ord. 1151, 7-25-1978)
1-23-7: VACATIONS/COMPENSATORY TIME/PERSONAL DAY:
   (A)   Employees shall earn vacation time beginning with their first day of
employment. Full time employees are entitled to vacation benefits as listed
below:
 
After one year of work      80 hours
After five years of work    120 hours
After ten years of work     160 hours
After fifteen years of work 200 hours
 
Vacation hours shall accumulate per the following structure, with the final pay
period of the employee's anniversary year making the above mentioned total
hours whole:
 
First day of employment through five-year anniversary    3.0 hours/pay period
Completion of five years through ten-year anniversary    4.5 hours/pay period
Completion of ten years through fifteen-year anniversary 6.0 hours/pay period
Completion of fifteen years                              7.5 hours/pay period
 
   (B)   Accrual Cap: Employees shall be allowed to carry over a maximum of
forty (40) hours of vacation time from the preceeding anniversary year into the
next anniversary year. Employees who are unable to use their vacation due to
the nature of their employment shall be able to cash out vacation time at their
current rate of pay in lieu of losing earned vacation time. In no instance
shall an employee be able to cash out more than forty (40) hours of accrued
vacation per anniversary year.
   (C)   An employee on earned vacation shall receive the same wages and all
regular benefits as though he or she were working a normal work schedule.
Should a holiday occur while an employee is in a vacation status, such holiday
will not be charged against vacation time.
   (D)   Department heads are responsible for the approval of all vacation
leave requested by their employees. When a department head desires to enter a
vacation status, it must be brought to the attention of the Mayor. Any employee
who desires to establish his vacation leave in increments of five (5) days or
more must notify his supervisor thirty (30) days in advance of the initial date
of such leave.
   (E)   Employees requesting earned vacation/compensatory time shall notify
their department heads prior to starting of such leave and during regular
working hours. This requirement applies to leave requests for periods of less
than five (5) days. The employee's request for vacation/compensatory time shall
not be unreasonably withheld. However, the department head may take into
consideration the needs of the department and the City prior to authorizing
such leave.
   (F)   All department heads and non-union employees are granted two (2)
personal days annually. Employees requesting a personal day shall notify their
department head and such request shall not be unreasonably withheld. However,
the department head may take into consideration in approving the leave, the
needs of the department and City prior to authorizing such leave. Department
heads shall notify the Mayor of their request for a personal day and such
request shall not be unreasonably withheld subject to consideration by the
Mayor of the needs of the City. An employee's annual personal days shall accrue
on the annual anniversary day of their employment and must be used prior to
their next anniversary day of employment or the personal days shall be
forfeited. No personal days may be carried over to the next anniversary year.
   (G)   Separation Pay: Upon termination of employment, an employee shall be
compensated for vacation leave accrued up to the day of termination. If the
employee works six (6) full work days of the pay period, they shall be credited
for the entire pay period. There shall be no compensation for any unused
personal days. (Ord. 1867, 4-24-2007; amd. Ord. 2045, 6-25-2013; Ord. 2046, 6-
25-2013; Ord. 2181, 11-9-2016; Ord. 2286, 3-23-2021)
1-23-8: HOLIDAYS:
   (A)   Each employee of the City shall be granted eleven (11) paid holidays
per year. All holidays shall be observed on the date of the holiday except that
when the holiday falls on a Saturday, the employees will be scheduled off on
Friday and when the holiday falls on a Sunday, the employees will be scheduled
off on Monday. Members of the Police Department will be paid eight (8) hours
for the holiday in the pay period it occurs, and will not receive the holiday
as time off. Holiday pay will not count as overtime in the workweek. An
unexcused absence on either the day preceding or after a holiday will result in
the loss of pay for the holiday. This requirement applies to the regular
workday prior to and after any given holiday.
   (B)   In the event an employee, other than a member of the Police or Fire
Departments, is required to work a part or all of a recognized holiday, and if
such work falls within the employee's normal working hours, such employee will
be paid time and one-half (11/2) for such duty.
   (C)   The following are recognized as paid holidays for employees other than
members of the Police and Fire Departments:
New Year's Day
Presidents' Day
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve
Christmas Day
   (D)   Members of the Fire Department who are required to work on a holiday
will receive pay for a day in addition to their vacation leave. The Comptroller
will maintain such records.
   (E)   Employees in a probationary status will be entitled to holidays as
they occur. (Ord. 1151, 7-25-1978; Ord. 2008, 5-22-2012; amd. Ord. 2180, 11-9-
2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
1-23-9: SICK LEAVE; ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE:
   (A)   Sick leave with full pay will be granted to all full time employees at
the rate of one workday for each full month of service, except for police
officers who will receive eight (8) hours per month. All regular employment
benefits shall be in effect while an employee is in a properly approved sick
leave status. Sick leave will be approved on account of sickness or in the
interest of the health of the employee only. Employees may use six (6) days of
their sick leave per calendar year for an illness or injury in his/her
immediate family. Immediate family shall include: spouse, child, grandchild,
stepchild, parent, step grandchild, grandparent, step grandparent, stepparent,
brother, stepbrother, sister, stepsister. Any employee who fraudulently uses
their sick leave compensations, will be subject to disciplinary action,
including dismissal. (Ord. 2010, 5-22-2012)
   (B)   Sick leave may be accrued on an unlimited basis. Upon retirement an
employee shall receive benefits equal to twenty percent (20%) of the balance of
accrued sick leave. Employees receiving Illinois Municipal retirement benefits
shall receive twenty percent (20%) of the residual remaining from pension
benefits. Benefits shall be paid at the final hourly rate received by
employees.
   (C)   Employees of the Police and Fire Departments seeking sick leave shall
notify the dispatcher no less than two (2) hours prior to the beginning of
their regularly scheduled working hours. Other employees seeking sick leave
shall notify their department heads or assistants at least one-half (1/2) hour
prior to their regularly scheduled working hours. Failure to notify the
dispatcher or department heads within the authorized time limit may result in
loss of pay for the duration for any given illness and may be subject to
disciplinary action.
   (D)   The department heads, at their discretion, may require a doctor's
certificate for any given illness. The Public Works Department employees will
be required to provide a doctor's certificate after receiving three (3)
approved sick leave events without a doctor's certificate in a calendar year.
   (E)   All full time employees of the City may have a maximum of thirty (30)
days' sick leave advanced, providing the employee makes a valid request,
supported by reasons for such requirement. All advanced sick leave must be
approved by the Mayor and Personnel Committee. Advanced sick leave will not be
granted to probationary employees.
   (F)   Any employee may be granted a maximum of three (3) days'
administrative leave, with pay, to accommodate the death of a member of the
immediate family of the employee. This is further defined as mother,
stepmother, father, stepfather, husband, wife, son, stepson, daughter,
stepdaughter, brother, stepbrother, sister, stepsister, grandparent, step
grandparent, grandchild, step grandchild, mother-in-law or father-in-law,
brother-in-law, son-in-law, sister-in-law or daughter-in-law. Such leave will
not be charged against sick or vacation leave of the employee. (Ord. 1865, 4-
10-2007; amd. Ord. 2010, 5-22-2012; amd. Ord. 2086, 2-11-2014; amd. Ord. 2249,
8-13-2019)
1-23-10: LAYOFFS:
Layoffs shall be governed by department seniority with the youngest employee in
point of service being first to be separated, provided the employees retained
on the payroll are capable of performing the tasks of the available workload
and have been given a satisfactory work performance by their supervisor. In
reemployment, the oldest employee in point of service shall be the first
recalled, provided such employee is capable and qualified in performing the
required work. (Ord. 1151, 7-25-1978)
1-23-11: LEAVE OF ABSENCE:
   (A)   Leave of absence, without pay, will be recommended by the department
head and must have the final approval of the Mayor.
   (B)   Leave of absence for more than six (6) months shall not be granted
unless approved by both the department head and the Mayor.
   (C)   Leave of absence for purposes of other employment will not be
authorized under any circumstances. (Ord. 1151, 7-25-1978)
1-23-12: MILITARY SERVICE:
   (A)   Leaves of absence without pay for military or reserve duty are granted
to full time regular and part time regular employees.
   (B)   Any employee called to active military duty or to reserve or National
Guard training, should notify the City and submit copies of military orders to
the City as soon as is practicable.
   (C)   A City employee will be granted a military leave of absence without
pay for the period of military service in accordance with applicable Federal
and State laws.
   (D)   Upon an employee's return from active military duty, they shall be
entitled to all rights of reemployment provided the employee:
      1.   Receives a certificate or other evidence of honorable discharge or
satisfactory completion of their military service under the laws of the United
States; and
      2.   Is, at the time of such discharge or completion of such military
service, still qualified to perform the duties of the position of employment
which they left (with or without accommodation); and
      3.   Makes application for reemployment within ninety (90) days after
they are relieved from such military service, or from hospitalization
continuing after discharge for a period of not more than one year.
   (E)   Employees reinstated as set forth herein by the City shall be entitled
to return to the position of employment which they left with the same increase
in status, seniority and wages that were paid during their term of military
service to employees in like positions. (Ord. 1762, 3-23-2004)
1-23-13: JURY DUTY:
   (A)   Any employee called to serve on any State or Federal jury shall be
paid the difference between his or her regular pay and compensation received
for jury duty.
   (B)   Any employee called for jury duty shall notify his or her department
head as soon as possible and upon completion of jury duty shall return to his
or her job as soon as possible. (Ord. 1151, 7-25-1978)
1-23-14: RECORDS:
All official personnel records shall be maintained as outlined in subsection
1-23-1(A) of this chapter. The Comptroller shall submit to each department
head, at the end of each month, a complete listing of their employees and
indicate sick, vacation leave and compensatory time used for that particular
period, together with the total current sick, vacation leave and compensatory
time credited to each employee. Department heads must establish and maintain
adequate records which will show technical and specialized training which has
been completed by their employees. (Ord. 1423, 10-22-1991)
1-23-15: DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS:
   (A)   Dismissal or suspension of any city employee must have the approval of
both the department head and the mayor, and further, is subject to the
requirements of section
1-23-16 of this chapter.
   (B)   City employees may be discharged for serious inefficiency, absence
without leave for three (3) consecutive days or five (5) days in a thirty (30)
day period, continual tardiness, intoxication, insubordination,
incompatibility, dishonesty, committing a felony, or for other similar reasons.
   (C)   Department heads or any city employee found guilty of intentionally
falsifying an action or a report of any type, which involves city assets or
funds, may be suspended, demoted or dismissed by the mayor, subject to the
approval of the requirements of section
1-23-16 of this chapter.
   (D)   A department head may, for less serious cause and with the approval of
the mayor, suspend an employee within his or her department for such length of
time as he considers appropriate, not to exceed two (2) weeks in any one
calendar year.
   (E)   All approved suspensions will be without pay for the employee
involved. (Ord. 1151, 7-25-1978)
1-23-16: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Any employee, except police officers and firemen, who feels he has
received unfair treatment due to promotion, demotion, dismissal, suspension,
reprimand or for any other cause, shall present his case in writing to the city
clerk who shall notify the city council of receipt of the communication without
making public the name of the allegedly aggrieved. The council shall, at their
next regularly scheduled meeting, adjourn to executive session and consider the
matter. The council may elect to appoint a special board to inquire further and
prepare a complete written report to cover their findings. Both sides of the
grievance will be heard by either the council or a special board in a closed
session within ten (10) days after the initial action on the grievance. In the
event that the council decides that formal action is required, such action
shall be finalized at a closed meeting and all decisions shall be final and
binding for all parties concerned.
   (B)   Police and firemen who have a grievance in connection with dismissal
or suspension, or for any other cause as itemized in subsection (A) of this
section, will be brought to the attention of the mayor and city council.
Immediate action will then be taken to refer the case to the police and fire
commission for appropriate action 1 . (Ord. 1151, 7-25-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 2-1-11 of this code.
1-23-17: HOSPITALIZATION, INSURANCE:
   (A)   Group Health Insurance: The city will administer a group health
insurance plan for those employees who desire to participate in the plan. The
city will pay one hundred percent (100%) of the premium cost for the
participating employee and fifty percent (50%) of the premium cost for
dependents of the participating employee. A new employee shall be eligible for
the group health insurance plan on the first day of the month following
completion of thirty (30) days of employment. (Ord. 1652, 12-14-1999)
   (B)   Rates: The mayor and department heads will negotiate with insurance
agents so as to provide the insurance coverage at the best possible rates.
(Ord. 1190, 4-8-1980)
   (C)   Termination Of Employment; Continuation Of Coverage:
      1.   An employee who terminates employment, either voluntarily or
involuntarily, is entitled to have issued to the employee a converted health
insurance policy without evidence of insurability. The cost of the converted
policy shall be solely at the former employee's expense. Written application
for the first converted policy and the first premium paid to the insurer must
be made not later than thirty one (31) days after termination of employment or
fifteen (15) days after the employee has been given written notice of the
conversion privilege, but not later than sixty (60) days after the termination
of employment. Written notice to the employee by the employer of this
conversion privilege must be sent to the last known address of the employee.
Continued coverage may be terminated if the former employee fails to make
timely premium payments or becomes covered by medicare or another health
insurance plan. Regardless of the former employee's compliance with these
conditions, continued coverage ends eighteen (18) months after the former
employee's employment has terminated. Continued coverage only is available for
employees who are covered by the healthcare plan of the city the day
immediately before the day of termination of employment.
      2.   An active employee participating in IMRF and eligible for IMRF
pension or disability benefit is entitled to have issued to the employee a
converted health insurance policy without evidence of insurability, under the
following conditions:
         (a)   The IMRF employee must be insured under the provisions of the
healthcare plan of the city on the day immediately before the day the employee
retires or becomes disabled. The IMRF employee is only eligible for
continuation coverage for that coverage which was provided to the employee on
that day.
         (b)   The IMRF employee upon termination of employment must be
entitled to an immediate receipt of an IMRF pension or disability benefit.
         (c)   Surviving spouses of IMRF employees are not eligible for
continuation coverage under this subsection (C), unless the retired or disabled
employee dies with dependent coverage and the surviving spouse is paid an IMRF
surviving spouse benefit. Any coverage for a surviving spouse ends if the
surviving spouse remarries before age fifty five (55).
         (d)   The disabled employee, retiree or surviving spouse is required
to pay the full premium of the converted policy.
         (e)   Continuation coverage ends if the retiree or disabled employee
becomes an active IMRF participant. Continuation coverage for a disabled
employee, retiree or surviving spouse ends if they are convicted of a job
related felony, die, fail to pay premiums, reach medicare age or the city
terminates insurance coverage for all employees.
         (f)   When an IMRF employee retires or becomes disabled, the city
shall give written notice to the insurance carrier within fifteen (15) days
that the employee is eligible for continued insurance coverage.
      3.   A former employee whose employment was terminated because of
dishonesty or commission of a crime is not eligible for continued coverage.
      4.   This subsection (C) is subject to the provisions of the Illinois
insurance code, the federal consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act
(COBRA) and any other applicable state or federal laws. (Ord. 1557, 3-12-1996)
1-23-18: CLOTHING ALLOWANCE:
All full time employees in the public works, police and fire departments, and
the administrative department shall be granted a clothing allowance as follows:
   (A)   Public works department employees shall be allowed a total of three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for each individual employee for the purchase of
uniform clothing as approved by the department head and conditioned as follows:
      1.   Such allowance shall be made each fiscal year between the period May
1 through April 30. Unused balances can be carried over annually.
      2.   Such allowance shall be paid from the city financial assets upon
approval of a purchase order in accordance with chapter 20 of this title.
      3.   The comptroller shall maintain accurate records for each individual
employee and excess purchases must be paid for by the affected employee at the
time of the receipt of the merchandise.
      4.   The following items may be purchased by the public works personnel
to apply on clothing allowance:
         (a)   Shoes (in accordance with subsections
1-23-22(A)50 and (D)14(b) of this chapter);
         (b)   Trousers (long) - (in accordance with subsection
1-23-22(D)14 of this chapter);
         (c)   Shirts with sleeves - including pocket T-shirts and flannel with
company name;
         (d)   Winter coat or jacket with company name;
         (e)   Rain gear (parka and overall);
         (f)   Coveralls;
         (g)   Boots (winter snopak style);
         (h)   Sweatshirt - (basic or basic hooded zip front);
         (i)   Over the shoe boots;
         (j)   Insulated vest.
      5.   The following items shall be purchased by the city and issued to the
public works department:
         (a)   Hip boots or waders;
         (b)   Head protection - hard caps/hats;
         (c)   Caps with city logo/company name;
         (d)   Eye protection such as safety goggles or face protectors;
         (e)   Foot protectors;
         (f)   Hearing protectors.
   (B)   Police department employees shall be allowed a total of three hundred
fifty dollars ($350.00) for each individual employee for the purchase of
uniform clothing as approved by the department head. Part time employees are
not entitled to any uniform allowance. Such allowance shall be made each fiscal
year between the period May 1 through April 30, but unused balances can be
carried over annually, conditioned as follows:
      1.   A new hire shall receive a total of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
to apply for the purchase of their initial uniform clothing requirements.
      2.   Such allowance shall be paid from the city financial assets.
      3.   The comptroller shall maintain accurate records for each individual
employee and excess purchases must be paid for by the affected employee at the
time of the receipt of the merchandise.
      4.   The following items are to be purchased by the employee to apply on
clothing allowance:
         (a)   Belt, trouser;
         (b)   Necktie;
         (c)   Nameplates, shirt and coat;
         (d)   Shirts, short sleeve;
         (e)   Shirts, long sleeve;
         (f)   Trousers (short or long);
         (g)   Shoes;
         (h)   Cap;
         (i)   Cap, winter;
         (j)   Cap, strap;
         (k)   Jacket, lightweight;
         (l)   Raincoat;
         (m)   Rain cover, plastic, for summer cap;
         (n)   Jacket, winter;
         (o)   Shoulder patches;
         (p)   Sweaters;
         (q)   Uniform insignias;
         (r)   Work gloves (search and winter);
         (s)   Turtlenecks, mock and dickie.
      5.   The following items shall be purchased by the city and issued by the
police department and shall remain the property of the city and are to be
turned in upon separation from active police service:
         (a)   Service pistol or revolver;
         (b)   Pistol belt;
         (c)   Holster;
         (d)   Cartridge carrier;
         (e)   Mace;
         (f)   Mace holder;
         (g)   Handcuffs;
         (h)   Handcuff case;
         (i)   Nightstick;
         (j)   Nightstick stop;
         (k)   Nightstick carrier;
         (l)   Belt keepers, four (4) each;
         (m)   ID card;
         (n)   ID case;
         (o)   Badge for ID case;
         (p)   Badge, medium, two (2) each;
         (q)   Badge, hat emblem;
         (r)   Tie clasp;
         (s)   Hearing and eye protectors;
         (t)   Flashlight;
         (u)   Vest, bulletproof;
         (v)   CPR mask;
         (w)   Rubber glove/CPR pouch;
         (x)   Flashlight ring/carrier;
         (y)   Portable radio and portable radio case holder;
         (z)   Key holder.
   (C)   Fire department employees shall be allowed a total of three hundred
dollars ($300.00) for each individual employee for the purchase of uniform
clothing as approved by the department head. Such allowance shall be made each
fiscal year between the period May 1 through April 30, but unused balances can
be carried over annually, conditioned as follows:
      1.   A new hire shall receive a total of eight hundred dollars ($800.00)
to apply for the purchase of their initial uniform clothing requirements.
      2.   Such allowance shall be paid from city financial assets.
      3.   The comptroller shall maintain accurate records for each individual
employee and excess purchases must be paid for by the affected employee at the
time of the receipt of the merchandise or service.
      4.   The following items are to be purchased by the fire personnel to
apply to clothing allowance:
         (a)   Trousers;
         (b)   Shirts, short sleeve;
         (c)   Shirts, long sleeve;
         (d)   Belt;
         (e)   Shoes;
         (f)   Jacket, lightweight;
         (g)   Necktie;
         (h)   Winter coat;
         (i)   Shoulder patches;
         (j)   Badge, cap;
         (k)   T-shirts with maltese cross and name;
         (l)   Winter boots;
         (m)   Tie clasp;
         (n)   Collar insignia;
         (o)   Sweater;
         (p)   Nameplate coat/shirt;
         (q)   Cap;
         (r)   Cap, strap;
         (s)   Sweatshirt with maltese cross and name;
         (t)   Black shorts.
      5.   The following items shall be purchased by the City and issued to the
Fire Department and shall remain the property of the City and shall be turned
in upon separation from active fire service:
         (a)   Boots, firefighter's;
         (b)   Coat, firefighter's Nomex;
         (c)   Helmet, firefighter's;
         (d)   Badge, for shirt/coat;
         (e)   Pager;
         (f)   Light, flashing blue (vehicle mounted);
         (g)   Bunker pants, firefighter's Nomex;
         (h)   Bunker pants suspenders, firefighter's;
         (i)   Hood, Nomex;
         (j)   Gloves, firefighter's Nomex/Gore-Tex;
         (k)   CPR microshield.
   (D)   Administrative Department employees shall receive a total of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each individual employee for the purchase
of uniform clothing, as approved by the department head and conditioned as
follows:
      1.   Such allowance shall be made each fiscal year between the period May
1 through April 30. Unused balances can be carried over annually.
      2.   Such allowance shall be paid from the City financial assets.
      3.   The Comptroller shall maintain accurate records for each individual
employee and excess purchases must be paid for by the affected employee at the
time of the receipt of the merchandise.
      4.   The following items may be purchased by Administrative Department
personnel to apply on the clothing allowance:
         (a)   Shirts (long sleeve or short sleeve) bearing an appropriate
emblem of the City of Savanna;
         (b)   Sweatshirts bearing an appropriate emblem of the City of
Savanna;
         (c)   Slacks.
   (E)   Public Works Department employees must wear the prescribed items
during working hours. Employees shall keep their uniforms and equipment in good
condition with no visible holes, tears or discoloration. Failure to wear or
maintain uniform clothing constitutes grounds for disciplinary action in
accordance with sections
1-23-15 and
1-23-16 of this chapter and may subject an employee violating this provision to
a loss of clothing allowance. (Ord. 2049, 7-9-2013)
1-23-19: TRAVEL, TRAINING, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSES:
   (A)   Definitions:
    ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements,
theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
   PUBLIC BUSINESS: Expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose
which is required or useful for the benefit of the City to carry out the
responsibilities of the City business.
   TRAVEL: Any expenditure directly incident to the official travel by
employees and officers of the City or by wards or charges of the City involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services.
   (B)   Reimbursement: The City shall only reimburse the following types of
travel, meal and lodging expenses incurred by its employees and officers up to
the following maximum allowable amounts:
      1.   City employees will be authorized to go on a travel status for
purposes of training, meetings, conferences, etc., when such activities are
directly related to official City business. All forms of travel will be
recommended by the department head and approved by the Mayor. Individuals who
utilize their own private conveyance for travel purposes will be paid at the
rate of fifty four cents ($0.54) per mile. Upon completion of travel, an
employee will be reimbursed for other expenses such as lodging, food, etc.,
providing proof of such expenses is made available to the City Comptroller and
the expenses are in accordance with this section. Meal reimbursement shall not
exceed twenty dollars ($20.00) per meal.
      2.   All travel authorizations as recommended by the department head must
be presented to the Mayor for final approval. A department head who must leave
the City on official business during his regular work shift should advise the
Mayor prior to his departure. Police personnel who are required to report to
the County Courthouse for law enforcement proceedings are an exception to this
requirement.
      3.   Alcohol is specifically excluded from reimbursement.
   (C)   Form Required: No reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses
incurred by a City employee or officer shall be authorized unless the "Travel,
Meal and Lodging Expense Reimbursement Request Form", on file in the City, has
been submitted and approved. All documents and information submitted with the
form shall be subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 1 .
   (D)   Exceeding Maximum Reimbursement: Expenses for travel, meals and
lodging of: 1) any officer or employee that exceeds the maximum reimbursement
allowed under the regulations adopted under subsection (B) of this section or
2) any member of the Corporate Authorities of the City may only be approved by
roll call vote at an open meeting of the Corporate Authorities of the City.
However, in the event of emergency or other extraordinary circumstances, the
Corporate Authorities may approve more than the maximum allowable expenses set
forth above.
   (E)   Entertainment: The City shall not reimburse any elected official,
employee, or officer for any activities which would be considered
entertainment. Activities which would otherwise be considered entertainment,
but which are excluded from the prohibition on reimbursement due to being
ancillary to the purpose of the program or event may be reimbursed in
accordance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2193, 3-14-2017, eff. 3-
14-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
1-23-20: PENSION PLANS:
   (A)   All City employees, other than police and firemen, must participate in
the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund Program. Payroll deductions, as required
by law, will be made from employee's wages each pay period as their
contribution to the Retirement Fund.
   (B)   Police and fire personnel will participate in Policemen's and
Firemen's Pension Fund in compliance with State Statutes. Payroll deductions
will be made each pay period from wages of police and fire personnel as their
contribution to the Pension Fund 1 . (Ord. 1151, 7-25-1978)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 2, chapters 2 and 3 of this Code.
1-23-21: INJURIES, DISABILITY FROM INJURIES IN LINE OF DUTY:
   (A)   Continuing Compensation For City Employees: Whenever any City employee
who is employed on a full time basis by the City suffers any injury in the line
of duty which causes him to be unable to perform his duties, he shall continue
to be paid by the City on the same basis as he was paid before the injury, with
no deduction from his sick leave credits, compensatory time for overtime
accumulations or vacation, or service credits in a public employee pension fund
during the time he is unable to perform his duties due to the result of the
injury, but not longer than one year in relation to the same injury.
   (B)   Order Examinations: At any time during the period for which continuing
compensation is required by this chapter, the City may order, at the expense of
the City, physical or medical examinations of the injured person to determine
the degree of disability.
   (C)   Forfeit Of Compensation: During this period of disability, the injured
person shall not be employed in any other manner, with or without monetary
compensation. Any person who is employed in violation of this paragraph
forfeits the continuing compensation provided by this chapter from the time
such employment begins. Any salary compensation due the injured person from
workers' compensation or any salary due him from any type of insurance which
may be carried by the City shall revert to the City during the time for which
continuing compensation is paid him under this chapter. Any disabled person
receiving compensation under the provisions of this chapter shall not be
entitled to any benefits for which he would qualify because of his disability
under the provisions of the Illinois Pension Code, as amended, before or after
this chapter becomes a law. (Ord. 1154, 10-10-1978)
1-23-22: SAFETY CODE:
   (A)   Rules: The rules included in this section were developed as a result
of injuries or accidents experienced by City employees. The rules cannot tell
every step to take, but they do enumerate a few steps that must always be taken
and a few steps that must never be taken.
      1.   Employees do not have special traffic rights. Employees operating
equipment on streets or highways shall obey all State and City traffic laws and
department policies.
      2.   The number of employees permitted to ride in a car or truck shall
not exceed the seat space and seat belts as provided by the manufacturer.
      3.   It is the operator's responsibility to report all vehicle and
equipment malfunctions and defective parts at once.
      4.   Safety seat belts installed in vehicles and mobile equipment shall
be used by the operator and passengers while the vehicle or mobile equipment is
in use.
      5.   Riding on the outside of equipment is prohibited except where
provision is made for the operator or others while performing an operation for
which the equipment is designed.
      6.   Do not mount or dismount moving vehicles or equipment.
      7.   Operators shall not operate vehicles or mobile equipment in reverse
unless they are certain the backing movement can be made safely. When the
vision to the rear is limited and a fellow employee is available, such employee
shall be utilized by the operator to assist with the backing movement. The
person assisting the operator shall take a position outside the vehicle so as
not to be exposed to oncoming traffic or the backing vehicle.
      8.   Employees shall not operate motorcycles, scooters or motorized bikes
in the course of employment nor at city expense.
      9.   When stopped or parked on the shoulder, as much clearance as
possible shall be maintained between the edge of the pavement and the near side
of the vehicles. If less than two feet (2') or approximately two-thirds (2/3)
meter clearance is provided, the four-way flashers and/or revolving light shall
be used.
      10.   Do not smoke where flammable or combustible liquids are being
handled, stored or used.
      11.   Do not use gasoline to start fires.
      12.   Do not store or transport gasoline in open or unmarked containers.
Use only containers manufactured for such purpose. All containers shall be
properly labeled.
      13.   Do not use gasoline as a cleaning solvent. Use commercial cleaner
or kerosene to wash parts and equipment.
      14.   Horseplay is prohibited.
      15.   Extension and office equipment cords shall be in good condition and
secured so that they will not be under foot.
      16.   Always keep file drawers and desk drawers closed when not in use.
      17.   Do not open more than one drawer of a file cabinet at any time.
      18.   Use red/orange flags (red light or lantern at night that is visible
for a minimum of 500 feet or 150 meters to the sides and rear) to mark the end
of any loaded material extending four feet (4') or approximately one and one-
third (11/3) meters beyond the rear of the bed or body of the vehicle.
      19.   When leaving equipment unattended at any location, block all
blades, buckets, booms, beds, plows and devices or lower to down positions;
remove ignition or starter switch key.
      20.   Do not operate, adjust or repair gasoline or diesel powered
equipment when it is running in a closed area without adequate ventilation or
facilities for removing exhaust fumes.
      21.   Do not use a tractor with defective safety starting system.
      22.   No one shall ride in any end loader bucket at any time.
      23.   Do not start a tractor unless seated in the operator's seat.
      24.   After mounting a tire on a demountable rim, a safety cage or other
safety devices shall be used when inflating truck or off the road equipment
type tires.
      25.   When towing towed type equipment, in addition to securing the
hooking device, the driver of the vehicle shall make certain that two (2)
safety chains are securely attached or hooked to the towing vehicle and towed
unit.
      26.   Never reach, crawl or work under any raised or suspended equipment
without using cribbing, solid blocks or approved safety devices to prevent the
raised or suspended equipment from falling.
      27.   Only electrically powered tools and equipment which have been
grounded or are double insulated shall be used.
      28.   Before changing attachments, repairing or adjusting electrically or
pneumatically powered tools and/or equipment, they shall be unplugged or
disconnected. Lock and tag electrical breaker box if directly wired.
      29.   When operating a power saw, observe the following precautions:
         (a)   All guards shall be in place.
         (b)   Use only sharp blades in good repair.
         (c)   Wear eye and/or face protection.
         (d)   Table saw - Use a stick to push narrow or short pieces of lumber
through power saws when making a rip cut.
      30.   The following precautions shall be observed when operating a
grinder:
         (a)   Make certain the grinding wheels are tight on the shaft.
         (b)   Check grinding wheels for cracks, chips, uneven wear or other
defects. If wheel is cracked, replace it. If uneven or chipped, dress with a
dressing wheel or replace.
         (c)   Use only grinding wheels designed for the size and speed of the
grinder.
         (d)   Tool rests shall be properly adjusted (not more than 1/8 inch or
3.17 millimeters from grinding wheel).
         (e)   Wheel guards shall be in place.
         (f)   Do not use side of wheel for grinding.
         (g)   Even though grinder is equipped with fixed face shield, eye
protection shall also be used.
      31.   Except when riding on self-propelled equipment, all employees
engaged in activities on or within fifteen feet (15') or approximately four and
one-half (41/2) meters of the edge of the pavement which normally do not
require flagmen shall wear high visibility vests.
      32.   Maintenance operations or other work on or within two feet (2') or
approximately two-thirds (2/3) meter of the pavement requiring the diversion or
stopping of traffic shall be conducted with the protection of a flagman. When
the work activity, continuous or intermittent, exceeds fifteen (15) minutes,
advance warning signs shall also be used.
      33.   Do not stand on or within two feet (2') or approximately two-thirds
(2/3) meter of an open traffic lane to talk with the driver of a vehicle parked
on the road shoulder.
      34.   It shall be the responsibility of the employee in charge to ensure
that traffic control devices used in daily operation for the protection of the
workers and the public be removed at the end of the day's work. All temporary
warning signs shall be removed as soon as the hazard has been eliminated.
      35.   The flagman shall be:
         (a)   Stationed at least one hundred feet (100') or approximately
thirty (30) meters from work site and workers.
         (b)   Stationed away from equipment.
         (c)   Stationed so they can be seen at least five hundred feet (500')
or approximately one hundred fifty (150) meters by oncoming traffic. (Avoid
stationing flagman in shaded areas where they will not be visible to
approaching traffic.)
         (d)   Stationed at an effective location other than the open traffic
lane.
         (e)   Always alert for oncoming traffic and not turn their back on
traffic in the lane under control until traffic responds.
      36.   Flagmen shall be equipped with and required to wear or use the
following:
         (a)   Hard caps or hard hats.
         (b)   High visibility vests (reflectorized for night work).
         (c)   Flagman traffic control signs.
         (d)   For night operations, a red lantern or flashlight with red wand
shall be used. (Note: The flagman station should be illuminated.)
      37.   When using distributors or asphalt kettles, the following must be
observed:
         (a)   Do not use the unit until you have been instructed in its proper
operation.
         (b)   Do not light burner with a match held in the hand. Use a stiff
wire or stick lighting torch.
         (c)   Lowering chains shall be used to add a full drum (drum shall be
punctured on sides and ends) of asphalt to a heating kettle.
         (d)   To prevent hot asphalt from being splashed, do not throw chunks
of asphalt into heated kettle.
         (e)   Do not heat asphalt when there is evidence of accumulated
moisture in the asphalt, kettle or distributor tank.
         (f)   Do not allow the level of the heated asphalt to get below the
heating flues or coils.
      38.   Pavements cracks and joints are to be poured in a direction moving
from the centerline to the shoulder. Never cross centerline or lane line into
an open traffic lane.
      39.   Never operate a tractor mower on a slope with the sickle bar
operating on the down slope side.
      40.   Mowers operating in the same direction shall maintain an interval
of at least three hundred feet (300') or approximately ninety (90) meters.
      41.   Always face the ladder when climbing up or down.
      42.   Never use metallic ladders when making electrical repairs or when
working near electrical lines and power sources.
      43.   No one shall work in trenches or excavations five feet (5') or
approximately one and one-half (11/2) meters or deeper unless OSHA standards
pertaining to protective procedures are followed. (Consult your supervisor.)
      44.   All personnel shall wear lifelines when entering a manhole. At
least two (2) workers shall remain on the surface in such a position that they
can observe and assist in the removal of those in the manhole.
      45.   Open flames, torches, lighted cigars, cigarettes, pipes, flame or
spark producing devices shall not be brought into or near an open manhole.
      46.   Operators of boom equipment and workers handling long pieces of
conductive material shall be constantly on the alert for overhead power and
telephone lines.
      47.   Do not stand or walk under suspended loads or so near a cable under
tension that you can be struck should the cable break or load shift.
      48.   All LP (liquified petroleum), acetylene and oxygen gas cylinders
whether empty or full shall be securely fastened at all times in an upright
position to prevent falling. The cylinder valves shall be turned off when the
cylinders are not being utilized.
      49.   Head protection in the form of hard caps/hats shall be worn by all
city employees involved in field activities where there is possible danger of
head injury from falling objects, impact from flying or swinging objects,
contact with fixed objects, or from electrical shock and burns and at locations
or sites designated as hard cap/hat areas.
Head protection in the form of a bump cap is to be worn by employees whose
normal duties are that of performing automotive and/or equipment repairs where
there is danger of bumping and/or lacerations to the head.
The employee in charge has the authority and responsibility to order the
wearing of head protection where there is danger of head injury due to a hazard
not covered elsewhere in the safety code.
      50.   Safety toe footwear shall be worn by employees engaged in
operations where the danger of injury to the foot may occur.
      51.   All air hammer operations shall wear foot protection capable of
providing protection to the toes and metatarsal arch. (Ord. 1179, 11-13-1979)
      52.   Eye protection, such as safety goggles, glasses or face protectors,
shall be worn when observing, performing or assisting with any operation where
danger of injury to the eye or face may occur and which shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
         (a)   Grinders.
         (b)   Lathes.
         (c)   Drill presses.
         (d)   Sanders.
         (e)   Power saws.
         (f)   Welding.
         (g)   Sandblasting.
         (h)   When using compressed air for cleaning.
         (i)   When making repairs under equipment.
         (j)   When using cold chisels or star drills.
         (k)   Pavement breaking or drilling.
         (l)   When using handheld weed burning equipment.
         (m)   When working with wet cell batteries.
         (n)   Chemicals.
         (o)   When striking metal objects of any type with a hammer or maul.
(Ord. 1186, 1-8-1980)
   (B)   General Safety Requirements: The practices outlined in this subsection
apply to all employees regardless of position or job assignment.
      1.   Hazards And Emergencies:
         (a)   Every employee should watch constantly for hazards along the
streets, highways or their place of employment. If one is noted, it should be
removed or proper protection provided by placing appropriate warnings such as
signs, cones, flags, torches or barricades. Employees not prepared to perform
this type of work shall notify their superior.
         (b)   Employees who see or learn of any damage to city property shall
report the damage to their superior or to the office to which the employee is
assigned.
         (c)   Reasonable assistance in emergencies should be offered to anyone
involved in an accident along the highway or in obvious distress whether or not
city equipment is involved and no other aid is on the scene.
         (d)   If any employee observes a motor vehicle or other equipment of a
utility company, contractor or others parked upon the roadway, or workers
working on or adjacent to the pavement without being protected by adequate
signs, flags or personnel directing traffic, the employee should notify their
superior.
      2.   Accident Reporting: Failure to follow reporting procedures may
disqualify an employee from receiving workers' compensation benefits.
         (a)   All accidents (including physical collapse) occurring in the
course of employment involving city personnel and/or equipment shall be
reported as soon as possible to the office to which the employee is assigned.
(Ord. 1179, 11-13-1979)
         (b)   It shall be the duty of every employee to report all accidents
in accordance with the following:
            (1)   Accidents which involve city personnel and/or equipment shall
be reported on the proper form within twenty four (24) hours after occurrence.
            (2)   All vehicle and equipment accidents shall be reported on
forms supplied by the police department (form-SR 1733).
            (3)   All personnel injury accidents shall be reported on forms
supplied by the business office (form 45).
            (4)   All accidents, including vehicular, equipment and personnel
injuries, shall be reviewed by a board of accident investigation. Said board,
when used in this chapter, shall consist of the department head for the
department involved and two (2) city council members appointed by the mayor.
The mayor shall serve as a board member when an accident involves a department
head.
The board shall conduct a thorough investigation to determine the cause,
negligence and responsibility for the accident and shall submit a written
report to the city council for further consideration.
            (5)   Vehicle accidents involving Savanna police department
vehicles shall be investigated by the Carroll County sheriff's department or by
the Illinois state police.
            (6)   A copy of all completed accident reports will be made
available to the mayor for subsequent board action. (Ord. 1224, 7-14-1981)
         (c)   Injuries incurred during working hours but resulting from
horseplay, altercations, or while engaged in activities for personal benefit,
may deprive the employee of benefits provided by the workers' compensation act
and the Illinois municipal retirement system.
         (d)   The operator of a vehicle or mobile equipment operated at city
expense having been involved in an accident shall immediately notify the
nearest local police, sheriff department or state police.
         (e)   No oral or written statement is to be made by an employee
regarding an accident involving city property or employees, except reports to a
police officer, unless approved by the employee's department head.
         (f)   Incidents involving loss or damage to city buildings and
equipment resulting from explosives, fire, theft, vandalism and storm shall be
reported immediately to the department head.
      3.   Safe Driving Practices:
         (a)   Select overnight parking locations that will present the least
hazard to the traveling public and city vehicles and equipment.
         (b)   When visibility is reduced during daylight operations, use
headlights with beams depressed.
         (c)   Do not shift the vehicle into neutral or disengage the clutch
when traveling downgrade.
         (d)   To minimize skidding when stopping on wet or icy pavement, apply
the brakes with a pumping action. Avoid sudden application of brakes.
         (e)   Drive cautiously and be prepared to stop when approaching a
child, pedestrian, or person riding a bicycle on the street or highway.
         (f)   Should disabled equipment, either city or privately owned, be
parked on the pavement without proper protection, it is the duty of employees
to protect traffic by placing fusees, reflectors or torches. In the case of
privately owned vehicles, the matter should then be referred to the nearest
police agency as soon as possible.
         (g)   All city owned cars and trucks shall be equipped with fully
stocked first aid kits.
         (h)   Always signal a turning movement or a lane change.
         (i)   Special attention should be given to keeping windshields,
windows, headlamps and tail lamp lenses clean.
         (j)   Damaged glass and lenses of vehicles shall be replaced as soon
as practical.
         (k)   For a safe following distance, always allow a minimum of two (2)
seconds counting time between your vehicle and the vehicle ahead.
         (l)   While refueling vehicles and equipment:
            (1)   Turn off engine.
            (2)   Do not smoke or permit an open flame.
            (3)   Read instructions for the operations of gasoline dispensing
equipment posted at each self-service station before refueling.
            (4)   To avoid backsplash, stand to one side or far enough away to
avoid getting gasoline on clothing.
            (5)   Replace gas tank cap when finished.
         (m)   Caution shall always be used when removing radiator cap from
equipment or vehicles. Never remove the radiator cap from equipment or vehicles
when the motor is overheated.
         (n)   When it is necessary to stop a city vehicle at locations where
traffic does not normally stop, the city operator shall give warning to
following vehicles by flashing his brake lights and slowing down gradually.
         (o)   Exercise care in attempting to start a vehicle with a "booster
battery". See your supervisor for proper instructions.
         (p)   To prevent the overflow of gasoline and possible fire, leave
sufficient space at the top of the tanks and/or containers for expansion.
      4.   Fire Prevention:
         (a)   All employee occupied buildings shall be adequately equipped
with fire extinguishers. The fire extinguisher shall be selected and placed
according to hazards.
            (1)   All fire extinguishers shall be visually inspected every
thirty (30) days by the employees in charge to:
   A. Ensure that they are in their designated places.
   B. Ensure they have not been actuated or tampered with.
   C. Detect any obvious physical or chemical change.
            (2)   All fire extinguishers are to be:
   A. Serviced at least once each year by an approved service agency.
   B. Tagged to show date of last inspection and recharge.
   C. Labeled to provide immediate identification as to its type.
         (b)   Vehicles and mobile equipment which carry fire extinguishers
shall have extinguishers: 1) bracket mounted, 2) located as to be accessible,
and 3) periodically inspected (see subsection (B)4(a) of this section for
inspection schedule and requirements).
         (c)   If a fire extinguisher has been used or damaged, report the use
or damage immediately to the individual in charge so that it will be replaced
by a serviceable unit.
         (d)   "No smoking" signs shall be conspicuously posted in areas where
combustible and flammable materials are stored and distributed and this warning
shall be strictly enforced.
         (e)   Do not throw matches or cigarette butts directly into waste
baskets; use ashtrays. Check ashtrays for any signs of smoldering materials
before emptying into trash containers.
         (f)   When a fire is discovered, an employee should do three (3)
things:
            (1)   Alert fellow workers.
            (2)   Turn in the alarm (no matter how small the fire appears to
be).
            (3)   If trained, use the proper firefighting equipment.
         (g)   In case of fire, all personnel shall be evacuated to an area of
safety and away from firefighter's arena of activity.
      5.   Firefighting Emergencies: A minimum of two (2) firefighting
personnel shall conduct firefighting operations within any building.
   (C)   Office Activities: The practices outlined in this subsection apply to
personnel assigned to an office, or to personnel who may at some time during a
normal work day perform an office activity.
      1.   Tripping Hazards, Slips And Falls:
         (a)   Chairs shall not be used as ladders. Use stepladders, step
stools or similar devices for reaching high places.
         (b)   Be alert for slipping hazards such as freshly mopped floors and
stairs. Wet or slippery stairs and floors shall be reported immediately.
         (c)   Use handrails when going up or down stairways.
         (d)   When going around corners, keep to the right and be alert for
other employees, handcarts and hand trucks and other objects.
         (e)   Open doors with caution; another person may be approaching from
the other side.
         (f)   Remove objects such as pencils, paperclips and rubber bands from
floors whenever noticed as they may contribute to falls resulting in serious
injury.
         (g)   All chairs and equipment shall be kept in good repair; report
defects immediately.
      2.   Housekeeping And Building Maintenance:
         (a)   Broken glass and other sharp objects shall be wrapped in heavy
paper, marked "broken glass" or "sharp objects" and placed beside, not in, the
waste basket.
         (b)   Aisles, halls and stairways shall be kept clear of objects that
may cause employees to fall.
         (c)   Keep exits clear at all times. Fire doors shall not be blocked
at any time or made inoperative.
         (d)   Keep work and storage areas clean and orderly.
         (e)   Precautionary measures shall be taken when disposing of used
pressurized containers. Follow the instructions given on the containers.
         (f)   Good housekeeping practices shall be followed at all times.
      3.   General Office Safety:
         (a)   Distribute weight in file cabinets to prevent top heavy
conditions.
         (b)   When emptying drawers of file cabinets, empty top drawers first.
         (c)   Electric fans and other equipment with exposed rotating parts
shall be equipped with proper guarding. (Fans shall be guarded with 1/2 inch
mesh or finer to prevent fingers from coming into contact with blades.)
         (d)   Avoid sitting on the front edge of a swivel base chair or
tipping any chair.
         (e)   Do not use pins to fasten papers.
         (f)   Glass desk tops shall be free of breaks and sharp edges.
   (D)   Field Activities, Shops And Storages: The practices outlined in this
subsection apply to personnel working at a location (other than an office) to
which the employee reports or is assigned.
      1.   Trucks And Mobile Equipment:
         (a)   All trucks shall have the proper emergency warning kits, in
addition to the required number of fusees, which must be maintained in a
serviceable condition for emergency use.
         (b)   When mounting or dismounting vehicles or equipment, use hand
holds and ladders to prevent injury from slips and falls.
         (c)   When changing tires on motor vehicles and equipment, set
emergency brake and use blocks to prevent vehicle from rolling and do not stand
or work on the pavement.
         (d)   Trucks shall be loaded in such a way that the cargo will not
spill or fall off the truck. All ledges and rubrails shall be free of stones
and other material that could drop off and hit other property or persons.
         (e)   All trucks shall have the proper lights and reflectors.
         (f)   Proper use of rotating oscillating lights. The revolving warning
lights on vehicles so equipped must be used during the following operations:
            (1)   When plowing snow or spreading chemicals and/or abrasives.
            (2)   When traveling with mounted snowplows or other over width
attachments.
            (3)   When performing slow moving operations.
            (4)   When temporarily stopped on roadway surface during an
emergency operation.
            (5)   When towing equipment.
            (6)   Red lights shall be activated whenever emergency vehicles are
operated in excess of posted speed limits or such other circumstances as may be
required to provide for safety to persons and/or property.
         (g)   Take all other precautions necessary to assure that no one,
especially children, can start, operate or cause any movement of parked
equipment.
         (h)   A truck may be operated with the endgate or liftgate in the open
or horizontal position only when necessary or for load situation.
         (i)   Select parking locations for city vehicles and equipment that
will not hide any traffic sign or signal.
         (j)   While refueling vehicles and equipment:
            (1)   Turn off engine.
            (2)   Keep nozzle or spout in direct contact with the tank.
            (3)   Do not smoke.
            (4)   Extinguish all open flames or burners.
            (5)   Have not less than twenty (20) BC fire extinguisher
available.
         (k)   A "slow moving vehicle emblem" shall be properly displayed on
all mobile equipment designed to travel less than twenty five (25) mph so
traffic to the rear may see the emblem.
         (l)   City employees must comply with posted speed limits except under
the following conditions:
            (1)   When performing slow moving operations.
            (2)   When reduced speed is necessary for safe operation of the
vehicle.
            (3)   When working on the roadway surface with the protection of
signs, barricades, escort vehicles and/or flagmen.
            (4)   When performing emergency police and fire operations. Maximum
speeds shall be posted in the emergency vehicles by the department head.
         (m)   When traveling in traffic, do not operate the vehicle at such a
slow rate of speed as to cause an accumulation of other vehicles behind. If a
slow rate of speed is unavoidable, occasionally pull off the road and wait in
order that traffic may clear.
         (n)   All culvert headwall openings and other hazards shall be marked
with a post to indicate such hazards to employees.
         (o)   Equipment designed to be towed, having light systems installed,
shall be properly electrically connected to the towing vehicle and the lights
shall be operational before moving onto the highway.
      2.   Shops And Storages:
         (a)   All employee occupied buildings shall have first aid kits which
shall be stocked with the minimum requirements for the number of people working
in and around that particular building.
         (b)   Good housekeeping practices shall be followed at all times.
         (c)   Used oily and paint rags shall be placed in an approved metal
container equipped with a self-closing lid.
         (d)   Precautionary measures shall be taken when disposing of used
pressurized containers. Follow the instructions given on the container.
         (e)   Spilled substances and materials shall be cleaned from floors
and loading ramps immediately to prevent slips and falls.
         (f)   Compressed air used in shops and storages for cleaning shall be
limited to less than thirty (30) psi and the nozzle shall be equipped with a
chip guard.
         (g)   Do not use extension cords which have faulty insulation or
connections.
         (h)   Tools shall not be left lying where employees are likely to trip
or fall over them.
         (i)   Use tools for their intended purpose.
      3.   Welding:
         (a)   Should it be necessary to weld, cut, solder or do other hot work
on a tank or container which previously contained gasoline, flammable material
or other chemicals, the welder/solderer shall make certain such tank or
container has been thoroughly steamed cleaned inside and that the cap or lid is
removed so as to prevent production of flammable or toxic vapors.
         (b)   Cutting and welding operations shall be performed in adequately
ventilated areas.
         (c)   Never leave heating or cutting torches unattended when lighted.
Whenever practicable, all arc welding and cutting operations shall be shielded
by noncombustible or flameproof screens to protect employees and other persons
working in the vicinity from the direct rays of the arc.
      4.   Tools; Power And Hand:
         (a)   Power saws shall not be left running unattended.
         (b)   When working with chisels, star drills and/or wedges, the
following shall be observed:
            (1)   Maintain sharp cutting edge.
            (2)   Striking surfaces should not be mushroomed or have an
overhang (dress or replace).
            (3)   Use only tools that are free of cracks or checks.
            (4)   Employees required to face the work shall wear eye
protection.
            (5)   Wood chisels shall have a tight handle and sharp cutting
edge.
         (c)   Observe the following when using lift jacks:
            (1)   Make certain lift jacks are properly placed before making
lift.
            (2)   Make certain the lifting capacity of jack is adequate for
load to be raised.
            (3)   Do not lean over a jack handle while jack is under load.
            (4)   Removable jack handles shall be removed when lifting
operations are completed.
            (5)   When working under a raised load, use blocks or cribbing to
support the load.
         (d)   Handles, sockets and rivets of all shovels shall be smooth and
securely fastened. Shovels shall never be used in place of a lever or pry bar.
         (e)   Proper spacing of workers shall be given attention at all times,
especially when using hand tools, since it is not uncommon for workers to be
injured by a tool in the hands of a fellow worker.
         (f)   Faulty, damaged or broken tools shall be kept separately or
properly disposed of in accordance with city policy.
         (g)   Axes, hammers, picks and sledges shall be properly balanced and
have a tight and securely wedged smooth straight grained handle. All such tools
with battered, mushroomed or cracked striking faces or taped handles shall not
be used.
         (h)   While using a wrench, take a position to prevent striking an
adjacent object should the nut release suddenly.
         (i)   Powder actuated hand tools, such as "ramset" type guns, shall be
used only by certified operators who have been instructed in the safety
precautions and limitations recommended by the manufacturer.
         (j)   Do not operate any equipment until all protective guards are in
place.
      5.   Worksite Protection And Flagging Traffic: (Note: In this subsection
(D)5, it is not possible to prescribe detailed signing diagrams for all
situations that may arise; therefor, refer to the current standards for
construction and maintenance signing. In the event questions arise in respect
to required signing, consult with your immediate superior.)
         (a)   Replacement Of Signs: Permanent signs temporarily removed
because of maintenance or construction operations along the roadway shall be
replaced immediately upon completion of the work. In the meantime, work crews
and traffic shall be protected by appropriate signs placed upon temporary
stands.
         (b)   Vehicles Or Mobil Equipment Used As Barricades: Do not use
vehicles or mobile equipment as barricade(s) unless specifically designed for
that purpose, such as escort vehicles, emergency patrol vehicles and towed
arrow boards.
         (c)   Extraordinary Conditions: Should extraordinary conditions
require facing of equipment in the wrong direction for loading or unloading,
ample protection must be provided with additional flagmen by the employee in
charge.
         (d)   Pothole Patching, Debris Or Dead Animal Removal: Emergency
single pothole patching, debris or dead animal removal may be performed by an
employee without a flagman providing sufficient gaps in traffic are available
to accomplish the work without diverting or stopping traffic. Also, the
employee shall wear a hard cap or hat, a high visibility vest and must perform
such emergency task with extreme care. When it is necessary to stop the vehicle
within two feet (2') or approximately two-thirds (2/3) meter of the pavement,
the four- way emergency flashers and revolving light shall be used if vehicle
is so equipped.
         (e)   Orange Flags Displayed: It is the responsibility of the employee
in charge to ensure that high visibility orange flags are displayed on all
single warning signs and on at least the first of a series of warning signs.
         (f)   Legible Signs: For the protection of the working crew and
traveling public, do not use signs that are so badly defaced that their
legibility is affected. Poorly maintained signs are ineffective and may
contribute to accidents. Request new signs as needed.
         (g)   Erection Of Signs: Barricades and warning signs on temporary
stands shall be erected in such a manner that they will withstand other forces
such as passing vehicles and anticipated winds. If necessary, use filled
sandbags or stakes to hold the devices in place. Sandbags, should they be
necessary, shall be suspended or placed on the lowest support of the barricade
or sign stand. Never place a sandbag on the top of a barricade or sign so as to
hide part of the device. Do not use concrete blocks, pieces of steel or similar
items that could become a flying missile if hit by a vehicle.
         (h)   Flagging Traffic: Supervisory personnel shall familiarize
themselves and personnel assigned to flagging traffic with the procedures
outlined in chapter 6, section 6-5, entitled "control of traffic through work
areas", as contained in the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices
For Streets And Highways".
         (i)   Qualifications: Flagmen shall possess the following
qualifications:
            (1)   Average intelligence.
            (2)   Good physical condition, including sight and hearing.
            (3)   Mental alertness.
            (4)   Courteous but firm manner.
            (5)   Neat appearance.
            (6)   Pleasing personality.
            (7)   Sense of responsibility for safety of public and crew.
         (j)   Warn Of Danger: It shall be the duty of the flagmen to warn the
workers of danger should the driver of a vehicle fail to heed the flagman's
signals.
         (k)   Stationing Of Flagman: A flagman shall be stationed at least one
hundred feet (100') or approximately thirty (30) meters in advance of the work
crew.
      6.   Asphalt Work:
         (a)   When using hot asphalt, employees shall wear garments that cover
the body completely, tightfitting around the neck, sleeves reaching over the
wrists and trousers over the shoe tops. Gloves, other than gauntlet type, shall
be worn continuously.
         (b)   Inoperative temperature gauges or safety valves are to be
repaired or replaced promptly.
         (c)   Never turn the flame so low in an asphalt heating device that
there will be danger of the flame being extinguished which will permit gas to
accumulate.
         (d)   To prevent fire, do not heat asphalt material beyond the
recommended maximum working temperature for the type asphalt being heated.
         (e)   When adding material to an asphalt heating kettle, always have
five inches (5") to six inches (6") from the top unfilled to minimize the
possibility of spillage and to allow space for expansion when heating.
         (f)   To prevent hot asphalt from splashing on employees when
attaching or detaching a two (2) wheeled kettle or distributor filled with hot
asphalt to or from a truck, have sufficient assistance to prevent the unit from
tipping.
         (g)   To minimize the possibility of fire, clean excess asphalt from
heating kettles and distributors.
         (h)   To prevent fire, do not allow the level of the liquid to get
below the hot coils of an asphalt distributor.
         (i)   Do not use water to extinguish an asphalt kettle fire. Lower the
lid and use a dry chemical fire extinguisher or loose sand or dirt to smother
the fire.
         (j)   To prevent spilling hot asphalt, do not fill the pouring can
over three-fourths (3/4) full.
         (k)   Do not attempt to clean the spout of a pouring can while the can
contains hot asphalt unless special tools are provided.
         (l)   Caution should be taken during crack pouring operations so that
hot asphalt will not be blown onto yourself or fellow employees.
         (m)   When commercial trucks hauling flammable liquids are directed
past hole drying and bump burning operations, the burner flame shall be
directed away from the passing truck.
         (n)   Caps shall be placed on LP gas containers at all times except
when the containers are properly connected to a burner.
      7.   Vegetation Control:
         (a)   Drivers of tractor mowers shall operate at all times in such
manner as not to endanger traffic, being constantly on the alert for a motor
vehicle which might unexpectedly leave the roadway and cause a collision. In
certain areas, such as on shoulders having guard fences, slopes back of gutters
and shoulders of high fills, it is permissible for the mower to operate on the
pavement in the direction of traffic movements in mowing the first swath.
         (b)   Make daily inspections of rotary mower guards, chains, shields,
blades and bolts in order to ensure maximum protection to the tractor operator
and the traveling public. Prompt replacement of missing or defective guards,
shields and blades shall be made. Always use factory approved replacement
parts.
         (c)   Do not use rotary mower blades that have been heated or welded.
         (d)   A slow moving vehicle emblem shall be properly mounted on upper
left corner of rollover protection structure.
         (e)   Operators of tractor mowers shall be alert and watch for hazards
such as hidden logs, stumps, right of way markers, culvert headwalls, rocks,
holes or dirt piles that can cause a tractor to overturn or stall. When a
hazard is observed, slow down and proceed with caution.
         (f)   Tractor mower operators shall allow sufficient clearance when
mowing around signs.
         (g)   Operators of rotary mowers must raise the mower when passing
over side roads, intersections and driveways to reduce the danger of the mower
throwing foreign objects. Adjust mower to recommended cutting length and mow in
such a manner as not to scalp.
         (h)   To minimize the throwing of debris by rotary mowers, police the
right of way prior to first mowing of the season; caution, pressurized cans
must be picked up by hand.
         (i)   All culvert headwalls, openings and other hazards shall be
marked with a post to show the location of such hazards to employees engaged in
vegetation control.
         (j)   When traveling, avoid traffic by driving on the shoulder with
tractor mower when possible.
         (k)   Employees engaged in cutting vegetation with hand sickles or in
other work requiring exposure to high weeds or brush shall cleanse parts of the
body exposed with a strong soap solution after completing the day's work in
order to lessen the chances of weed poisoning. Weed poisoning preventatives are
available for employees.
         (l)   When necessary to observe or adjust a sickle bar mower while in
operation, always stand in back of the sickle bar.
         (m)   When removing growth or foreign objects from the sickle bar or
rotary mower housing, always stop the tractor, turn off the ignition, put the
tractor transmission in low or reverse gear and wait until the rotary mower
blade has stopped. To prevent the amputation of fingers, use a stick or similar
object to remove foreign material from the sickle bar or movable parts.
         (n)   Employees engaged in field activities should learn to recognize
poisonous vegetation such as poison ivy, poison oak and poison sumac.
         (o)   Mower operators shall let traffic clear before turning onto the
pavement. When necessary to cross a bridge, the mower operator shall first
raise the sickle bar or rotary mower and then proceed across the bridge in the
right hand traffic lane when it is safe to do so.
         (p)   All weed and brush control chemicals (pesticides) shall be used
only by employees authorized, instructed and licensed in its use.
         (q)   Avoid direct contact with and the breathing of dust or vapor of
weed and brush control chemicals (pesticides). Always wash hands, arms and face
with strong soap solution after the use of such chemicals before eating.
         (r)   Never mow with front end loader bucket and/or bucket arms
mounted on the tractor mower.
         (s)   Employees engaged in cutting vegetation with hand scythes,
sickles, machete and brush hook shall be spaced to prevent fellow employees
from being struck by such tools.
         (t)   Employees cutting down trees shall make certain that a clear
path for retreat is available when the tree begins to fall.
         (u)   Before cutting limbs and branches from a felled tree with chain
saw, clear away stones, earth and bark so chains cannot throw them in the
direction of the operator.
         (v)   Employees engaged in tree trimming shall be constantly on the
alert for power lines.
      8.   Ladders And Scaffolds:
         (a)   Use linseed oil or other clear preservative to preserve wooden
ladders. Do not paint ladders because paint covers defects.
         (b)   Do not leave tools or materials on top of ladders or scaffolds
where they may be knocked off and injure someone below.
         (c)   Ladders in need of repair shall not be used. Those beyond repair
shall be disposed of according to current policies and procedures.
         (d)   Never climb a ladder while carrying tools or materials in your
hands. Use a bucket and/or rope to lift and lower tools and/or materials.
         (e)   While working from a ladder, never reach too far out in any
direction.
         (f)   All straight ladders shall be equipped with safety "shoes" or
spikes.
         (g)   Place bottom of ladder out from the surface of which such ladder
leans, a distance equal to approximately one-fourth (1/4) the ladder length.
         (h)   No ladder shall be used to gain access to a roof or higher level
unless the top of the ladder shall extend at least three feet (3') or
approximately one meter (1 m) above the point of support, at eave, gutter, roof
or surface line.
      9.   Snow And Ice Control Operations:
         (a)   If it becomes necessary to stop a truck in the traffic lane for
any delay when plowing snow or spreading abrasives or chemicals, additional
warning shall be given as follows:
            (1)   First turn on simultaneous turn signal flashers.
            (2)   If sight distance is limited, lighted fusees shall be used.
         (b)   All lights, windows and wiper blades shall be frequently cleaned
during snow and ice control operations.
         (c)   Always wear gloves and eye protection while handling snow fence,
tie wires and brace wires.
         (d)   When stretching and tying snow fence, stand on the post side as
it is not uncommon for the wire to break and the fence to roll back.
         (e)   Do not use fingers to align holes when mounting snowplow blades,
spreaders or other attachments. Use punch, drift pin or similar devices to
align holes.
      10.   Laboratory And Special Equipment Safety:
         (a)   All chemical containers shall be labeled so their contents may
be determined at a glance.
         (b)   Cracked glassware or glassware with sharp or cracked edges
should either be fire polished or, if this is impossible, destroyed.
         (c)   Keep adequate protection between you and apparatus in which
there is any chance of flash or explosion.
         (d)   Where the eyes or body of any person may be exposed to injurious
corrosive materials, suitable facilities for quick drenching or flushing of the
eyes and body shall be provided within the work area for immediate emergency
use.
         (e)   Keep hazardous fumes and vapors confined to hoods and provide
supplemental ventilation.
         (f)   Do not drink from beakers, since they may have contained
hazardous substances.
         (g)   Keep waste in refuse containers, empty daily.
         (h)   Where devices using radioactive materials are utilized, all
personnel shall be trained in their proper use. Such devices shall be used with
caution and only for the purpose intended.
         (i)   The requirements regarding radioactive material imposed by the
atomic energy commission and state regulations shall be followed. (Also see
OSHA part 1910.96 and department policies on "radiation safety and accident
procedures".)
         (j)   Employees whose assignment requires exposure to laser beams
shall be furnished suitable laser safety goggles which will protect for the
specific wavelength of the laser and be of optical density adequate for the
energy involved.
      11.   Trenching, Excavating And Underground Facilities:
         (a)   Sides and banks of trenches in excess of five feet (5') deep or
approximately one and one-half meters (11/2 m) shall be shored, sheeted, braced
or laid back to a stable slope.
         (b)   When employees are required to be in trenches four feet (4') or
approximately one and one-half meters (11/2 m) deep or more, an adequate means
of exit such as ladders or steps shall be provided and located so as to require
no more than twenty five feet (25') or approximately seven and two-thirds
meters (72/3 m) of lateral travel.
         (c)   Be alert for underground utility services when digging,
trenching, drilling and driving posts. Check with all utility companies in the
area before commencing work.
         (d)   Never work under an overhang bank of gravel, earth, cinders or
rock.
         (e)   No entry to a confined area or underground facility having
limited ventilation shall be permitted unless forced ventilation is provided or
the atmosphere is found to be safe by testing for oxygen deficiency and the
presence of explosive gases, fumes or liquids. If in doubt, check with your
supervisor or safety office.
         (f)   If any irritation to the eyes, nose or throat is experienced or
any difficulty in breathing is encountered while entering or working in the
manhole, leave at once and report the condition to your immediate superior. Do
not reenter until proper tests have been conducted. (See rule 20.5.)
      12.   Handling Of Supplies And Materials:
         (a)   When using hooks for loading or unloading material, be sure the
hook is equipped with a safety latch. Be careful not to catch hands between the
hook and the load.
         (b)   Always use a tag line to control the load and stand clear of the
load when it is being moved.
         (c)   Employees handling materials such as reinforcing steel, cables,
castings and rough lumber shall wear heavy gloves.
         (d)   When lifting heavy objects, lifting shall be done with the legs,
arms and shoulders, not with the back. Keep the back as nearly perpendicular
with the ground as possible. (Obtain assistance when the objects are awkward or
too heavy to handle by oneself.)
         (e)   If any rope becomes wet, it shall be dried after being used in
order to prevent deterioration. All ropes shall be checked for broken strands
before use.
      13.   Oxygen, Acetylene, LP Gas And Explosives:
         (a)   Oxygen, acetylene and LP gas cylinders shall not be stored
inside a building. Empty cylinders shall be so marked or tagged and stored
separate from full units.
         (b)   Caps shall be placed on LP gas containers at all times except
when the containers are properly connected.
         (c)   No explosives are to be secured, stored or used without the
permission of proper authority. Employees, as well as the public, shall be
properly warned and kept at a safe distance before a charge of explosives is
detonated. Blasting shall be done only under the supervision of a person
trained and experienced in blasting procedures.
      14.   Employee Personal Protection:
         (a)   All field employees must be properly clothed (long trousers,
shirts with sleeves or coveralls and other necessary appropriate outerwear) to
minimize exposure to the elements and hazards resulting from city operations.
         (b)   Footwear of sturdy construction shall be worn so as to minimize
the chance of injury from the hazards of one's normal duty assignment. Casual
style footwear such as canvas, slip ons and loafers are not acceptable footwear
for normal maintenance, construction, material testing and material handling
activities. (The aforementioned is not intended to cover all activities where
casual shoes are not to be worn.)
         (c)   Where it is not feasible to reduce the noise level or duration
of exposure at work areas exceeding published standards, personal protective
equipment such as earmuffs or earplugs shall be used. (Check with superior for
OSHA requirements.)
   (E)   Safety Code Receipt: Each employee of the city shall be issued a copy
of the safety code. The signed safety code receipt will be attached to
employee's personnel file which is maintained by the city comptroller.
   (F)   City Safety Policy: The following safety concepts are the fundamentals
of the city safety policy and as such shall continue to be a part of the
overall employee safety and accident prevention program:
      1.   It shall be the duty of every employee in a supervisory capacity to
carry on the operation under their jurisdiction in such a manner as to afford
the maximum protection for all employees and the public. Supervisory personnel
shall be responsible for the correction of unsafe conditions, unsafe driving
practices and the continued maintenance of good housekeeping practices.
      2.   It shall be the duty of every employee in a supervisory capacity to
see that each individual employee under their supervision receives all
necessary instruction and such training as may be required to perform work in
the safest manner possible. In addition, the person in charge shall see that
the job instructions, safe driving practices, safe work practices, good
housekeeping and the rules of the city's safety code are fully complied with by
the employee.
      3.   The city will expect the individual employee to cooperate in every
respect with the safety program so that the operations may be carried on in
such a manner as to ensure the safety of themselves, fellow workers and the
public.
      4.   It shall be the duty of each employee to consider no job so
important and no service so urgent that time cannot be taken to work and drive
safely.
   (G)   Accountability: Every employee of the department is required to know,
understand and obey all city safety rules and practices as they pertain to the
employee's job assignment.
      1.   Supervisory personnel are required to implement all safety rules,
practices and policies of the city and to provide the necessary training and
direction to ensure compliance.
The violations of city safety rules and practices have resulted in injury to
employees, damage to city equipment and third party lawsuits; therefore, the
failure to comply with safety rules and practices outlined in this chapter may
result in disciplinary action.
   (H)   Safety Suggestions And Hazard Observations: As an aid to locating and
correcting unsafe conditions and unsafe practices, every employee is encouraged
to report hazards observed (see subsection (B), "General Safety Requirements",
of this section). Those conditions noted which may not justify an immediate
call to a superior or which may require a more complete investigation can be
reported on the forms available from your department head or may be reported in
any written form.
   (I)   Alphabetical Index:
 Subsection Of
 This Section
                                         Subsection Of
                                         This Section
Accident reporting                       (B)2
Accountability                           (G)
Asphalt work                             (D)6
Building maintenance                     (C)2
Caps, head protection                    (A)49
Clothing                                 (D)14
Ear, protection                          (D)14(c)
Employee personal protection             (D)14
Explosives                               (D)13
Field activities, shops and storage      (D)
Fire prevention                          (B)4
Flagging traffic                         (D)5
Foot protection                          (A)50
Footwear                                 (D)14
Forms, accident                          (B)2(b)(1),(2)
Gas                                      (D)13
General office safety                    (C)3
General safety requirements              (B)
Glasses, safety                          (A)52
Handling of supplies and materials       (D)12
Hard caps, hats                          (A)49
Hazards and emergencies                  (B)1
Head protection                          (A)49
Housekeeping and building maintenance    (C)2
Horseplay                                (A)14
Laboratory and special equipment safety  (D)10
Ladders and scaffolds                    (D)8
Lifelines                                (A)44
Material, handling                       (D)12
Mowing operations                        (D)7
Office activities                        (C)
Office safety                            (C)3
Oxygen, acetylene, LP gas and explosives (D)13
Receipt, safety code                     (E)
Safe driving practices                   (B)3
Safety code receipt                      (E)
Safety glasses                           (A)52
Safety policy                            (F)
Safety rules                             (A)52
Safety suggestions                       (H)
Shops and storages                       (D)2
Snow and ice control operations          (D)9
Suggestions                              (H)
Supplies, handling                       (D)12
Tools; power and hand                    (D)4
Towing, operations                       (A)25
Trenching, excavating and underground    (D)11
facilities
Tripping hazards, slips and falls        (C)1
Trucks and mobile equipment              (D)1
Vegetation control                       (D)7
Warning lights                           (D)1(f)
Welding                                  (D)3
Worksite protection and flagging traffic (D)5
 
(Ord. 1179, 11-13-1979)
1-23-23: EMPLOYMENT POLICY:
   (A)   The organizational departments are hereby established for the city as
follows:
      1.   Administrative.
      2.   Public works.
      3.   Police.
      4.   Fire.
The mayor shall conduct an annual performance review during the first quarter
of each calendar year. Reviews are set to allow the mayor and the department
head to discuss past job performance and offer suggestions on how to improve in
job performance. Said annual review shall be in writing, signed by the
department head, and placed in the employee's personnel file. A signature page
shall be provided to committee members showing evidence that the review has
been completed. The signature page shall include a summary of ratings for each
performance criteria. (Ord. 2085, 2-11-2014)
   (B)   Any person employed by the city and who is the recipient of a
certificate of technical competency, issued by the Illinois environmental
protection agency for a water or wastewater treatment or pretreatment facility
will not be permitted to perform services for another government entity,
corporation, industry or a privately owned activity which requires this
certification except by requests to the city council from another government
entity, corporation, industry or privately owned activity, which requests may
be approved by the city council and services to be performed on a contractual
basis.
Failure to comply with this policy will be cause of immediate disciplinary
action by the mayor with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 1255, 7-26-
1983; amd. Ord. 1689, 4-9-2002)
1-23-24: POLICE CODE OF ETHICS:
   (A)   All police officers who are permanently assigned for duty with the
city must familiarize themselves and sign a police code of ethics as follows:
   POLICE CODE OF ETHICS Date:
As a Law Enforcement Officer, my fundamental duty is to serve mankind; to
safeguard lives and property; to protect the innocent against deception, the
weak against oppression or intimidation, and the peaceful against violence or
disorder; and to respect the constitutional rights of all men to liberty,
equality and justice.
I will keep my private life unsullied as an example to all; maintain courageous
calm in the face of danger, scorn, or ridicule; develop self-restraint; and be
constantly mindful of the welfare of others, honest in thought and deed in both
my personal and official life. I will be exemplary in obeying the laws of the
land and the regulations of my department. Whatever I see or hear of a
confidential nature or that is confided to me in my official capacity will be
kept ever secret unless revelation is necessary in the performance of my duty.
I will never act officiously or permit personal feelings, prejudices,
animosities, or friendship to influence my decisions. With no compromises for
crime and with relentless prosection of criminals, I will enforce the law
courteously and appropriately without fear or favor, malice or ill will, never
employing unnecessary force or violence and never accepting gratuities.
I recognize the badge of my office as a symbol of public faith, and I accept it
as a public trust to be held so long as I am true to the ethics of police
service. I will constantly strive to achieve these objectives and ideals,
dedicating myself before God to my chosen profession....law enforcement.
   (B)   A completed code of ethics statement for each officer will be filed in
the permanent personnel file in the office of the comptroller. (Ord. 1195, 6-
10-1980)
1-23-25: DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE POLICY:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this policy is to perform the necessary drug
and alcohol testing pursuant to the federally mandated requirements under 49
CFR part 40 and part 382. The drug related requirements of this policy become
effective February 13, 1996. The alcohol related requirements under this policy
become effective February 13, 1996.
   (B)   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the words and terms
defined in this subsection shall have the meaning therein given, unless the
context otherwise clearly requires.
    DRIVER: Any person who operates a commercial motor vehicle as defined in 49
CFR part 382.107. This includes, but is not limited to: full time, regularly
employed drivers; casual, intermittent or occasional drivers; leased drivers
and independent, owner-operator contractors who are either directly employed by
or under lease to an employer or who operate a commercial motor vehicle at the
direction of or with the consent of an employer. For the purpose of
preemployment/preduty testing only, the term "driver" includes a person
applying to an employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle.
   SAFETY SENSITIVE FUNCTION: Any of those on duty functions set forth in 49
CFR part 395.2, paragraphs (1) through (7).
   (C)   Use Prohibited: The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation,
possession or use of a controlled substance or alcohol is prohibited on all
municipal premises, in any municipally owned or leased motor vehicle, or other
location at which the driver is to perform work. Nor will this municipality
hire or retain any individual who uses or possesses any illegal drug, in any
amount, regardless of frequency, or any individual who engages in prohibited
alcohol related conduct.
      1.   The municipality will maintain a preemployment screening program
designed to prevent hiring anyone who uses any illegal drugs, or engages in
prohibited alcohol related conduct.
      2.   No driver will consume any schedule 1 drug of the schedule of
controlled substance of the drug enforcement administration or any
amphetamines, narcotics, opiates, hallucinogenic substances, depressants,
stimulants, or any other habit forming drug while on or off duty, except as
provided in subsection (C)4 of this section.
      3.   No driver shall report for work or drive while impaired by any drug,
controlled substance or with an alcohol breath concentration of 0.02 or
greater.
      4.   A driver may use a substance administered by or under direction of a
physician who has advised the driver that the substance will not affect the
driver's ability to safely operate a motor vehicle.
      5.   No driver may operate any motor vehicle whose motor senses, sight,
hearing, balance, reaction, reflexes or judgment are or may be presumed
affected or who has consumed any alcohol within four (4) hours.
      6.   Any driver who sells or otherwise dispenses illegal drugs or alcohol
to others on municipal premises, in or from a municipally owned or leased motor
vehicle is subject to immediate termination.
   (D)   Drug And Alcohol Testing:
      1.   Drug Testing: This municipality will require drug testing in
accordance with federal motor carrier safety requirements as set forth in part
40. Effective August 15, 1994, all urine samples shall be split samples. The
"primary sample" shall be at least thirty milliliters (30 ml) of urine; the
"split sample" shall be at least fifteen milliliters (15 ml). Failure of the
driver to provide that quantity even after a two (2) hour second opportunity
following drinking up to twenty four (24) ounces of water, will cause the
driver to be referred for a medical evaluation to develop pertinent information
whether the driver's inability to provide a specimen is genuine or constitutes
a refusal to test. The medical evaluation shall go to the medical review
officer (MRO) who will make a conclusion in writing to the employer. While this
process is being accomplished the driver shall be placed out of service.
      2.   Alcohol Testing: The municipality will require alcohol testing in
accordance with federal motor carrier safety requirements as set forth in part
40. Two (2) breath tests are required to determine if a person has a prohibited
alcohol concentration. A "screen test" shall be conducted first. Any result
less than 0.02 alcohol concentration is considered a "negative test". If the
alcohol concentration is 0.02 or greater, a second or "confirmation test" must
be conducted. This test shall be by an "evidential breath testing" (EBT)
device, that prints out the results, date, time, a sequential test number, name
and serial number of the EBT. The alcohol test must be conducted by a "breath
alcohol technician" (BAT) who is trained to operate that EBT and is proficient
in all breath alcohol testing procedures.
Drivers shall only be tested for alcohol while performing a safety sensitive
function, just before performing a safety sensitive function, or just after
performing a safety sensitive function. Any test 0.02 or greater but less than
0.04 shall cause the driver to immediately be removed from driving or any other
safety sensitive function for at least twenty four (24) hours. Failure of the
driver to provide an adequate amount of breath will cause the driver to be
immediately referred for a medical evaluation to develop pertinent information
concerning the driver's inability to provide the adequate amount of breath is
genuine or constitutes a refusal to test. The physician shall submit a written
medical evaluation to the MRO who will make a conclusion in writing to the
employer. While this process is being accomplished the driver shall be placed
out of service.
      3.   Drug Test Required: For the purposes of compliance with the federal
motor carrier safety regulations, all drivers will be required to take and
successfully pass urine drug testing and breath alcohol testing. Refusal to
submit to such screenings is considered a positive test.
      4.   Preemployment: Applicants for positions as drivers will also be
required to take and successfully pass urine drug tests and alcohol breath
tests before they can be used as drivers; except, applicants that have taken
part in qualified programs in the last thirty (30) days and tested in the last
six (6) months or in a random program in the last twelve (12) months with no
positive results.
      5.   Drug Test Records: The following information must be obtained on any
new driver from previous employers for the past two (2) years: any positive
drug test or alcohol test of 0.04 or greater, including any refusals to be
tested. Every new employee shall provide to this municipality a written release
which authorizes this municipality to obtain the driver's past drug and alcohol
test results. No driver shall be used for more than fourteen (14) days while
these test results are being secured. Regulations prohibit the use of any
driver after fourteen (14) days if these test results have not been obtained.
Any driver found to have had a positive test result in these two (2) years
shall cause the employer to further obtain information on the subsequent
substance abuse professional's evaluation and/or determination under section
382.605 and determine if there was compliance with sections 382.309 and
382.311. If not, the driver cannot be used until in full compliance.
      6.   Periodic Testing: All drivers may be required to submit to a urine
drug test and breath alcohol test at least every two (2) years at the same time
as the biennial medical examination occurs.
      7.   Reasonable Cause: Any driver suspected of drug or alcohol use as a
result of reasonable evidence upon reporting to work, during the work day, or
upon completion of his day's work activity may be subjected to a reasonable
cause urine drug or breath alcohol test. Refusal to submit to such screening
will be considered a positive test. A reasonable cause observation form must be
completed and signed by at least one qualified supervisor within twenty four
(24) hours of the observation that led to a reasonable cause test.
      8.   Random Testing:
         (a)   All employees covered by this section will be included as a part
of the Mid-West Truckers Association Drug And Alcohol Test Consortium group
from which the consortium will randomly select fifty percent (50%) each year
for drug testing and twenty five percent (25%) each year for breath alcohol
testing per the requirements of section 382.305 and 49 CFR part 40.
         (b)   On a monthly basis our MRO will from the total group select
randomly on his computer a number to be tested that on an annual basis will
equal fifty percent (50%) of that total group for random drug testing and
twenty five percent (25%) for breath alcohol testing. This same process will be
repeated each month.
         (c)   Once the MRO makes the monthly selections, he will forward that
list to the consortium which will notify the employer under whose drug policies
those selected are covered. The municipality will be given a date before which
the individual must be tested per these random selection processes. The person
to be tested shall not be informed of the need to be tested except just prior
to the actual test being performed.
         (d)   Failure of the municipality to accomplish the above requirements
in the time allotted will cause them to be out of compliance with the random
testing requirements of 49 CFR part 40.
      9.   Post-Accident Testing:
         (a)   This municipality will require post-accident urine drug and
breath alcohol testing of all employees covered by this section as required by
section 382.303 and 49 CFR part 40.
         (b)   Post-accident urine drug and breath alcohol testing will be
required of those employees who are involved in an accident if the driver
receives a citation for a moving traffic violation arising from the accident or
there is a fatality.
         (c)   The post-accident urine drug test shall be conducted as soon as
possible but not later than thirty two (32) hours after the reportable or fatal
accident. If the test is not administered, the employer shall prepare and
maintain on file a record stating the reasons the test was not promptly
completed. If a breath alcohol test is not conducted within two (2) hours, a
record shall be prepared and retained stating why. If in eight (8) hours a test
is still not conducted, all attempts shall cease and a complete record made of
why it was not accomplished. In addition, the driver shall not consume any
alcohol for at least eight (8) hours following an accident or until a breath
alcohol test has been accomplished.
         (d)   A driver who is seriously injured and cannot provide a urine
specimen or breath alcohol test at the time of the accident shall provide the
necessary authorization for obtaining medical records and reports that would
indicate if a controlled substance or alcohol was in the driver's system and
the level present.
         (e)   The employer shall provide the driver with sufficient procedures
so that the driver can meet the requirements of subsections (D)9(a), (D)9(b),
(D)9(c), (D)9(d) of this section, and comply with all provisions of 49 CFR part
40.
         (f)   Failure of the driver to be readily available or refusal to give
a urine sample or breath alcohol test when the driver has been involved in a
fatal accident, or received a citation for a moving violation, except for a
driver who meets the conditions of subsection (D)9(d) of this section, shall be
considered a refusal to take a test and a positive test result.
   (E)   Test Results:
      1.   Drug Test Results: Test results will be reviewed to determine
whether there is any indication of a controlled substance abuse.
         (a)   The test results will be reviewed by an MRO. If there is any
evidence of a positive result the MRO will give the person tested an
opportunity to discuss the results and provide documentation of legally
prescribed medication.
         (b)   The results will be released to the MRO, who will then release
the results to the Mid-West Truckers Association (our drug test consortium),
which will forward them to the Illinois municipal league, which will forward
those results to this municipality, which will maintain them in a secure
location with controlled access.
      2.   Alcohol Test Results:
         (a)   The test results shall be provided on forms established by
subpart C 40.59 appendix A. Copy 1 (white) will be retained by the BATs, copy 2
(green) shall go to the employee, copy 3 (blue) shall be transmitted to the
employer.
      3.   General:
         (a)   The test results from all drug and alcohol tests will become a
part of the driver's qualification file which shall be in a secured location
with controlled access and retained as specified in section 382.401 or in this
section.
         (b)   The results will not be released to any unauthorized party
without written consent. Every driver upon termination is required to permit in
writing the release of their urine drug and breath alcohol test results for at
least two (2) years to any future employer. Every employer is required upon the
receipt of a written request of a driver to provide copies of all his or her
urine drug and breath alcohol test results promptly to any other possible
employer at no charge.
   (F)   Assistance Program: An employee assistance program will be conducted
by this municipality to provide educational information concerning the effects
and consequences of drug or alcohol use on personal health, safety and work
environment.
      1.   Every driver will be required to take at least one hour of training
each year on substance abuse and alcohol use, and sign form IML-10 certifying
their attendance.
      2.   Written notice will be given when this training is available.
   (G)   Laws And Regulations:
      1.   Compliance: This municipality will comply with all federal, state
and local laws and regulations concerning any violations of criminal drug and
alcohol use status in the work place.
      2.   Record Keeping: All records will be retained as listed in section
382.401.
      3.   Driver Access To Records: A driver is entitled, upon written
request, to obtain copies of any records pertaining to the driver's use of
drugs or alcohol, and test results. Access shall not be contingent upon payment
for records other than those requested.
      4.   Employer Access To Records: Records shall be made available to a
subsequent employer upon receipt of a written request from a driver.
      5.   Disclosure: An employer may disclose information required to be
maintained under this section on a driver, to the decision maker in a lawsuit,
grievance, or other proceeding initiated by or on behalf of that driver and
arising from the results of an alcohol or controlled substance test required by
this section, or from the employer's determination that the driver engaged in
conduct prohibited by this section (including, but not limited to, worker's
compensation, unemployment compensation, or other proceeding related to
benefits sought by the driver).
   (H)   Disciplinary Action:
      1.   Violations of this section will result in termination.
      2.   Every driver who has engaged in violations of this section will be
advised by the employer of resources available to the driver in evaluating and
resolving problems associated with the misuse of drugs or alcohol, even though
the driver is terminated. (Ord. 1549, 2-13-1996)
1-23-26: BACKGROUND CHECKS AND LICENSE VERIFICATION:
   (A)   All city job applicants authorize the city, or its designee to conduct
a background check. To that end all such applicants shall sign a consent form
provided by the city.
   (B)   All employees who drive a city vehicle in the course of their duties
must maintain a valid driver's license. Biannually, the chief of police is
authorized to conduct a driver's license check with the secretary of state to
verify that such employees have a valid driver's license. (Ord. 1981, 8-23-
2011)
1-23-27: PART TIME POLICE:
   (A)   Employment: The city of Savanna may employ part time police officers
from time to time as they deem necessary.
   (B)   Duties: A part time police officer shall have all the responsibilities
of a full time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the
general orders of the Savanna police department, but the number of hours a part
time officer may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part time police
officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full time police
officers. Part time police officers shall be trained in accordance with the
Illinois police training act 1  and the rules and requirements of the ILETSB.
   (C)   Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time police officer
must meet the following standards:
      1.   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      2.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   Pass a medical examination.
      4.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      5.   Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
      6.   Possess no prior felony convictions.
      7.   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged.
   (D)   Discipline: Part time police officers shall be under the disciplinary
jurisdiction of the chief of police. Part time police officers serve at the
discretion of the city authorities, shall not have any property rights in said
employment, and may be removed by the city authorities at any time. Part time
police officers shall comply with all applicable rules and general orders
issued by the police department. (Ord. 1998, 2-28-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 24
WAGES FOR PUBLIC WORKS LABORERS
SECTION:
1-24-1: Wages Established
1-24-2: Wage Rates Posted
1-24-3: Notice Of Wage Rate
1-24-4: Provisions To Be Filed
1-24-5: Publication
1-24-1: WAGES ESTABLISHED:
To the extent and as required by "an act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workmen employed in any public works by the state, county,
city or any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under
contract for public works", approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general
prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other
workmen engaged in the construction of public works coming under the
jurisdiction of this city, is hereby ascertained to be the same as the
prevailing rate of wages for construction work in Carroll County area as
determined by the department of labor of the state of Illinois as of June of
the current year, a copy of that determination being attached to ordinance 1193
and incorporated herein by reference. The definition of any terms appearing in
this chapter which are also used in aforesaid act shall be the same as in said
act. (Ord. 1193, 5-13-1980)
1-24-2: WAGE RATES POSTED:
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general prevailing
rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except public
works construction of this city to the extent required by the aforesaid act.
The city clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any
interested party in the main office of this city this determination of such
prevailing rate of wage. (Ord. 1193, 5-13-1980)
1-24-3: NOTICE OF WAGE RATE:
The city clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employee and to
any association of employers and to any person or association of employees who
have filed, or file their names and addresses, requesting copies of any
determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of workmen
whose wages will be affected by such rates. (Ord. 1193, 5-13-1980)
1-24-4: PROVISIONS TO BE FILED:
The city clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of this chapter with both
the secretary of state and the department of labor of the state. (Ord. 1193, 5-
13-1980)
1-24-5: PUBLICATION:
The city clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the area a copy of this chapter, and such publication shall
constitute notice that the determination is effective and that this is the
determination of this public body. (Ord. 1193, 5-13-1980)
CHAPTER 25
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
SECTION:
1-25-1: Requests For Nonpolice Records
1-25-2: Requests For Police Records
1-25-3: Intake Procedure
1-25-4: Training
1-25-5: Retrieval Of Records
1-25-6: Fees
1-25-7: Denial; Appeal
1-25-8: City Directory And Other Documents
1-25-1: REQUESTS FOR NONPOLICE RECORDS:
The city comptroller is hereby designated as the FOIA officer to whom all
initial requests for access to nonpolice records of the city are to be
referred. Such requests are to be made at the offices of the city of Savanna at
101 Main Street, Savanna, IL 61074, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. Monday through Friday. In the event that the
city comptroller is not available during the times described above, the
bookkeeper or office clerk is designated as the deputy FOIA officer to whom
such initial requests are to be made. Except in instances when records are
immediately furnished, the FOIA officer, and their designees, shall receive
requests submitted to the city under the freedom of information act, ensure
that the city responds to requests in a timely fashion and issue responses
under the act. The FOIA officer shall develop a list of documents or categories
of records that the city shall immediately disclose upon request. (Ord. 1943,
4-27-2010)
1-25-2: REQUESTS FOR POLICE RECORDS:
The chief of police is hereby designated as the FOIA officer to whom all police
requests to the city police department are to be referred. Such requests are to
be made at the offices of the city of Savanna at 101 Main Street, Savanna, IL
61074, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. Monday through Friday. (Ord. 1943, 4-27-2010)
1-25-3: INTAKE PROCEDURE:
Upon receiving a request for public records, the FOIA officer shall:
   (A)   Note the date the city receives the written request;
   (B)   Compute the date on which the period for response will expire and make
a notation of that date on the written request;
   (C)   Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including
all documents submitted with the request until the request has been complied
with or denied; and
   (D)   Create a file for the retention of the original request, a copy of the
response, a record of written communications with the requestor, and a copy of
other communications. (Ord. 1943, 4-27-2010)
1-25-4: TRAINING:
The FOIA officers and deputy FOIA officer shall, within six (6) months after
January 1, 2010, successfully complete an electronic training curriculum to be
developed by the public access counselor of the state of Illinois and
thereafter successfully complete an annual training program. Whenever a new
freedom of information officer is designated by the city, that person shall
successfully complete the electronic training curriculum within thirty (30)
days after assuming the position. (Ord. 1943, 4-27-2010)
1-25-5: RETRIEVAL OF RECORDS:
Any records which are the subject of a request under the freedom of information
act shall be retrieved from such place as they are stored, by the FOIA officer,
or by an employee of the city acting under the direction of the FOIA officer.
In no event shall records be retrieved by the party requesting them or by any
person who is not employed by the city. (Ord. 1943, 4-27-2010)
1-25-6: FEES:
If copies of records are requested, the fees for such copies, whether certified
or not, shall be as determined from time to time by the FOIA officer pursuant
to section 6(b) of the freedom of information act. The city comptroller or city
clerk shall maintain a written schedule of current fees in the comptroller's
office. The fees so charged shall reflect the actual cost of copying the
records and the costs of certifying copies, if certification is requested.
(Ord. 1943, 4-27-2010)
1-25-7: DENIAL; APPEAL:
In the event that a request to inspect city records is denied by the FOIA
officer, the denial may be appealed to the public access counselor of the state
of Illinois. (Ord. 1943, 4-27-2010)
1-25-8: CITY DIRECTORY AND OTHER DOCUMENTS:
The city comptroller shall prepare:
   (A)   A city information directory;
   (B)   A block diagram of the functional subdivisions of the city;
   (C)   A city records directory; and
   (D)   A records catalogue, all of which shall be substantially in the same
form as the documents attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a part
hereof as exhibits A, B, C and D. This information shall also be posted on the
city's website. (Ord. 1943, 4-27-2010)
CHAPTER 26
REVENUE AND FINANCE
SECTION:
1-26-1: Delinquent Payments
1-26-1: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS:
   (A)   All fees, charges and other amounts due the city shall be due and
payable on or before the thirtieth day after the date on which the statement of
such amounts is delivered or deposited in the U.S. mail by the city. In the
event that such amounts are not received by the city within the thirty (30) day
period, such amounts shall be deemed and will thereby be declared delinquent
and thereafter a delinquent charge of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per
month, or portion thereof, will be added to the amount due. The delinquent
charge will continue to accrue until all amounts due, including all delinquency
charges, are received by the city.
   (B)   The above established delinquency charge shall be in addition to any
other charges or penalties imposed by law for late payment or nonpayment of
funds due the city.
   (C)   Charges for water, sewer and refuse collection are not subject to the
delinquency charge imposed by this section. However, nothing in this section
shall prohibit the city from imposing penalties which may be provided elsewhere
in this code.
   (D)   This section shall apply to all charges billed after the effective
date hereof. (Ord. 1456, 6-22-1993)
CHAPTER 27
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-27-1: State Officials And Employees Ethics Act
1-27-2: Sexual Harassment
1-27-1: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
   (A)   The regulations of sections 5-15 1  and article 10 2  of the State
Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq. (hereinafter referred to as the "Act" in this section), are hereby adopted
by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the City to
the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the City, is hereby
prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the City under the Act, is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by
any officer or employee of the City, is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall
be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the Act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of City officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
Corporate Authorities of the City.
   (I)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the Corporate Authorities of the City if the Act is found unconstitutional by
the Illinois Supreme Court.
   (J)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act,
or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of
the City. (Ord. 1776, 10-26-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 - 10-40.
1-27-2: SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   (A)   Prohibition On Sexual Harassment: It is unlawful to harass a person
because of that person's sex. The courts have determined that sexual harassment
is a form of discrimination under title VII of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of
1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a right to work in an environment
free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is unacceptable misconduct which
affects individuals of all genders and sexual orientations. It is a policy of
Savanna to prohibit harassment of any person by any Municipal official,
Municipal agent, Municipal employee or Municipal agency or office on the basis
of sex or gender. All Municipal officials, Municipal agents, Municipal
employees and Municipal agencies or offices are prohibited from sexually
harassing any person, regardless of any employment relationship or lack
thereof.
   (B)   Definition Of Sexual Harassment: This policy adopts the definition of
sexual harassment as stated in the Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently
defines sexual harassment as:
      1.   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any
conduct of a sexual nature when:
         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment,
         (b)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or
         (c)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially
interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
      2.   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
         (a)   Verbal: Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor,
and jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
         (b)   Non-verbal: Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures. "catcalls", "smacking"
or "kissing" noises.
         (c)   Visual: Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
         (d)   Physical: Touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching,
brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
         (e)   Textual/electronic: "Sexting" (electronically sending messages
with sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually
explicit language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of
electronic communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line
postings, blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and
Twitter).
The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to determine.
On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more subtle and
depends, to some extent, on individual perception and interpretation. The
courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what would offend a
"reasonable person".
   (C)   Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment:
      1.   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes
herself/himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the
incident(s) as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his
position to the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not
necessary for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
      2.   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following:
         (a)   Electronic/Direct Communication: If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
         (b)   Contact With Supervisory Personnel: At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or
intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a
Director of Human Resources, an Ethics Officer, the City Manager or
Administrator, or the Chief Executive Officer of the Municipality.
The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual harassment must
not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there are no witnesses
and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other responsible officer, the
Municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of the harassment.
         (c)   Resolution Outside Municipality: The purpose of this policy is
to establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
Municipality. However, all Municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within one hundred eighty (180)
days of the alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint
with the EEOC must be filed within three hundred (300) days.
      3.   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what
was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not limited
to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
      4.   All allegations, including; anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
Municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
   (D)   Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment
Allegations: No Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal employee or
Municipal agency or office shall take any retaliation action against any
Municipal employee due to a Municipal employee's:
      1.   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this policy,
      2.   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this policy, or
      3.   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the reprimand,
discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or change in
the terms or conditions of employment of any Municipal employee that is taken
in retaliation for a Municipal employee's involvement in protected activity
pursuant to this policy.
No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a report made
in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will be protected
from retaliation.
Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the State
Officials and Employees Ethics Act 1  provides whistleblower protection from
retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, or
denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for an employee who
does any of the following:
      1.   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, State agency, or
other State employee that the State employee reasonably believes is in
violation of a law, rule, or regulation,
      2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, State agency or other State
employee, or
      3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act 2 , an employer may not retaliate against an
employee who discloses information in a court, an administrative hearing, or
before a legislative commission or committee, or in any other proceeding, where
the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation. In addition, an
employer may not retaliate against an employee for disclosing information to a
government or law enforcement agency, where the employee has reasonable cause
to believe that the information discloses a violation of a State or Federal
law, rule, or regulation 3 .
According to the Illinois Human Rights Act 4 , it is a civil rights violation
for a person, or for two (2) or more people to conspire, to retaliate against a
person because he/she has opposed that which he/she reasonably and in good
faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment, because he/she has made a
charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an
investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois Human Rights Act.
An employee, who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or passed over
for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may file a
retaliation charge - due within one hundred eighty (180) days (IDHR) or three
hundred (300) days (EEOC) of the alleged retaliation.
   (E)   Consequences Of A Violation Of The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment:
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
Municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this policy or the
Prohibition On Sexual Harassment contained in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
5-65, may be subject to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per
offense, applicable discipline or discharge by the Municipality and any
applicable fines and penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, State
law or Federal law. Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any
discipline imposed by the Municipality shall be separate and distinct from any
penalty imposed by an Ethics Commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a
court of law or a State or Federal agency.
   (F)   Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report: A false report is a
report of sexual harassment made by an accuser using the sexual harassment
report to accomplish some end other than stopping sexual harassment or
retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is not a report
made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the seriousness of the
consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe offense
that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who intentionally
makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this policy shall
be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable Municipal
policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/or
collective bargaining agreements.
In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act to
an Ethics Commission, an Inspector General, the State Police, a State's
Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official is guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor. An Ethics Commission may levy an administrative fine
of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any person who intentionally
makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation. (Ord. 2215, 1-9-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/15-10.
2 2. 740 ILCS 174/15(a).
3 3. 740 ILCS 174/15(b).
4 4. 775 ILCS 5/6-101.
CHAPTER 28
ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS
SECTION:
1-28-1: Electronic Attendance At Meetings Rules
1-28-1: ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS RULES:
The city of Savanna hereby authorizes electronic attendance at meetings so as
to permit a member of the public body to attend any meeting of a public body as
defined in the open meetings act via electronic means provided the rules of
attendance set out below are strictly complied with.
   (A)   Rules Statement: It is the decision of the city of Savanna that any
member of the city council may attend any open or closed meeting of the city of
Savanna via electronic means (such as by telephone, video or internet
connection) provided that such attendance is in compliance with these rules and
any applicable laws.
   (B)   Prerequisites: A member of the city council may attend a meeting
electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
      1.   A quorum is physically present throughout the meeting.
      2.   Any member wishing to attend a meeting electronically has notified
the city clerk at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting, unless
impractical, so that necessary communications equipment can be arranged.
Inability to make the necessary technical arrangements will result in denial of
a request for electronic attendance.
      3.   The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why he
or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
         (a)   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability; or
         (b)   The member cannot attend because of an employment conflict or
because they are carrying out the business of the city of Savanna; or
         (c)   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
      4.   The city clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance request,
shall inform the mayor and city council of the request for electronic
attendance.
   (C)   Voting Procedures: After a roll call establishing that a quorum is
physically present, the presiding officer shall call for a motion that a member
may be permitted to attend the meeting electronically after specifying the
reason entitling the absent member to attend electronically. The motion must be
approved by a vote of a majority of the council members present.
   (D)   Adequate Equipment Required: The member participating electronically
and other members of the city council must be able to communicate effectively,
and members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the
meeting site. Before allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the city of
Savanna shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the
meeting site.
   (E)   Minutes: Any member attending electronically shall be considered an
off site attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting. The
meeting minutes shall also reflect and state specifically whether each member
is physically present or present by electronic means.
   (F)   Rights Of Remote Member: A member permitted to attend electronically
will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting and participate
in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all
general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and adhered to.
The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as
to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any member attending electronically
shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded
by the city clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A
member attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case
of any member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his
or her leaving and returning.
   (G)   Application To Committees, Boards And Commissions: These rules shall
apply to all committees, boards and commissions established by authority of the
city of Savanna. (Ord. 2038, 5-28-2013)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE AND POLICE ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
2-1-1: Creation; Appointment; Qualification
2-1-2: Regular Meetings
2-1-3: Submission Of Minutes To City Council
2-1-4: Rules And Regulations
2-1-5: Assistance In Hiring Of Members Of Fire And Police Departments
2-1-1: CREATION; APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATION:
There is hereby created and established in the city a fire and police advisory
board. The board shall consist of three (3) members whose terms of office shall
be three (3) years, or until their respective successors shall be appointed and
qualified. (Ord. 2081, 1-28-2014)
2-1-2: REGULAR MEETINGS:
Meetings of the advisory board of fire and police commissioners shall be when
requested by the mayor and chief of police and/or fire chief. (Ord. 2081, 1-28-
2014)
2-1-3: SUBMISSION OF MINUTES TO CITY COUNCIL:
The board shall keep minutes of their proceedings and provide them to the city
council. (Ord. 2081, 1-28-2014)
2-1-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The mayor and chief of police and/or fire chief shall prepare the rules and
regulations to be followed by the board, all of which shall be consistent with
applicable federal and state statutes. (Ord. 2081, 1-28-2014)
2-1-5: ASSISTANCE IN HIRING OF MEMBERS OF FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS:
When requested, the advisory board shall assist the mayor and chief of police
and/or fire chief in hiring decisions. (Ord. 2081, 1-28-2014)
CHAPTER 2
FIREMEN'S PENSION BOARD
SECTION:
2-2-1: Board Of Trustees Created
2-2-2: Membership
2-2-3: Meetings
2-2-4: Compensation
2-2-5: Treasurer Of The Board
2-2-6: Powers And Duties
2-2-7: Report For Tax Levy
2-2-1: BOARD OF TRUSTEES CREATED:
There is hereby created the board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund of
the city, composed of three (3) persons chosen from the active firemen and one
other from the firemen thereof who have been duly retired under the firemen's
pension fund act of 1919. (1977 Code)
2-2-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The members of the board to be chosen from the active and retired firemen shall
be elected by ballot at elections held on the third Monday in April of each
year. Each member of the board so elected shall hold office for a term of three
(3) years and until his successor has been duly elected and qualified. Said
board shall elect from its number a president and secretary and the city
treasurer shall be the ex officio treasurer of the board. (1977 Code)
2-2-3: MEETINGS:
The board shall hold regular quarterly meetings in July, October, January and
April annually and special meetings as called by the president. (1977 Code)
2-2-4: COMPENSATION:
Members of the board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund shall not
receive nor have any right to receive any money or monies from a pension fund
as salary for service performed as a member of such board. (1977 Code)
2-2-5: TREASURER OF THE BOARD:
The treasurer of the board shall be the custodian of the pension fund and shall
secure and safely keep the same, subject to the control and direction of the
board; and shall keep his books and accounts concerning such fund in such
manner as may be prescribed by the board; and the books and accounts shall be
subject to the inspection of the board or any member thereof. (1977 Code)
2-2-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board shall have the power and it shall be its duty:
   (A)   To control and manage the pension fund and all money donated, paid,
assessed or provided by law for the relief or pensioning of disabled,
superannuated and retired firemen, their widows, minor children and dependent
parents.
   (B)   To enforce contributions. To assess each fireman such percentage of
salary required by laws of the state of Illinois.
   (C)   To hear and determine applications for relief or pension under the
articles of the firemen's pension fund.
   (D)   To provide for the payment from the fund of all necessary expenses of
the board.
   (E)   To invest the money of the pension fund in interest bearing bonds or
tax anticipation warrants of the United States, of the state of Illinois, or of
any county, township or municipal corporation of the state of Illinois; insured
withdrawable capital accounts of state chartered savings and loan associations;
insured withdrawable capital accounts of federal chartered federal savings and
loan associations if the withdrawable capital accounts are insured by the
Federal Savings And Loan Insurance Corporation; and in savings accounts or
certificates of deposit of a national or state bank. All securities shall be
deposited with the treasurer of the municipality, and be subject to the order
of the board. Interest on such investments shall be credited to the account of
the pension fund.
   (F)   To keep a record of all its meetings and proceedings. (1977 Code)
2-2-7: REPORT FOR TAX LEVY:
The board shall make report to the city council on the condition of the fund
prior to the meeting of such council held for appropriating and levying of
taxes for the year for which such report is made. The board shall certify to
the council of the municipality:
   (A)   The assets in the custody at such time.
   (B)   The estimated receipts during the next succeeding year (from January 2
to December 31) from deductions from salaries or wages of firemen and from all
other sources.
   (C)   The estimated amount during such period for:
      1.   Paying all pensions and other obligations provided in this chapter
including, but not limited to, the actuarial reserves and accrued liabilities
specified, and
      2.   Maintaining the reserve fund as provided by statute. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 3
POLICE PENSION BOARD
SECTION:
2-3-1: Creation
2-3-2: Membership
2-3-3: Meetings
2-3-4: Compensation
2-3-5: Powers And Duties
2-3-6: Reports
2-3-1: CREATION:
A board, composed of five (5) members, shall constitute a board of trustees to
administer the pension fund and to designate the beneficiaries thereof. The
board shall be known as the "board of trustees of the police pension fund" of
the municipality. (Ord. 2099, 8-12-2014)
2-3-2: MEMBERSHIP:
Two (2) members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor of the city. The
third and fourth members of the board shall be elected from the regular police
force by the active members thereof. The fifth member shall be elected by and
from among the beneficiaries of the fund. (1977 Code)
2-3-3: MEETINGS:
The board shall hold regular quarterly meetings on the second Tuesday of July,
October, January and April annually, and special meetings as called by the
president of the board. At the regular July meeting, the board shall select
from its members a president, vice president, secretary, and assistant
secretary to serve for the period of one year and until his respective
successor is elected and qualified. (1977 Code)
2-3-4: COMPENSATION:
Members of a board of trustees of a pension fund shall not receive or have any
right to receive any money or monies from a pension fund as salary for service
performed as a member of such board. (1977 Code)
2-3-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board shall have the power, and it shall be its duty:
   (A)   To control and manage the pension fund.
   (B)   To submit annually to the city council at the close of the
municipality's fiscal year, a list of persons entitled to payments, and their
purpose, as ordered by the board. It shall also include items of income accrued
to the fund during such fiscal year. Such list shall be signed by the secretary
and president of the board, and attested under oath. No resolution or order for
the payment of money shall be valid unless approved by a majority of the
members of the board, and any order for such payment shall be signed by the
president and secretary of the board.
   (C)   To draw such pension funds from the treasurer or other officials of
the municipality, and invest any part thereof in the name of the board of the
police pension fund in: interest bearing bonds or tax anticipation warrants of
the United States, of the state of Illinois, or of any county, township or
municipal corporation of the state of Illinois; insured withdrawable capital
accounts of state chartered savings and loan associations; insured withdrawable
capital accounts of federal chartered federal savings and loan associations, if
the withdrawable capital accounts are insured by the federal savings and loan
insurance corporation; and in savings accounts or certificates of deposit of a
national or state bank. All securities shall be deposited with the treasurer of
the municipality, and be subject to the order of the board. Interest on such
investments shall be credited to the account of the pension fund.
   (D)   To compel witnesses to attend and testify before it, upon all matters
connected with administration in the manner provided by law for the taking of
testimony before masters in chancery. The president, or any member of the board
may administer oaths to such witnesses.
   (E)   To appoint a clerk and define his duties. No person drawing a pension
shall be employed by the board.
   (F)   To provide for the payment from the fund of all necessary expenses,
including clerk hire, printing and witness fees.
   (G)   To keep a public record of all its proceedings.
   (H)   On the second Tuesday in May annually, the treasurer and all other
officials of the city, who had the custody of any pension funds herein provided
shall make a sworn statement to the board of the police pension fund, and to
the mayor and council of the city, of all monies received and paid out by them
on account of the pension fund during the year, and of the amount of such funds
then on hand and owing to the pension fund. All surplus then remaining with any
official other than the treasurer shall be paid to the treasurer of the city.
Upon demand of the pension board any official shall furnish a statement
relative to the official method of collection or handling of such pension
funds. All books and records of such official shall be produced at any time by
him for examination and inspection by the board. (1977 Code)
2-3-6: REPORTS:
   (A)   The board shall report to the city council on the condition of the
police pension fund. The report shall be made prior to the meeting of the
council held for the levying of taxes for the year for which such report is
made.
   (B)   The board shall certify to the city council:
      1.   The assets in its custody at such time;
      2.   The estimated receipts during the next succeeding calendar year from
deductions from the salaries of policemen, and from all other sources; and
      3.   The estimated amount required during said calendar year to:
         (a)   Pay all pensions and other obligations, and
         (b)   Maintain the reserve fund. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD
SECTION:
2-4-1: Creation, Membership And Procedure
2-4-2: Meetings And Rules
2-4-3: Powers, Duties And Jurisdiction In Its Planning Capacity
2-4-4: Land Subdivision Or Resubdivision; Official Map
2-4-5: Powers, Duties And Jurisdiction In Its Zoning Capacity
2-4-6: Appeal
2-4-7: Review
2-4-8: Variations
2-4-9: Notice
2-4-1: CREATION, MEMBERSHIP AND PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Creation: The city of Savanna planning and zoning board (hereinafter
"PZB") is hereby established pursuant to the authority granted by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-3 and 5/11-12-4 of the Illinois municipal code. The
PZB shall have seven (7) members, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the
consent of the city council from the sitting members of the planning commission
and the zoning board of appeals as of the effective date of this amendatory
provision.
   (B)   Terms Of Office: The initial members of the PZB will have staggered
terms of office as designated by the mayor, with two (2) members having an
initial one year term, two (2) members having an initial two (2) year term, and
three (3) members having an initial three (3) year term. All subsequent terms
of PZB members, including renewal terms, shall be for three (3) years.
   (C)   Chair And Vice Chair: The PZB board shall designate one member as
chair and one PZB member as vice chair by majority vote of the PZB's
membership. The chair, or in the absence of the chair, the vice chair, will
preside over all meetings of the PZB and may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. In the absence of both the chair and the vice chair,
the members of the PZB will select from those members present a chair pro tem
to serve for the duration of the meeting.
   (D)   Removal; Resignation: The mayor shall have the power to remove any
member of the PZB for good cause and after a public hearing conducted by the
city council. A member may resign after providing notice to the mayor and
acceptance by the city council of the resignation. Resigning members shall be
deemed to serve until their replacement has been appointed and received the
consent of the city council.
   (E)   Adoption: The PZB shall adopt rules, regulations and procedures
consistent with city ordinances and state laws. The PZB shall keep written
records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public
inspection.
   (F)   Vacancies: Vacancies upon the PZB shall be filled for the unexpired
term of the members whose place has become vacant, in the manner herein
provided for in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
2-4-2: MEETINGS AND RULES:
   (A)   Time And Place: All meetings of the PZB shall be held at the call of
the chairman and at such other times as such board may determine upon proper
notice pursuant to the open meetings act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1 et
seq.
   (B)   Conduct Of Meetings: The chair, and in the chair's absence, the vice
chair shall preside over all public meetings and hearings of the PZB. No
meeting may be conducted without the presence of a quorum, which shall consist
of a majority of the currently appointed PZB members. All meetings and hearings
shall be conducted in compliance with the open meetings act and rules of
procedure to be adopted by the PZB and ratified by the city council.
   (C)   Secretary; Records: The city zoning administrator or designee shall
serve as the secretary to the PZB. The secretary of the PZB shall keep minutes
of all of the PZB's proceedings, record the vote of each member, the absence or
failure to vote of any member, and records of hearings and other official
actions. If the secretary of the PZB is absent, the city clerk or deputy city
clerk shall have the duties of the secretary under this section. All records of
the PZB, including minutes, decisions, and recommendations, shall be filed with
and maintained in the office of the city clerk and shall be public records open
to inspection and review pursuant to the freedom of information act. (Ord.
2158, 4-26-2016)
2-4-3: POWERS, DUTIES AND JURISDICTION IN ITS PLANNING CAPACITY:
The PZB is hereby vested with the following powers, duties, jurisdiction and
authority related to its planning role:
   (A)   Comprehensive Plan: To prepare and recommend to the city council a
comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of
the city and contiguous unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half
(11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits of the city and not included in any
other municipality. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate
geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted shall be the
official comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the city. Such plan shall be
advisory except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by ordinances
duly enacted by the city council. All requirements for public hearing, filing
of notice of adoption with the county recorder of deeds, and filing of said
plan and ordinances with the city clerk shall be complied with as provided for
by law.
To provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants
of the city and contiguous territory, such plan or plans shall establish
reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of
unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public
improvements as herein defined and shall establish reasonable requirements
governing the location, width, course and surfacing of public streets and
highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be
used for residential purposes, stormwater drainage, water supply and
distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment. The
requirements specified herein shall become regulatory only when adopted by
ordinance.
   (B)   Annexation: To designate land suitable for annexation to the
municipality and the recommended zoning classification for such land upon
annexation.
   (C)   Changes To Comprehensive Plan: To recommend to the city council from
time to time, such changes in the comprehensive plan or any part thereof as may
be deemed necessary or are in the public interest. Give aid and advice to the
officials of the city charged with the direction or projects embraced within
the comprehensive plan; and generally to promote the realization of the
comprehensive plan.
   (D)   Recommendations For Improvements: To prepare and recommend to the city
council from time to time, plans and/or recommendations for specific
improvements in pursuance of the official comprehensive plan.
   (E)   Give Aid: To give aid to the officials of the city charged with the
direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan or
parts thereof, to further the making of such improvements, and generally to
promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan.
   (F)   Publicity: To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to
its activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
   (G)   Planning: To cooperate with municipal and/or regional planning
commissions and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program
and to assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
   (H)   Rules Of Procedure: To adopt rules of procedure for the PZB's meetings
and hearings not in conflict with state law or this code; provided, however,
that such rules of procedure must be ratified by the city council.
   (I)   Procedure At Hearings: The PZB shall adopt rules of procedure by a
majority vote of the currently appointed members to govern the conduct of its
hearings, subject to ratification by the city council. Upon the hearing, any
party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
   (J)   Powers Granted By Statute: To exercise such other powers germane to
the powers granted under authority of state statute. (Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
2-4-4: LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION; OFFICIAL MAP:
   (A)   At any time or times before or after the formal adoption of the
official comprehensive plan by the corporate authorities, an official map may
be designated by ordinance, which map may consist of the whole area included
within the official comprehensive plan or one or more separate geographical or
functional parts, and may include all or any part of the contiguous
unincorporated area within one and one-half (11/2) miles from the corporate
limits of the city. All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of
adoption with the county recorder of deeds, and filing of said plan and
ordinances including the official map with the city clerk shall be complied
with as provided by law.
   (B)   No map or plat of any subdivision or resubdivision presented for
record, affecting land within the corporate limits of the city, or within
contiguous territory which is not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles
beyond the corporate limits, shall be entitled to record or shall be valid
unless the subdivision shown thereon provides for standards of design, and
standards governing streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service
facilities, streetlights, public grounds, size of lots to be used for
residential purposes, storm and flood water runoff channels and basins, water
supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment,
in conformity with the applicable requirements of the ordinances including the
official map. (Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
2-4-5: POWERS, DUTIES AND JURISDICTION IN ITS ZONING CAPACITY:
The PZB is hereby vested with the following powers, duties, jurisdiction and
authority related to its zoning role:
   (A)   The PZB shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the administrative official
charged with the enforcement of the zoning title. It shall also hear and decide
all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under the
zoning title. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of such
administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant regarding any
matter upon which it is required to pass under the zoning title, or to
recommend any variation or modification in the zoning title. Every such
recommendation by the board after a hearing shall be accompanied by a finding
of fact, specifying the reason for such recommendations.
   (B)   The PZB shall also hear all applications for variations to the
provisions of the zoning title, and shall submit to the city council its
recommendations, based on a finding of fact, for enactment of an amending
ordinance, as the city council sees fit. In making recommendations to the city
council, the board shall find that a proposed variation will not contaminate
the air, nor impair the light supply to adjacent property, increase the
congestion in the public streets, increase the danger of fire, impair or
diminish property values or be contrary to the general health, safety and
welfare of the people of the city. The city council shall not authorize a
variation until a public hearing has been held by the board pursuant to notice,
and until the board's recommendation with such a finding of the fact has been
received by the city council. (Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
2-4-6: APPEAL:
   (A)   An appeal may be taken from the officer in charge of the enforcement
of the zoning title by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board
or bureau of the city. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be
prescribed by the PZB by general rule, by filing with the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and with the PZB, a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds
therefor. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
   (B)   An appeal stays all proceedings and furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the PZB
after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of fact
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion cause imminent peril to
life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by restraining order, which may be granted by the PZB or by a court of
record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken
and on due cause shown.
   (C)   The PZB may reverse or confirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination as, in its opinion, ought to be
made in the premises and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken. (Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
2-4-7: REVIEW:
All final administrative decisions from the PZB under the zoning title shall be
subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the administrative
review act of the state of Illinois, and all amendments and modifications
thereto and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
2-4-8: VARIATIONS:
   (A)   The city council, by ordinance, may authorize other variations from
the provisions of the zoning title where there are particular difficulties or
particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any of the
provisions of the zoning title relating to the use, construction or alteration
of buildings or structures or the use of land. However, no such variation shall
be made by the city council except in a specified case and after a public
hearing before the PZB pursuant to a notice, and after a report with a finding
of fact by the PZB as provided by the laws of this state.
   (B)   The city council, by ordinance, without further public hearing, may
adopt any proposed variation or may refer it back to the PZB for further
consideration; provided however, that any proposed variation which fails to
receive the approval of the PZB shall not be passed except by the favorable
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the councilmen of the city. (Ord. 2158, 4-26-
2016)
2-4-9: NOTICE:
Decisions and recommendations of the PZB shall be reached only after a public
hearing and after notice has been given by registered mail to the applicant. In
addition, notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be
published in a newspaper published in the city, not less than fifteen (15) days
and not more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall also
contain the address or location of the property for which a hearing by the
board is sought, as well as a brief description of the nature of the
application. (Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 2157, 4-26-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 4 of this title.
CHAPTER 6
AMBULANCE BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 1441, 9-22-1992)
CHAPTER 7
HOSPITAL BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 1468, 11-23-1993)
CHAPTER 8
COMMISSION ON YOUTH
(Rep. by Ord. 1925, 10-13-2009)
CHAPTER 9
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD
SECTION:
2-9-1: Creation; Appointment
2-9-2: Regular Meetings
2-9-3: Approval Of Expenditures
2-9-1: CREATION; APPOINTMENT:
   (A)   There is hereby created and established in the city a foreign fire
insurance board whose members shall be elected by the Savanna fire department.
The board shall consist of three (3) members all of whom may serve on the
Savanna fire auxiliary board. Foreign fire insurance board member's terms of
office shall be three (3) years, or until their respective successors shall be
appointed and qualified.
   (B)   The board must develop and maintain a listing of those items that the
board feels is appropriate expenditures of the foreign fire insurance tax
collected by the municipality. (Ord. 1906, 1-27-2009)
2-9-2: REGULAR MEETINGS:
Meetings of the foreign fire insurance board shall be established by the
chairman of the board. (Ord. 1906, 1-27-2009)
2-9-3: APPROVAL OF EXPENDITURES:
The foreign fire insurance board shall obtain approval of all expenditures
through the city warrant process and all receipts and expenditures shall be
part of the annual municipal audit process. (Ord. 1906, 1-27-2009)
CHAPTER 10
CITY TREE BOARD
SECTION:
2-10-1: Creation Of The City Tree Board
2-10-2: Term Of Office
2-10-3: Compensation
2-10-4: Duties And Responsibilities
2-10-1: CREATION OF THE CITY TREE BOARD:
There is hereby created the City Tree Board composed of three persons at least
two of whom shall be residents of the City of Savanna. The members shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. (Ord. 2369, 2-11-
2025)
2-10-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The members shall serve each serve terms of three years except on the initial
appointment of the membership the terms of two of the members shall be for one
year and the term of the third member shall be for a term of three years. In
the event of a vacancy occurs in the term of any member, there shall be
appointed a successor member for the unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 2369,
2-11-2025)
2-10-3: COMPENSATION:
Members of the City Tree Board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2369, 2-
11-2025)
2-10-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
It shall be the responsibility of the City Tree Board to advise the
Superintendent of Public Works and assist as needed to study, investigate,
counsel and develop a written tree plan for the care, preservation, pruning,
planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in city parks,
along streets and other public areas, and to update and revise the plan as
needed. The Board shall work to organize and aid in the necessary steps for
seeking community grants and funding relating to tree planting, management and
removal. The Board shall aid in obtaining and maintaining Tree City USA status.
When requested by the City Council, the Board shall consider, investigate, and
report its findings and recommendations to the Council upon any special matter
or question coming within the scope of its mission and the City tree
ordinances. (Ord. 2369, 2-11-2025)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: General Licensing Provisions
3-1-1-1: Persons Subject To License
3-1-2: Licensing Procedure
3-1-2-1: License Required
3-1-2-2: Applications
3-1-2-3: Investigation And Approval Of License Or Renewal Of License
3-1-2-4: Issuance And Form Of Licenses
3-1-3: License Fees And Term
3-1-3-1: Amount Of Fees
3-1-3-2: Nonapproval Of License
3-1-3-3: Term Of License
3-1-3-4: Prorating Of License Fee
3-1-3-5: Rebate Of Fee
3-1-3-6: Prohibition Against Transfer
3-1-4: Regulations
3-1-4-1: Building And Premises
3-1-4-2: Change Of Location
3-1-4-3: Nuisances
3-1-4-4: Inspections
3-1-4-5: Posting License
3-1-4-6: Alteration Or Removal Of License Certificate Or Insignia
3-1-4-7: Unlawful Transfer Or Use Of License Certificate Or Insignia
3-1-5: Expiration And Renewal Of Licenses
3-1-5-1: Notice Of Expiration
3-1-5-2: Renewal Of Licenses
3-1-6: Enforcement And Penalties
3-1-6-1: Duty Of City Comptroller And Police Powers
3-1-6-2: Refusal To Grant, Revocation And Suspension Of Licenses
3-1-6-3: Notice In The Case Of License Denial Or Revocation
3-1-6-4: Hearings
3-1-6-5: General Regulations
3-1-6-6: Penalty
3-1-1: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS:
3-1-1-1: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever the licensing regulations of this code require a person to obtain a
license as a prerequisite to "doing", "conducting", "engaging in",
"maintaining", "operating", "carrying on", or "managing" a business, occupation
or activity, such terms, or one or more such terms, shall include any person
who holds himself forth as being engaged in the business, occupation or
activity, or who solicits patronage therefor, either actively or passively, or
who performs or attempts to perform any part of such business, occupation or
activity in the city; and the omission of one or more of these terms shall not
be deemed to exclude the activities described by the other terms where such
activities are in fact carried on by such person. (1977 Code)
3-1-2: LICENSING PROCEDURE:
3-1-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in, maintain, operate,
carry on or manage a business, occupation or activity, either by himself or
through an agent, employee or partner, for which a license is required by any
provision of this code without first having obtained a license for such
business, occupation or activity. (1977 Code)
3-1-2-2: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses required by this code shall be made to the city
comptroller on a form provided for that purpose. Each application shall
contain:
   (A)   The name of the applicant,
   (B)   The license desired,
   (C)   The location to be used, if any,
   (D)   The time covered, and
   (E)   The fee to be paid.
Each application shall contain such additional information as may be needed for
the proper guidance of city officials in the issuing of the license applied
for.
The city comptroller shall be the custodian of all applications for licenses
which, under the provisions of this code, are required to be made to him. (1977
Code)
3-1-2-3: INVESTIGATION AND APPROVAL OF LICENSE OR RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Where a provision of this code authorizes or necessitates an investigation or
inspection by any department or official of the city before issuance,
continuation or renewal of a license, and requires the approval by such
department or official, the city comptroller shall transmit, within forty eight
(48) hours of the time an application for such license is received by the city
comptroller, to each department or official charged with the investigation and
approval of any such application, such information as may be necessary in order
that the authorized or required investigation or inspection may be made. Each
such department head or official shall make any necessary investigation or
inspection, and shall note the results thereof on the license application. The
department head or official may rely upon the record of any inspection of the
premises conducted within the previous one hundred eighty (180) days in
determining that the premises do or do not comply with the requirements of this
code. The department head or official performing the inspection shall promptly
thereafter note upon the application whether he finds that the premises comply
with the provisions of this code. The city comptroller shall be notified
accordingly. (Ord. 1688, 3-12-2002)
3-1-2-4: ISSUANCE AND FORM OF LICENSES:
All licenses granted by the mayor shall be issued by the city comptroller
except when otherwise specifically provided, upon instruction or direction from
the mayor so to do. (1977 Code)
3-1-3: LICENSE FEES AND TERM:
3-1-3-1: AMOUNT OF FEES:
Except where otherwise expressly provided in this code to the contrary, all
fees and charges for licenses shall be paid in advance at the time of
application thereof to the city comptroller and shall be the amount established
in "schedule of fees 1 " hereafter set forth. (1977 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2 of this title.
3-1-3-2: NONAPPROVAL OF LICENSE:
Whenever a license is not approved and the applicant has not engaged in the
business, occupation or activity for which the license was sought, the license
fee paid in advance shall be refunded to the applicant by the city comptroller
upon authorization from the mayor. (1977 Code)
3-1-3-3: TERM OF LICENSE:
Except where otherwise expressly provided in this code to the contrary, no
license shall be granted for a period longer than one year, every license shall
expire on April 30 following the date of its issuance, and no license shall be
granted for a sum less than the full annual license fee except as qualified by
section
3-1-3-4 of this chapter. (1977 Code)
3-1-3-4: PRORATING OF LICENSE FEE:
Except where otherwise provided in this code to the contrary, the applicant for
a license for a new occupation or activity shall be required to pay the full
annual license fee specified in this code if application for a license is made
on or between May 1 and October 31 of any year. If any application is made on
or between November 1 and April 30 of any year, the applicant shall be required
to pay only one-half (1/2) of the annual license fee specified in this code.
(1977 Code)
3-1-3-5: REBATE OF FEE:
Except where otherwise expressly provided, in no event shall any rebate or
refund be made of any license fee or part thereof by reason of death of
licensee or by reason of nonuse of license, or by reason in the location of the
business, occupation or activity of such license; provided, however, that the
provisions of this section shall not be construed to prevent the city council
from authorizing a refund of a license fee collected through error or where a
licensed business is forced to close before the expiration of the license
period by reason of the taking over of the licensed premises by the United
States government or an agency thereof. (1977 Code)
3-1-3-6: PROHIBITION AGAINST TRANSFER:
No licensee may assign, sell or transfer his license to any other person, even
if such other person intends to conduct the same business, occupation or
activity as the licensee at the location used by the licensee. Such other
person must apply and pay the fee for a new license in accordance with the
provisions of this code. (1977 Code)
3-1-4: REGULATIONS:
3-1-4-1: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, occupation or
activity if the premises and building to be used for such purpose does not
fully comply with all applicable provisions of this code, including the fire
prevention, building and zoning, and police and health regulations. (1977 Code)
3-1-4-2: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
If any person licensed to engage in a business, occupation or activity at a
particular place shall, before the expiration of the license period, desire to
change the location of such place of business, occupation or activity, he shall
give ten (10) days' notice thereof to the city comptroller. No business,
occupation or activity shall be engaged in, under the authority of such
license, at such new location until notice of such change has been given as
herein provided, and until such licensee shall have complied with all the
provisions of this code relating to the conduct of each business, occupation or
activity at such new location, including the approval of the department head or
official of the city who originally approved the application for said license
and including compliance with the fire prevention, building and zoning, and
police and health regulations of this code. (1977 Code)
3-1-4-3: NUISANCES:
No business, occupation or activity, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or
operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact. (1977 Code)
3-1-4-4: INSPECTIONS:
Whenever inspections of the premises, or methods of operation used in
conducting a licensed business, occupation or activity are authorized or
required by this code or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any
provision of this code or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of
the licensee or person in charge of such premises, or methods of operation to
permit, at any reasonable time, any officer or employee of the city who is
authorized or directed to make such inspections to be admitted to such
premises, and to observe such methods of operation for the purpose of making
said inspections.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the city council may
revoke the license of any licensee who refuses to permit any such officer or
employee to make such inspections or who interferes with such officer or
employee while in the performance of this duty in making such inspections;
provided, however, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless
written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises,
in the name of the city, stating that such inspection is desired at the time it
is sought to make the inspection or to obtain the sample. (1977 Code)
3-1-4-5: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business, occupation
or activity in the city to keep his license certificate at all times in a
prominent place on the premises used for such business, occupation or activity.
(1977 Code)
3-1-4-6: ALTERATION OR REMOVAL OF LICENSE CERTIFICATE OR INSIGNIA:
No person shall add to, alter, deface, forge or counterfeit any license
certificate or license plate, tag, badge, or sticker or other insignia which
has been or is being issued by the city. (1977 Code)
3-1-4-7: UNLAWFUL TRANSFER OR USE OF LICENSE CERTIFICATE OR INSIGNIA:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to transfer, load or give away any
license certificate or any license plate, tag, badge, sticker or other insignia
issued to such licensee. It shall also be unlawful for any person to use or
display any license certificate or license plate, tag, badge, sticker or other
insignia which has been unlawfully acquired. (1977 Code)
3-1-5: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSES:
3-1-5-1: NOTICE OF EXPIRATION:
It shall be the duty of the city comptroller, from twenty (20) to sixty (60)
days prior to the expiration of the license period, to cause a written notice
to be mailed to each licensee directing the attention of such licensee to the
fact that a new license will be required on the day following the expiration of
his existing license, and directing his attention also to the amount of the
license fee and to the penalty for failure to procure a license in accordance
with the provisions of this code governing the issuance of such license.
Failure on the part of the city comptroller to cause such notice to be mailed
to each licensee shall not, however, excuse the licensee from a failure to
secure a new license or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense to a suit
brought by the city to recover the penalty for a violation of the provision of
this code under which the licensee is required to obtain a license. (1977 Code)
3-1-5-2: RENEWAL OF LICENSES:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code to the contrary, the
mayor may renew any license at the beginning of a new license period upon
proper application and payment of the required fee. The procedure for the
application, granting and issuance of a renewed license shall be the same as
for the application, granting and issuance of the first license. (1977 Code)
3-1-6: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
3-1-6-1: DUTY OF CITY COMPTROLLER AND POLICE POWERS:
It shall be the duty of the city comptroller, with the aid of the police
department, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (1977 Code)
3-1-6-2: REFUSAL TO GRANT, REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSES:
   (A)   The mayor may refuse to grant any license, and the city council may
revoke any license issued under this chapter during the term of such license,
for failure by any applicant or licensee to comply with any provision of this
code or any statutes of the state of Illinois relating to the business,
occupation or activity for which a license application has been made or for
which a license has been granted; provided, however, that no license shall be
denied or revoked hereunder until notice has been given to the applicant or
licensee as hereinafter provided in section
3-1-6-3 of this chapter, a reasonable time has elapsed to enable the applicant
or licensee to comply with the provisions of this code and applicable state
statutes, and the applicant or licensee has been given the opportunity to
present his case at a hearing as hereinafter provided in section
3-1-6-4 of this chapter. Such denial or revocation of a license may be in
addition to any fine imposed. No person whose license has been revoked as
herein provided shall be eligible for a new license during the period for which
the revoked license was originally issued.
   (B)   The mayor may suspend, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days,
any license issued under this chapter during the term of such license upon
conviction of the licensee of violation of any provision of this code or any
statutes of the state of Illinois relating to the business, occupation or
activity for which such license was issued.
   (C)   The mayor may suspend, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days,
without prior warning, notice or hearing, any license issued under this chapter
during the term of such license for the failure of any licensee to comply with
any provision of this code or any statutes of the state of Illinois relating to
the business, occupation or activity for which such license was issued if, in
the judgment of the mayor, such failure constitutes an imminent clanger to the
public health, safety or welfare.
   (D)   Any person whose license is suspended shall immediately discontinue
the business, occupation or activity for which the license was issued.
   (E)   Any person whose license is suspended may, at any time, either
petition in writing, the mayor for a hearing or make written application to the
mayor for reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the license. Any
such hearing shall be held as soon as possible and shall be conducted by and
before the mayor at a time and place designated by him. Based upon the record
of such hearing, the mayor shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or
rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A written
report of the hearing decision shall be furnished by the mayor to the person
whose license was suspended. If a written application is made to the mayor for
reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the license; then, within ten
(10) days following receipt by the mayor of such application together with a
written statement signed by the applicant that in the applicant's opinion the
conditions causing suspension of the license have been corrected, the mayor
shall cause a reinspection to be made. rt; after such reinspection, the
applicant is found to comply with all applicable provisions of this code and
statutes of the state of Illinois, his license shall be reinstated.
   (F)   The mayor shall suspend every license issued in the name of any person
or entity that is more than sixty days in arrears of payment of any fee or
charge of any land owed to the City PROVIDED that the mayor has first caused a
written "Warning of Impending Suspensions" to be mailed to the address of the
licensee on tile with the City warning the licensee of the impending suspension
of all licenses under this section. The "Warning of Impending Suspensions"
shall be deposited in the U.S. Mail at least thirty (30) days prior to the
effective elate of the suspensions. Such suspensions shall continue until the
arrearage is paid in full. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2331, 9-26-2023)
3-1-6-3: NOTICE IN THE CASE OF LICENSE DENIAL OR REVOCATION:
When the mayor or the city council discovers that any of the applied provisions
of this code or any statutes of the state of Illinois have not been complied
with or have been violated, the mayor shall notify the applicant or licensee in
writing of such noncompliance or violation. Such notification shall:
   (A)   Set forth the specific nature of the noncompliance or violation
discovered;
   (B)   Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction
of such noncompliance or violation;
   (C)   State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter may result in a denial or an immediate
revocation, as the case may be, of the license; and
   (D)   State that an opportunity for appeal from any notice or inspection
findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the
mayor and city council within the period of time established in the notice for
correction.
Any such notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when it has been
delivered personally to the applicant or licensee or when it has been sent by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
residence or business address of the applicant or licensee. (1977 Code)
3-1-6-4: HEARINGS:
The hearings on license denial or revocation matters shall be conducted by the
city council at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the record of
such hearings, the mayor and city council shall make a finding and shall
sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order considered at the
hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the
applicant or licensee by the mayor and city council. (1977 Code)
3-1-6-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
All persons licensed hereunder shall strictly comply with all state statutes
and all regulations of this code pertaining to fire prevention, building and
zoning, and police regulations. (1977 Code)
3-1-6-6: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
or for any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be as set out in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SCHEDULE OF FEES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Schedule Of Fees
3-2-1: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
The fees for licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this title, and
other license and permit regulations elsewhere in this code, shall be as
follows:
Description Daily Fee Annual Fee
Description                                               Daily Fee Annual Fee
Amusement devices, coin operated (per machine)                     $ 60.00
Auctioneers                                               $ 30.00   100.00
Cigarette                                                          50.00
Circus, carnival                                          25.00      
Intoxicating liquors:                                               
 Class A                                                          1,500.00
 Class B                                                          750.00
 Class C                                                          750.00
 Class D                                                          750.00
 Class E                                                          1,500.00
 Class F, per permit                                     10.00      
 Class G                                                          100.00
Itinerant vendors                                         100.00    100.00
Itinerant vendors, transient merchants associated with an 25.00      
approved festival or event
Mobile home park                                                   240.00
Restaurant                                                         50.00
Solicitors                                                25.00      
Taxicabs:                                                           
 First cab                                                        20.00
 Each additional cab                                              10.00
Transient merchant                                        100.00    100.00
Video gaming terminal fee (per terminal)                           250.00
 
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977; Ord. 1123, 6-28-1977; Ord. 1303, 10-14-
1986; Ord. 1457, 6-22-1993; Ord. 1674, 5-8-2001; Ord. 1715, 4-22-2003; Ord.
1798, 6-28-2005; Ord. 1829, 3-28-2006; Ord. 1830, 3-28-2006; Ord. 1929, 10-27-
2009; Ord. 1930, 10-27-2009; Ord. 1982, 9-27-2011; Ord. 2059, 8-27-2013; Ord.
2090, 3-25-2014; Ord. 2301, 3-22-2022)
CHAPTER 3
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Coin Operated Amusement Devices
3-3-1-1: Definition
3-3-1-2: General Application
3-3-1-3: License Required
3-3-1-4: Applications
3-3-1-5: Fee
3-3-1-6: Gambling
3-3-1-7: Penalty
3-3-2: Billiard Halls, Pool Halls, Bowling Alleys
3-3-2-1: License Required
3-3-2-2: Application
3-3-2-3: Fee
3-3-2-4: Hours Of Operation
3-3-1: COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
3-3-1-1: DEFINITION:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following word or term for purposes of
this chapter, shall have the meaning indicated in this section:
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any mechanical amusement device or equipment,
the operation of which is governed by or controlled by the deposit of a coin,
token or slug, including, without being limited to, any such device or
equipment capable of reproducing musical sounds. (1977 Code)
3-3-1-2: GENERAL APPLICATION:
The regulator provisions of this chapter are applicable to all amusements
licensed by this chapter. (1977 Code)
3-3-1-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall own, promote, operate, conduct, manage or sponsor any amusement
not specifically licensed elsewhere in this chapter without first having
obtained a license therefor. No person shall own, lease or maintain a coin
operated amusement device for public use without first having obtained a
license therefor. (1977 Code)
3-3-1-4: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for a license to own, promote, operate, conduct, manage or sponsor
an amusement or own, lease or maintain a coin operated device for public use
shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this code relating
to applications for licenses. (1977 Code)
3-3-1-5: FEE:
The fee for subject license shall be set forth heretofore in "schedule of fees
1 ". (1977 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2 of this title.
3-3-1-6: GAMBLING:
No persons shall gamble, bet or partake in games of cards or dice for any
purposes in any building or hall used for amusement purposes. (1977 Code)
3-3-1-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1977 Code)
3-3-2: BILLIARD HALLS, POOL HALLS, BOWLING ALLEYS:
3-3-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall own, operate, maintain, or conduct any billiard, pocket
billiard, pool, or pigeon table or bowling alley open to the public without
first having obtained a license therefor. (1977 Code)
3-3-2-2: APPLICATION:
An application for a license to own, operate, manage or conduct a billiard,
pocket billiard, pool or pigeon table or bowling alley shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this code relating to applications
for licenses. (1977 Code)
3-3-2-3: FEE:
The fee for subject license shall be as set forth heretofore in "schedule of
fees". (1977 Code)
3-3-2-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No person licensed to own, operate, manage or conduct a bowling alley under
this chapter shall permit such bowling alley to be used, open for business or
operated between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M.
No building or hall in which a billiard, pool, bagatelle or pigeonhole table is
operated or maintained shall remain open for business of any kind between the
hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday through Thursday of any weekday
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following morning, or between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Friday and Saturday and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. of the following morning. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 4
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Automatic Food Vending Machines (Rep. by Ord. 1722, 5-13-2003)
3-4-2: Food Delivery Vehicles (Rep. by Ord. 1457, 6-22-1993)
3-4-3: Milk (Rep. by Ord. 1457, 6-22-1993)
3-4-4: Restaurants
3-4-4-1: Definition
3-4-4-2: License Required
3-4-4-3: Application
3-4-4-4: Fee
3-4-4-5: Specifications
3-4-4-6: Employees
3-4-4-7: Disorderly Conduct
3-4-4-8: Police Assistance
3-4-4-9: License Revocation
3-4-1: AUTOMATIC FOOD VENDING MACHINES:
(Rep. by Ord. 1722, 5-13-2003)
3-4-2: FOOD DELIVERY VEHICLES:
(Rep. by Ord. 1457, 6-22-1993)
3-4-3: MILK:
(Rep. by Ord. 1457, 6-22-1993)
3-4-4: RESTAURANTS:
3-4-4-1: DEFINITION:
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to
the public as a place where meals, sandwiches, coffee or other goods are
offered for sale, sold, served or supplied to the general public
indiscriminately at any time or hour, to be consumed on or off the premises.
(1977 Code)
3-4-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall exercise the business of keeping a
restaurant without first having obtained a license therefor. Each license
issued hereunder shall terminate on April 30 following the issuance thereof.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council, at its discretion, may issue
one restaurant license annually, without fee, to a not for profit corporation
operating a restaurant in Savanna, Illinois. (Ord. 1882, 10-23-2007)
3-4-4-3: APPLICATION:
No person, firm or corporation shall receive a license or the renewal of a
license to operate a restaurant unless the premises upon which the food is to
be served and prepared complies with the building regulations of title 4 of
this code and the fire regulations of title 5 of this code. The city fire
marshal, building official and a licensed plumber shall inspect the premises to
determine compliance with this section prior to the issuance of the license and
within ninety (90) days prior to the renewal thereof. (Ord. 1688, 3-12-2002)
3-4-4-4: FEE:
The fee for subject license shall be set forth heretofore in the "schedule of
fees 1 ". (1977 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2 of this title.
3-4-4-5: SPECIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Lighting; Construction: All rooms or places in the restaurant shall be
properly and adequately lighted so that all parts may be inspected readily.
The walls and ceilings shall be of smooth, hard material, and must be kept
clean and sanitary and in good repair.
Floors shall be smooth and of hard material, and must be kept clean and
sanitary and in good repair at all times.
   (B)   Counters, Shelves, Towels To Be Clean: All show or display cases or
windows, counters or shelves used in keeping and displaying food and drink
shall be kept clean and sanitary, free from dust, dirt and other contaminating
material, and in good repair. All food containers shall be elevated at least
two feet (2') from the floor.
All towels used for drying dishes, receptacles and utensils shall be clean.
   (C)   Sinks; Grease Traps: Sinks with an adequate supply of running hot and
cold water shall be provided and each sink shall be provided with a metallic
splashboard approved by the health officer. All sinks shall be constructed of
nonabsorbent material.
Each restaurant shall be provided with a grease trap installed in strict
compliance with all regulations of the city; provided, however, upon a written
agreement not to do cooking requiring any extensive washing of greasy
equipment, pans, dishes or other utensils, the health officer, in his
discretion may waive the requirement of this subsection relative to grease
traps, such waiver to be conditional upon compliance with the aforesaid written
agreement.
   (D)   Insanitary Rooms; Screens: No restaurant shall be conducted in a room
or rooms used for sleeping purposes; or in any room or place that is damp,
dark, poorly ventilated or insanitary. All doors, windows and other openings
shall be properly screened from May 1 of each year. Screen doors shall be
provided with self- closing devices.
   (E)   Refrigerators: All refrigerators, iceboxes and other appurtenances
thereof used for the storage of food and drink shall be kept clean and sanitary
and in good repair, and the compartments used for storage of ice shall be lined
with some proper metallic substance so as to be watertight. No food shall be
placed directly on ice or ice coils.
   (F)   Water Closets: Suitable lavatories shall be provided and installed in
strict compliance with the plumbing regulations of the city.
   (G)   Serving Milk: All milk intended for service to patrons of restaurants,
hotels, schools, boarding houses and other public eating places shall be served
in the individual bottles filled at the dairy or pasteurizing plant.
   (H)   Handled Food: No hotel, restaurant, lunch counter or other place where
food is sold shall resell any food which has been sold to or handled by any
customer.
   (I)   Arrangement Of Stoves: All stoves, ranges, heaters and hot water tanks
shall be elevated and placed far enough from the wall to assure easy access for
cleaning, and all stoves shall be equipped with proper ventilation by suction
or hood as approved by the health officer.
   (J)   Garbage Cans: Regulation, watertight, properly covered, galvanized
iron, metal cans for receiving and holding, without leakage, all garbage and
other waste material shall be provided. A tightfitting cover shall be provided
for each can, and the cans shall be kept covered. All garbage and other waste
material shall be removed from the premises daily and shall not be allowed to
become a nuisance.
   (K)   Soiled Linens; Utensils: A special covered container shall be provided
for the storing of all soiled linen.
All utensils used in the preparation, service and sale of food and drink shall
be properly cleaned and sterilized with hot water, steam or approved chemicals
after use, and no utensil shall, under any circumstances be used a second time
unless it shall have been, after previous use thereof, so cleaned and
sterilized, and in such cleaning the use of water, which has become insanitary
by previous use, is prohibited.
   (L)   Steam Tables: All steam tables shall be maintained at a temperature of
at least one hundred fifty five degrees Fahrenheit (155°F) while containing
food, and shall be cleaned daily.
   (M)   General Cleanliness: The use of any utensil used in the preparation,
service and sale of food or drink which is badly worn or rusted, or the use of
cracked dishes or glassware in such condition that it cannot be rendered clean
and sanitary, is prohibited.
Equipment or utensils made of crockery, pottery, porcelain, enamelware or other
material, the surface of which may become chipped or otherwise damaged to such
an extent that dirt, grease, verdigris or where disease causing germs may
collect or stick to the damaged edges, or whose damaged edges may chip or
become loose (and get into the food, or endanger life or health) shall not be
used after such damage or breakage of the inside surface is present, but shall
at once be discarded or repaired. The presence in any restaurant of any bugs,
cockroaches or other vermin is expressly prohibited and if found, shall be
promptly exterminated therefrom.
All food shall be arranged and displayed in an orderly and systematic manner so
as to improve the general appearance of the restaurant and to facilitate easy
inspection.
The use of tobacco in any form is prohibited in the kitchen.
The presence of any food, drink or raw material in any part of the restaurant
shall be deemed prima facie evidence of its use for human food.
No domestic animals shall be permitted anywhere in a restaurant. (1977 Code)
3-4-4-6: EMPLOYEES:
No person who has any infectious or venereal disease shall be permitted to
handle food and drink or any utensil used in dispensing food. (1977 Code)
3-4-4-7: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
No licensee hereunder, exercising the business of keeping a restaurant, shall
permit any person or persons to frequent the same who are under the influence
of liquor, nor shall such person offer for sale, sell or give away any
intoxicating liquor in such place of business unless licensed so to do; nor
shall such licensee permit any person to engage in disorderly conduct or in any
lewd or lascivious behavior in such place of business. (1977 Code)
3-4-4-8: POLICE ASSISTANCE:
It shall be the duty of the police to assist the health officer in serving any
and all notices which he may issue hereunder, and to report to him any
violation hereof, and to aid in every necessary manner in the enforcement of
these health regulations. (1977 Code)
3-4-4-9: LICENSE REVOCATION:
Any license so granted may be revoked by the mayor by notice in writing,
whenever it shall appear to his satisfaction that the person so licensed shall
have violated the provisions of any law of this state or of the provisions of
this code relative to the keeping of restaurants. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 5
BUSINESS LICENSING
SECTION:
3-5-1: Auctioneers
3-5-1-1: Definition
3-5-1-2: License Required
3-5-1-3: Application
3-5-1-4: Investigation
3-5-1-5: Fee
3-5-1-6: Licensed Employee
3-5-1-7: Terms Of Sale
3-5-1-8: False Representations
3-5-1-9: Return Of Articles Purchased (Rep. by Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977)
3-5-1-10: Substitution
3-5-1-11: Fictitious Bids
3-5-1-12: Special Permit For Auction Sales (Rep. by Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977)
3-5-1-13: Addition Or Substitution Of Property
3-5-1-14: Transfer Of License
3-5-1-15: Auctions On Public Ways
3-5-1-16: Exemptions
3-5-2: Transient Merchants; Itinerant Vendors
3-5-2-0: Intent
3-5-2-1: Definitions
3-5-2-2: Prerequisites To Conduct Business
3-5-2-3: License
3-5-2-4: Bond Or Deposit Required (Rep. by Ord. 1831, 3-28-2006)
3-5-2-5: License Expiration
3-5-2-6: License Fee
3-5-2-7: Holding Inventory
3-5-2-8: Prima Facie Evidence
3-5-2-9: Exemptions
3-5-2-10: Possession Of License Required
3-5-2-11: Vehicles To Be Marked
3-5-2-12: Nuisances Declared
3-5-2-13: Public Streets, Ways; Restrictions
3-5-2-14: Fraud
3-5-2-15: Violations
3-5-3: Reserved
3-5-4: Photographers (Rep. by Ord. 1728, 5-13-2003)
3-5-5: Taxicabs
3-5-5-1: Definition
3-5-5-2: License Required
3-5-5-3: Vehicle Inspection
3-5-5-4: Liability Insurance
3-5-5-5: Application
3-5-5-6: Fee
3-5-5-7: License Nontransferable
3-5-5-8: Name On Vehicle
3-5-5-9: City License Number, Card
3-5-5-10: List Of Drivers
3-5-5-11: License Revocation
3-5-5-12: Driver Qualifications
3-5-5-13: Operator's License
3-5-5-14: Parking Spaces
3-5-6: Mobile Home Parks
3-5-6-1: Model Code Adopted
3-5-6-2: Fee
3-5-7: Garage Sales
3-5-7-1: Frequency And Duration
3-5-8: Raffles
3-5-8-1: License Required
3-5-8-2: Eligibility
3-5-8-3: Ineligibility
3-5-8-4: Definitions
3-5-8-5: Licenses
3-5-8-6: Applications
3-5-8-7: Forms And Signatures
3-5-8-8: Investigation
3-5-8-9: Mayor Action
3-5-8-10: Conduct Of Raffles
3-5-8-11: Raffles Manager's Bond
3-5-8-12: Records
3-5-1: AUCTIONEERS:
3-5-1-1: DEFINITION:
The term "auctioneer", when used in this section shall mean any person who
sells real estate or personal property at public or private auction for another
or for himself, regardless of who owns such property. (1977 Code)
3-5-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct an auction or engage in the business of an auctioneer
in the city without first having obtained a license therefor.
It shall also be unlawful for any employee of an auctioneer to conduct an
auction in the city without first having obtained a license therefor, and it
shall be unlawful for any auctioneer to permit an auction to be conducted by an
unlicensed employee.
The auctioneer's license shall state the name and residence address of the
person, if any, authorized by the auctioneer to conduct auctions on his behalf,
if such person meets the prerequisites of a licensee hereunder, and such
auctioneer's license shall constitute a license for such named person. (1977
Code)
3-5-1-3: APPLICATION:
An application for an auctioneer's license shall be made in conformity with the
general requirements of this code relating to applications for licenses. An
auctioneer shall use the same application form in obtaining a license for not
more than two (2) of his employees by stating in such application, in addition
to the other information required, the name and residence address of any
employee who is to be authorized by the applicant to conduct auctions on
applicant's behalf. (1977 Code)
3-5-1-4: INVESTIGATION:
The chief of police, or any other city official designated by the mayor, shall
make or cause to be made such investigation as he deems necessary to determine
the character and reputation of the applicant for an auctioneer's license and
the character and reputation of any employee of the applicant designated to
conduct auctions on the applicant's behalf. No license shall be issued to any
applicant or for any employee of an applicant who is not found to be a person
of good character and reputation. The city official, charged with making said
investigation, shall indicate on the application for license the results of his
investigation and his approval or disapproval of said application. (1977 Code)
3-5-1-5: FEE:
The fee for subject license shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per day or an
annual fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and shall be set forth heretofore
in "schedule of fees 1 ". (Ord. 1727, 5-13-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2 of this title.
3-5-1-6: LICENSED EMPLOYEE:
All the provisions of this code relating to an auctioneer shall apply equally
to any licensed employee of an auctioneer, and should any licensed employee of
an auctioneer violate any of the provisions of this code concerning
auctioneers, such licensed employee shall be subject to all the penalties
herein imposed upon licensed auctioneers for violating any of the provisions of
this section.
If any licensed auctioneer shall permit any person other than the one
authorized by him and licensed hereunder to conduct an auction on his behalf,
such auctioneer shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. In
addition, his license shall forthwith be revoked and no other license shall be
issued to him for a period of one year. (1977 Code)
3-5-1-7: TERMS OF SALE:
It shall be the duty of every auctioneer, before beginning any auction sale of
real or personal property of any kind whatever, to state fully the terms and
conditions upon which the sale will be made and to announce to the persons
present the character, quality and description of the property offered for
sale. (1977 Code)
3-5-1-8: FALSE REPRESENTATIONS:
No auctioneer or person being present when any real or personal property is
offered for sale shall knowingly, with intent to induce any person to purchase
the same or any part thereof, make any false representations or statement as to
the ownership of, or the character or quality of, the property so offered for
sale, or as to the poverty or circumstances of the owner or pretended owner of
such property; and if such false representation is made by the auctioneer, or
by any other person with such auctioneer's knowledge and consent or connivance,
the license of such auctioneer shall be revoked. (1977 Code)
3-5-1-9: RETURN OF ARTICLES PURCHASED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977)
3-5-1-10: SUBSTITUTION:
No auctioneer shall exhibit and offer for sale at auction any article and
induce its purchase by any bidder, and then afterwards substitute any article
in lieu of that offered to and purchased by the bidder. (1977 Code)
3-5-1-11: FICTITIOUS BIDS:
No auctioneer shall procure any person to make a fictitious bid, or shall
conspire with any person to make a fictitious bid, or shall himself
fictitiously raise any bids at any auction sale of real or personal property.
(1977 Code)
3-5-1-12: SPECIAL PERMIT FOR AUCTION SALES:
(Rep. by Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977)
3-5-1-13: ADDITION OR SUBSTITUTION OF PROPERTY:
Said special permit shall be valid only for the sale of the particular property
described in the application therefor, and at the particular time and place
stated herein. Any renewal, addition or substitution of property, or change of
time or place for such sale shall be unlawful. (1977 Code)
3-5-1-14: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No license granted under the provisions of this section shall be transferred to
another person. (1977 Code)
3-5-1-15: AUCTIONS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
No real or personal property shall be sold at auction, or exposed for sale, by
any person in any public way in the city, unless approved by the mayor and
chief of police. (Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977)
3-5-1-16: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this section shall apply to any public auction or sale made or
conducted by a public officer by virtue of any jurisdictional order or process
or by virtue of any power of authority contained in a mortgage or trust deed.
(1977 Code)
3-5-2: TRANSIENT MERCHANTS; ITINERANT VENDORS:
3-5-2-0: INTENT:
It is the intent of the city council to provide standards and licensing
procedures for the regulation of transient merchants and itinerant vendors for
the following reasons:
   (A)   To protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Savanna
and protect the character and quality of the community;
   (B)   To protect the needs and interests of permanent businesses located
within the city;
   (C)   To accommodate special events and festivals that provide added
attraction to the city;
   (D)   To support local not for profit charitable events; and
   (E)   To provide a means by which the city can enforce this section
3-5-2. (Ord. 1831, 3-28-2006)
3-5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person who transports tangible personal property for
retail sale within the municipal limits who does not maintain an established
office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse, service center or residence
from which such business is conducted.
Exception: This chapter does not apply to any person who delivers tangible
property within the municipal limits who is fulfilling an order for such
property which was solicited or placed by mail or other means. This chapter
does not apply to any person holding a valid license, issued by a county or
municipality, to engage in retail sales.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: An organization which is legally chartered as nonprofit
and charitable or educational in nature.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, firm, association or
other entity.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail sale of
goods, wares or merchandise in this state and who, for the purpose of
conducting such business, occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure of
any kind, or vacant lot within the municipal limits for periods of fewer than
five (5) days.
Exception: This chapter does not apply to any person selling goods, wares or
merchandise which are raised, produced or manufactured by him, to any person
selling vegetables, fruit or perishable farm products at an established city or
village market, to any person operating a store or refreshment stand at a
resort, or to any person operating a stand or booth on or adjacent to property
owned by him or upon which he resides. This chapter does not apply to any
person holding a valid license, issued by a county or municipality, to engage
in retail sales. (Ord. 1370, 1-23-1990; amd. Ord. 1831, 3-28-2006)
3-5-2-2: PREREQUISITES TO CONDUCT BUSINESS:
It is a violation of this chapter for any person, either as principal or agent,
to conduct business as a transient merchant or itinerant vendor within the city
without first complying with the requirements of section 2a of the Illinois
retailers' occupation tax act by obtaining a certificate of registration and by
posting bond or other approved security and without having obtained a license
under this chapter. (Ord. 1370, 1-23-1990)
3-5-2-3: LICENSE:
   (A)   Application Must Be Filed: Any person who wishes to obtain a license
as a transient merchant or itinerant vendor shall file a written license
application with the city, as provided in this section. (Ord. 1370, 1-23-1990)
   (B)   Application Contents: The license application shall include the
applicant's name, permanent business address (which must include a street
address), residence address of the principal (and, if the applicant is a
corporation, the residence addresses of its officers), the location at which
the applicant intends to do business, the nature of the business the applicant
intends to conduct, a copy of the applicant's certificate of registration under
the Illinois retailers' occupation tax act, a complete inventory of the goods
the applicant intends to offer for sale, and a list of all licenses to conduct
business as a transient merchant or an itinerant vendor obtained by the
applicant in this state in the twelve (12) months preceding the date of filing
of the application, such additional information as may be needed for the proper
guidance of the municipal officials in the evaluation of such application.
   (C)   Approval Or Disapproval Of License Application: If the information
contained within the application is unsatisfactory or after due consideration
of the information contained within the application it is determined that
matters concerning the application are unsatisfactory, then the city clerk
shall notify the applicant that the application has been rejected. If the
information contained within the application is acceptable, the applicant shall
be informed that their request for a license has been approved.
   (D)   Insurance Certificate Required: No city license shall be issued for
special events that take place wholly or in part upon city owned property
unless the application is accompanied by a certificate establishing that the
applicant has sufficient liability insurance in place to protect and indemnify
the city from any liability. (Ord. 1831, 3-28-2006)
3-5-2-4: BOND OR DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1831, 3-28-2006)
3-5-2-5: LICENSE EXPIRATION:
A license or permit issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of
the year it was issued, except a license or permit which is issued for a daily
fee which would expire at the end of the day on which it was issued. (Ord.
1542, 10-10-1995)
3-5-2-6: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for any person wishing to conduct a business as either a
transient merchant or itinerant vendor shall be set forth heretofore in
"schedule of fees 1 ". (Ord. 1457, 6-22-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2 of this title.
3-5-2-7: HOLDING INVENTORY:
If any person makes retail sales as a transient merchant or itinerant vendor
without having obtained a license under section
3-5-2-3 of this chapter, the city may hold the inventory, truck or personal
property of the person until he obtains a license to conduct business as a
transient merchant or itinerant vendor. If the property has been held by the
city for more than sixty (60) days and the person whose property is being held
has not obtained a license under section
3-5-2-3 of this chapter, the city may petition the circuit court for an order
for the sale of the property being held. If the court finds that the person
whose property is held has not obtained a license under section
3-5-2-3 of this chapter, the court may order the city to sell the property.
Proceeds of the sale of the property, less reimbursement to the city of the
reasonable expenses of storage and sale of the property, shall be deposited in
the treasury of the city. (Ord. 1370, 1-23-1990)
3-5-2-8: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE:
It shall be prima facie evidence that a person is a transient merchant or
itinerant vendor under this chapter if the person does not transact business
from a fixed location or if the person does not own, or lease for a term of at
least six (6) months, the property from which business is conducted. (Ord.
1370, 1-23-1990)
3-5-2-9: EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   Prior Invitation: Any person who, for the purpose of selling or taking
orders for the sale of merchandise or services, has been invited by the
occupant of a residence to call thereon is exempt.
   (B)   Nonprofit Organizations: Any person selling, peddling, soliciting or
taking orders for any goods not prohibited by law on behalf of a charitable,
religious or other nonprofit organization sponsored by or participated in by a
local chapter of such organization; or by a national organization not
represented locally but which has filed a statement of registration with the
city clerk specifying the name of the nonprofit organization, its permanent
address, the names of its principal officers, and the names of those persons
who are authorized to sell, peddle or solicit or take orders for goods and
services within the city.
   (C)   Farmers: Any person whose principal occupation is that of farmer who
sells the produce of his own farm, vineyard, orchard or garden, provided he
does not obstruct streets, sidewalks or other public places within the city;
provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to
authorize the sale of alcoholic, spirituous, malt or other intoxicating
liquors, or peddling of any kind whatsoever in any public park.
   (D)   Newspaper Vendors: Any person who, on behalf of the publisher of any
newspaper of general circulation within the city, peddles the same in any
public place. (Ord. 1370, 1-23-1990)
3-5-2-10: POSSESSION OF LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person licensed pursuant to this chapter shall, at all times while engaged
in the activities defined in section
3-5-2-1 of this chapter, keep said license in his possession and shall display
the same upon the demand of any police officer or upon the request of any
person whose premises he seeks to enter. (Ord. 1370, 1-23-1990)
3-5-2-11: VEHICLES TO BE MARKED:
Every vehicle or conveyance used by a person licensed hereunder shall be
conspicuously marked, as may be prescribed by the city clerk, with the name of
such person or his employer and the number of his license. (Ord. 1370, 1-23-
1990)
3-5-2-12: NUISANCES DECLARED:
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and welfare and a nuisance
for any person licensed hereunder to be in the habit of or to continue the
practice of entering in and upon private premises in disregard of the express
wish of the owner or occupant, for the purpose of selling, peddling or
soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise. (Ord. 1370, 1-
23-1990)
3-5-2-13: PUBLIC STREETS, WAYS; RESTRICTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit any person licensed
hereunder, unless expressly stated to the contrary upon said license:
   (A)   To erect or place any temporary or permanent stand upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place within the city for the purpose of
dispensing or displaying his goods, wares or merchandise; or
   (B)   To go about the city or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public place while making any noise, blowing any horn, or using any like device
to call attention to his goods, wares or merchandise. (Ord. 1370, 1-23-1990)
3-5-2-14: FRAUD:
Any licensed transient merchant or itinerant vendor who shall be guilty of any
fraud, cheating, misrepresentation or imposition, whether himself or through an
employee, while engaged in this trade within the city, or who shall act as a
broker for, sell or peddle any goods other than those specified in his
application for a license, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 1370, 1-23-1990)
3-5-2-15: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who is convicted of violating any provisions of this section
3-5-2 is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 1370, 1-23-1990)
3-5-3: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1607, 10-28-1997)
3-5-4: PHOTOGRAPHERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1728, 5-13-2003)
3-5-5: TAXICABS:
3-5-5-1: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "taxicab" shall mean any vehicle
hauling or carrying passengers for hire, except that it shall not include any
buses now operating or to be operated on regularly scheduled routes in the city
or any vehicles which carry seven (7) or more passengers. (1977 Code)
3-5-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a taxicab within the city without having first obtained
a license therefor. (1977 Code)
3-5-5-3: VEHICLE INSPECTION:
No license for any taxicab shall be issued until the vehicle has been
thoroughly inspected by the chief of police, or such other official that the
city council may direct, and found to be in safe and satisfactory condition for
the transportation of passengers, he shall check the vehicle to see that the
brakes on the vehicle are in good workable condition, that the vehicle is in
good running order, that there is no broken glass in any of the windows of the
vehicle, that there is nothing about the vehicle or located within as to cause
harm or danger to any passenger or other vehicle. The vehicle shall be equipped
with good tires, shall have good headlights and two (2) working taillights, and
shall be in a clean condition. (1977 Code)
All licensed taxicabs shall be inspected biannually between the first and the
seventh of April and October of each year. If any vehicle licensed as a taxicab
is involved in an automobile collision or any other accident, an inspection
shall be made of it before it is again placed in service. (1977 Code; amd. Ord.
1654, 4-25-2000)
3-5-5-4: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
No vehicle shall be licensed as a taxicab until the owner thereof has first
furnished satisfactory evidence that the vehicle is covered for the period of
the license by bodily injury liability insurance in the amount of twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each person, and fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) for each accident, and property damage insurance in the amount of
fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for each accident. (1977 Code)
3-5-5-5: APPLICATION:
Written applications for taxicab permits must be filed at the city offices and
they shall set forth the owner of the vehicle, the make and model of the
vehicle, and the motor number thereof. (1977 Code)
3-5-5-6: FEE:
The fee for subject license shall be as set forth heretofore in the "schedule
of fees 1 ". (1977 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2 of this title.
3-5-5-7: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
The license for any taxicab is not assignable or transferable, except that the
owner may use the license on a replacement vehicle after making written
application for such transfer, and after the chief of police or such other
official as the city council may direct, has inspected the replacement vehicle
to see that the same complies with all the provisions of this chapter. (1977
Code)
3-5-5-8: NAME ON VEHICLE:
All taxicabs licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall have the name
of the owner or company operating such taxicab, plainly printed on the side of
the vehicle. (1977 Code)
3-5-5-9: CITY LICENSE NUMBER, CARD:
Upon a license being granted, there shall be delivered to the licensee a card
of such size and form as may be determined by the chief of police. Such card
shall contain the official city license number of the taxicab and shall be
signed by the chief of police.
The license card above referred to shall be affixed in a place in the said
taxicab so that same is visible to any passenger. (1977 Code)
3-5-5-10: LIST OF DRIVERS:
Every owner of a taxicab shall furnish to the chief of police a certified list
of all the drivers of its taxicab or taxicabs. (1977 Code)
3-5-5-11: LICENSE REVOCATION:
A taxicab license shall be revoked by the chief of police when he has held a
hearing, after first giving ten (10) days' notice thereof, to the holder of the
license, and at such hearing has found that the holder of the license is
violating any of the provisions of this chapter or the traffic laws of the
state. (1977 Code)
3-5-5-12: DRIVER QUALIFICATIONS:
An applicant for a taxicab driver's license must be in sound physical
condition, possess good eyesight, good hearing, must be a licensed driver under
the laws of the state, be of sound mind, show that he is familiar with the
traffic laws of the state, and the traffic ordinances of the city, and shall
show to the satisfaction of the chief of police that he can properly and safely
handle a vehicle under crowded traffic conditions. Applicant must not have been
convicted of a crime rendering him infamous, and cannot be addicted to the use
of alcohol or drugs. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1654, 4-25-2000)
3-5-5-13: OPERATOR'S LICENSE:
   (A)   Taxicab drivers' licenses shall be issued by the chief of police after
he has been furnished with a written application which shows to the
satisfaction of the chief of police that the requirements as set forth in this
chapter have been met and complied with by the applicant. Provided that if any
applicant is refused a license to drive a taxicab by the chief of police, the
applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of police to the city
council for the issuance of a license. (1977 Code)
   (B)   (Rep. by Ord. 1303, 10-14-1986)
   (C)   A taxicab driver's license shall be revoked by the chief of police
when he has held a hearing, after having first given ten (10) days' notice
thereof, and at such hearing he finds the driver's Illinois driver's license
has expired, or that it has been suspended or revoked by the state of Illinois,
or that the driver is addicted to the use of alcohol or drugs. (Ord. 1654, 4-
25-2000)
3-5-5-14: PARKING SPACES:
Any person shall be entitled to parking stands or spaces in the city where
taxicabs may sit while awaiting calls or passengers. Such parking spaces shall
be limited to two (2) parking spaces, which parking spaces will be assigned by
the city council. No other space may be used for stands other than those
assigned by the city council. (1977 Code)
3-5-6: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
3-5-6-1: MODEL CODE ADOPTED:
That certain act of the state of Illinois entitled "an act to provide for,
license and regulate mobile homes and mobile home parks" being in particular
210 Illinois Compiled Statutes 115/1 et seq., as amended, is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as the regulations of the city for mobile homes and
mobile home parks. (1977 Code)
3-5-6-2: FEE:
The fee for subject license shall be as set forth heretofore in "schedule of
fees 1 ". (1977 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2 of this title.
3-5-7: GARAGE SALES:
3-5-7-1: FREQUENCY AND DURATION:
No person or entity shall have or cause to have more than three (3) garage
sales per calendar year. No garage sale may exceed three (3) consecutive days
in duration. (Ord. 1817, 10-11-2005)
3-5-8: RAFFLES:
3-5-8-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct a raffle without having first obtained a license
therefor pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1208, 11-11-1980)
3-5-8-2: ELIGIBILITY:
Raffle licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor,
business, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that operate
without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously
for a period of five (5) years immediately before application for a license and
which have had during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide membership
engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a nonprofit fundraising
organization that the licensing authority determines is organized for the sole
purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group
of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an
illness, disability, accident or disaster. (Ord. 1347, 2-21-1989)
3-5-8-3: INELIGIBILITY:
The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter.
   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character.
   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection (A),
(B) or (C) of this section has a proprietary, equitable, or credit interest, or
in which such a person is active or employed.
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B) or
(C) of this section is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated
or not.
   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B) or
(C) of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
"raffle" as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 1208, 11-11-1980)
3-5-8-4: DEFINITIONS:
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who
have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civic
interest of the community.
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an
indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide
systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to
schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and
intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported schools.
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: Gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums
expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating expenses
incurred operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for
profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery conducted by an organization licensed hereunder, in
which the player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element
of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or
connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be
determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 1208, 11-11-1980; amd. Ord. 1347, 2-21-1989)
3-5-8-5: LICENSES:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall:
   (A)   Be valid for one raffle only.
   (B)   Be sold only within the corporate limits of the city.
   (C)   Limit aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded in a
single raffle to two hundred thousand dollars ($200.000).
   (D)   Limit maximum retail value of each prize awarded in a single raffle to
two hundred thousand dollars ($200.000).
   (E)   Limit the maximum price charged for each raffle ticket or chance
issued or sold to one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (F)   Limit the maximum number of days during which raffle tickets or
chances may be issued or sold to one hundred eighty (180) days.
   (G)   The cost payable in cash in advance when said license is issued shall
be:
      1.   Five dollars ($5.00) if aggregate value of prize(s) is five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) or under.
      2.   Fifteen dollars ($15.00) if aggregate value of prize(s) is between
five thousand one dollars ($5,001.00) to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
      3.   Twenty five dollars ($25.00) if aggregate value of prize(s) is over
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
   (H)   Be suspended or revoked for any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1661,
10-24-2000; amd. Ord. 2356, 6-11-2024)
3-5-8-6: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses herein shall be made in writing to the city clerk
and must include the following:
   (A)   The name of the not for profit organization requesting the license.
   (B)   A sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the
prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and
secretary of that organization.
   (C)   The name of the raffle manager, the amount of his or her bond and the
name and address of the bonding company.
   (D)   The area or areas within the city in which raffle tickets or chances
will be sold or issued.
   (E)   The time period during which raffle tickets or chances will be sold or
issued.
   (F)   The day and hour winning tickets or chances will be determined.
   (G)   The address of the location or locations at which winning tickets or
chances will be determined.
   (H)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded in the
raffle to be conducted.
   (I)   The maximum retail value of each prize.
   (J)   The price of each ticket or chance.
   (K)   The number of days tickets or chances will be sold. (Ord. 1208, 11-11-
1980)
3-5-8-7: FORMS AND SIGNATURES:
Forms for all licenses, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept
on file by the city clerk. Each license shall bear the signature of the mayor
and the city clerk. (Ord. 1208, 11-11-1980)
3-5-8-8: INVESTIGATION:
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a raffle license the city clerk
shall within forty eight (48) hours of such receipt refer the application to
the chief of police for investigation.
   (B)   The chief of police shall investigate the application and make a
report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving
such application and file same with the city clerk. (Ord. 1208, 11-11-1980)
   (C)   Upon receipt of said report the city clerk shall present said report,
together with the application, to the mayor for evaluation and determination.
(Ord. 1363, 10-10-1989)
3-5-8-9: MAYOR ACTION:
   (A)   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and the investigative report, the mayor shall determine that the
matters concerning the application are unsatisfactory, he shall deny the
application, indicating the reasons therefor. The mayor shall promptly notify
the applicant that its application is not approved, and that no license will be
issued.
   (B)   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and the investigative report, the mayor shall determine that the
matters concerning the application are satisfactory, he shall approve the
application. The mayor shall promptly notify the applicant that its application
is approved, and the license may be issued.
   (C)   The mayor shall act upon a license application within thirty (30) days
from the date of the application. (Ord. 1363, 10-10-1989)
3-5-8-10: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   (B)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed
under this act.
   (E)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
   (F)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. (Ord. 1208, 11-11-1980)
3-5-8-11: RAFFLES MANAGER'S BOND:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a
single raffles manager designated by the organization licensed. The manager
shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in
favor of the organization conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of
his duties. Said bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to
the city council not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation.
(Ord. 1208, 11-11-1980)
The city may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the
license issued to an organization provided that a license containing such
waiver provision be granted only by unanimous vote of the members of the
licensed organization. (Ord. 1347, 2-21-1989)
3-5-8-12: RECORDS:
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state
and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records
of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who
accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to
its membership, and to the city council, its gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from raffles and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required
in this section.
   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 1208, 11-11-1980)
CHAPTER 6
REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: Certificate Of Registration
3-6-3: Application For Certificate Of Registration
3-6-4: Issuance And Revocation Of Certificate
3-6-5: Soliciting Without Certificate Of Registration Prohibited
3-6-6: Time Limit On Soliciting
3-6-7: Exemptions
3-6-8: Street Solicitation
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words as used herein shall be
construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
RESIDENCE: Shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied for
residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of
building or structure.
SOLICITOR: Shall mean and include any person who engages in one or more of the
following activities within the city:
(A) Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise,
foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description whatever, for any
kind of consideration whatever.
(B) Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of
insurance of any type, kind or character.
(C) Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication.
(D) Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other
valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization, corporation or project. (1977 Code)
3-6-2: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
Every "solicitor" as herein defined is hereby required to make written
application for a certificate of registration as hereinafter provided. (1977
Code)
3-6-3: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form
provided by the chief of police and filed in the police department. The
applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the
application:
   (A)   Name of applicant and his current residence address.
   (B)   Social security number.
   (C)   Business address, if other than residence address.
   (D)   Age of applicant and date and place of birth.
   (E)   Physical description of the applicant.
   (F)   Name and address of the person, firm, corporation or organization by
whom the applicant is employed or represents.
   (G)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter for
which the applicant will solicit.
   (H)   Has a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under this
chapter ever been revoked, suspended or canceled?
   (I)   Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or the ordinance of any other municipality
regulating soliciting?
   (J)   Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a felony?
   (K)   Description and registration of the motor vehicle that the applicant
is using.
   (L)   Such other information and proof of identification as the chief of
police may require.
The chief of police shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of
every application received and acted upon together with all other information
and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of registration issued under
the provisions of this chapter, and of the denial of applications.
No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been
convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois
or any other state or federal law of the United States within five (5) years of
the date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; nor to any person whose
certificate of registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as
herein provided. (1977 Code)
3-6-4: ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
The chief of police, after consideration of the application and all information
obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the applicant does not
possess the qualifications for such certificate as herein required, or that the
issuance of a certificate of registration to the applicant would not be in
accord with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Endorsement shall be made
by the chief of police upon the application of the denial of the application.
When the applicant is found to be fully qualified and payment of the
registration fee is made to the city clerk, the certificate of registration
shall be issued forthwith.
Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the chief
of police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter or has made a false material statement in the
application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a
certificate of registration under the terms of this chapter. Immediately upon
such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police
to the holder of the certificate in person or by certified U.S. mail addressed
to the applicant at his residence or business address set forth in the
application.
Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of registration
shall become null and void.
The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof. (1977
Code)
3-6-5: SOLICITING WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION PROHIBITED:
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for anyone to engage in
soliciting without a valid certificate of registration in his possession. Such
certificate of registration shall be presented by the solicitor upon demand to
any police officer or occupant of the premises whereon the soliciting occurs
for examination. The certificate of registration is valid only for the person
to whom it is issued. (1977 Code)
3-6-6: TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING:
A certificate of registration for a solicitor shall expire at nine o'clock (9:
00) P.M. on the same day that it is issued. It shall be unlawful to engage in
soliciting prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
of any weekday or at any time on a Sunday or on a holiday. (1977 Code)
3-6-7: EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   Prior Invitation: Any person who, for the purpose of selling or taking
orders for the sale of merchandise or services, has been previously invited by
the occupant of a residence to call thereon.
   (B)   Farmers: Any person whose principal occupation is that of a farmer,
who sells the produce of his own farm, vineyard, orchard or garden, provided he
does not obstruct streets, sidewalks or other public places or solicit in any
public park.
   (C)   Newspaper Vendors: Any person who, on behalf of the publisher of any
newspaper of general circulation within the city, solicits to sell such
newspapers. (1977 Code)
3-6-8: STREET SOLICITATION:
   (A)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except with express written
authority by the city.
Written application for street solicitation shall be requested on a form to be
provided by the city which shall require the applicant to warrant that:
      1.   The solicitation is on behalf of a soliciting agency registered with
the attorney general as a charitable organization as provided by "an act to
regulate solicitation and collection of funds for charitable purposes" approved
January 26, 1963, and as amended;
      2.   The soliciting agency is part of a statewide fundraising activity;
      3.   The soliciting agency will be liable for any injuries to any person
or property during the solicitation which is causally related to an act of
ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent;
      4.   The soliciting agency will require that all parties soliciting be
sixteen (16) years of age or more and wear a high visibility vest;
      5.   The soliciting agency will indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
city of Savanna from any injury to persons or property occurring during the
solicitation which is causally related to the soliciting activity. (Ord. 1761,
3-23-2004)
CHAPTER 7
LIQUOR REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: License Required
3-7-3: Application
3-7-4: Restriction On Issuance Or Renewal Of Licenses
3-7-5: Term Of License
3-7-6: Examination, Local License
3-7-7: Classification And Fees
3-7-8: Limitation Of Licenses
3-7-9: Payment And Disposition Of Fees
3-7-10: Alcohol Sellers And Servers Education Required
3-7-11: Reissue
3-7-12: Records
3-7-13: Transfer Of License
3-7-14: Change Of Location
3-7-15: Renewal Of License
3-7-16: Employees
3-7-17: Local Restrictions
3-7-18: Stores Selling School Supplies, Lunches
3-7-19: Access From Licensed Premises To Dwelling Quarters
3-7-20: Adult Entertainment
3-7-21: Inspections
3-7-22: Access
3-7-23: Times Of Sales; Closing Hours
3-7-24: Minors
3-7-25: Warning Signs Required
3-7-26: Unsealed Container
3-7-27: Consumption On Licensed Premises
3-7-28: Gambling
3-7-29: Disorderly House
3-7-30: Peddling
3-7-31: Sanitary Conditions
3-7-32: Revocation, Suspension, Fines
3-7-33: Violation Of State Laws
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this
chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being; however, the provisions of
this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured
alcohol, produced in accordance with acts of Congress, nor to any liquid or
solid containing one- half of one percent (0.5%) or less of alcohol by volume.
BOWLING ALLEY: Every establishment or building, or part of an establishment or
building, as the case may be, wherein the game of bowling, played with
composition balls and ten (10) pins, is played.
CITY: The City of Savanna, Carroll County, Illinois, including all the
territory bounded by the limits of the said City.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this State, not for pecuniary
profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members
through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or
space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants
and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members
and their guests; provided, that such club files with the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner of the City at the time of its application for license under this
chapter, the list required under the classification of Class B licenses; and
provided further that the affairs and management of such club are conducted by
a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members
at their annual meeting, and that no member or any officer, agent or employee
of the club is paid or directly or indirectly receives in the form of salary or
other compensation any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic
liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by
members, beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any
annual meeting by the members or by a board of directors or other governing
body out of the general revenue of the club.
HOTEL: Any building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed
and where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and
guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty five (25)
or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests, and
having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests,
such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same
building or buildings in connection therewith and such building or buildings,
structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity.
LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER: The mayor of the city and the person charged
with the administration of the appropriate provisions of the Illinois liquor
control act and of such ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor
as may be enacted. The mayor may appoint a person or persons to assist him in
exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties set forth in the
Illinois liquor control act and in this chapter.
PREMISES: Shall generally be construed as the structure upon which the business
is housed as well as appurtenances thereto. Enclosed porches, fences, decks and
private grounds and facilities surrounding said structure may also be
considered the appurtenances, provided the city council grants licensee express
approval for use of same.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and
regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity, and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
RETAIL SALE: The sale for use or consumption, and not for resale. (Ord. 2090,
3-25-2014)
3-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall sell or offer for sale at retail in the city any alcoholic
liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or in violation of the
terms of such license, or in violation of this chapter.
No person, firm or corporation shall receive a liquor license, or the renewal
of a liquor license, unless the premises upon which the liquor is sold complies
with the building regulations of title 4 of this code and the fire regulations
of title 5 of this code. The city fire marshal, building official and a
licensed plumber shall inspect the premises to determine compliance with this
section prior to the issuance of the license and within ninety (90) days prior
to the renewal thereof. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-3: APPLICATION:
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the local liquor control
commissioner, in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a
duly authorized agent thereof if a club or corporation, verified by oath or
affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and information:
   (A)   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the objects for which
organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a
majority interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or
his nominee, the name and address of such person.
   (B)   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen the time and place of his naturalization.
   (C)   The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
   (D)   The length of time said applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was
issued.
   (E)   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made.
   (F)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license.
   (G)   A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or
other license on premises other than described in this application, and the
disposition of such application.
   (H)   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is
not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, laws of this State or the provisions of this Code.
   (I)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by
the Federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
   (J)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
State of Illinois, or of the United States, or any of the provisions of this
Code in the conduct of his place of business. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
   (K)   A statement that the applicant authorizes a background check to be
conducted on the applicant. First time applicants must pay a seventy five
dollar ($75.00) fee for a background check. Fingerprints must be provided by
going to a professional live-scan (electronic) fingerprinting service, approved
by the City to be processed. Background checks are completed by the State of
Illinois police. This process can take up to eight (8) weeks to complete. Once
the results of the background checks are received from the State of Illinois
police, the liquor license application will be approved/denied. All fees must
be paid prior to review of the application. (Ord. 2227, 7-24-2018)
3-7-4: RESTRICTION ON ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL OF LICENSES:
No such liquor license shall be issued or reissued to:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the City.
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State
law, unless the commission determines that such person has been sufficiently
rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set forth
in such person’s application and the commission’s investigation. The burden of
proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant.
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of keeping a place of prostitution or
keeping a place of juvenile prostitution, promoting prostitution that involves
keeping a place of prostitution, or promoting juvenile prostitution that
involves keeping a place of juvenile prostitution.
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   (G)   A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause.
   (H)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   (I)   A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited
partnership thereof, owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate
limited partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive
a license hereunder; and unless at least one member owning more than five
percent (5%) of the aggregate limited partner interest in such copartnership is
a resident of the City.
   (J)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
political subdivision.
   (K)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   (L)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who
shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation.
   (M)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is issued.
   (N)   Any law enforcing public official, any Mayor or member of the City
Council and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or
indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor,
except that a license may be granted to any Alderman, or the Mayor in relation
to premises that are located within Savanna if: 1) the sale of alcoholic liquor
pursuant to the license is incidental to the selling of food, 2) the issuance
of the license is approved by the State Commission, 3) the issuance of the
license is in accordance with all applicable local ordinances in effect where
the premises are located, and 4) the official granted a license does not vote
on alcoholic liquor issues pending before the board or Council to which the
license holder is elected and if a license is granted to the Mayor he or she
has appointed another to serve as Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (O)   Any person, firm or corporation not eligible for a State liquor
dealer’s license.
   (P)   Any person, firm or corporation who is delinquent in the payment of
any money due the City.
   (Q)   In the instance of a Class A, B or C license, to any person, firm or
corporation unless the premises upon which alcoholic beverages are to be served
and kept comply with the building regulations of title 4 of this Code and the
fire regulations of title 5 of this Code. The City Fire Marshal, the building
official and a licensed plumber shall inspect the premises to determine
compliance with this section prior to the issuance of the license and within
one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the renewal thereof. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-
2014; amd. Ord. 2231, 8-14-2018)
3-7-5: TERM OF LICENSE:
Each license issued hereunder shall terminate on April 30 following the
issuance thereof. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-6: EXAMINATION, LOCAL LICENSE:
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause
to be examined, under oath, any application for a local license or for a
renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension
has been served as provided by statute, and to examine or cause to be examined,
the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and
take proof for his information in the performance of his duties, and for such
purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this State.
For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on
his behalf, as provided by statute. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-7: CLASSIFICATION AND FEES:
Liquor licenses issued by the City shall be and they hereby are divided into
the following classes:
   (A)   Class A Licenses: Class A licenses shall authorize the retail sale on
the premises specified in such license of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises, as well as other retail sales of such liquor. The annual fee for
such license shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). For the
fiscal year beginning May 1, 2020 through April 30, 2021, Class A license fees
shall be reduced to seven-hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (B)   Class B Licenses: Class B licenses shall authorize the retail sale by
a club, on premises specified in such license, of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises, as well as other retail sales of such liquor by a
club; but such license shall not authorize the sale of alcoholic liquors to
anyone other than a member of such club or a bona fide guest of any member of
such club. The annual fee for such license shall be seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). With the application for a Class B license, there shall be filed a
true and complete list, in duplicate, containing all the names and addresses of
the members of the club, which list shall be supplemented every four (4) months
during the term of the license, with the names of new members elected to the
club. For the fiscal year beginning May 1, 2020 through April 30, 2021, Class B
license fees shall be reduced to three-hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00).
   No Class B license shall be issued until the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner has satisfied himself that the club applying for the license was
actually and in fact organized for some purpose or object other than the sale
or consumption of alcoholic liquor.
   (C)   Class C Licenses: Class C licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine in connection with the operation of an established food serving
facility during times when food is dispensed for consumption upon the premises,
and such sales may be made only:
      1.   With food served to the customer, and
      2.   At a dining table and not across a bar.
The annual fee for such license shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (D)   Class D Licenses: Class D licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
only beer and wine for consumption off the premises. The annual fee for such
license shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (E)   Class E Licenses: Class E licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
packaged alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises. The annual fee for
such license shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
   (F)   Class F Licenses: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the
power to issue a temporary permit for the sale or delivery of beer and wine
only, to be consumed at a banquet, picnic, fair or similar private or public
assembly where food or drink is sold, served or dispensed on specifically
designated enclosed or fenced off private premises or in a specifically
designated building belonging to or under the control of the City.
Said premises or building shall be fully and clearly defined in the application
for a Class F license and such licensed premises or building shall be clearly
marked and enclosed so that the general public and law enforcement officers can
easily and without difficulty determine the limits of the licensed area. All
beer and wine must be consumed within the limits of the licensed area and shall
be dispensed by disposable plastic or paper cups, and adequate and suitable
containers shall be provided for disposal of all cups.
Such temporary permit shall be issued only to a legally recognized club,
society, fraternal, charitable, benevolent organization, not for pecuniary
profit, or an existing liquor license holder and shall be for a specified
period of not more than three (3) consecutive days. Not more than one temporary
permit shall be granted to any one organization in any one period of thirty
(30) days.
Class F licenses shall be issued to an applicant meeting the qualifications
stated above and only in connection with a fair, carnival, street dance,
bazaar, picnic, reception, outing or similar event. Such events shall be the
principal reason for the gathering, and the consumption of beer and wine shall
be incidental thereto.
Each Class F license in a specifically designated building belonging to or
under the control of the City shall provide dramshop liability in maximum
insurance coverage limits so as to save harmless the City from all financial
loss, damage or harm.
All regulations that are part of this chapter shall apply in the same manner
and degree as they apply to all other classes of licenses described herein.
The permit fee for such license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each day the
license is in force.
   (G)   Class G Licenses: Class G licenses shall authorize the consumption of
beer and wine which has been brought onto the premises of a business operating
as a public accommodation as defined in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-42-
10.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code by a patron or patrons for their personal
consumption while being served a meal in said establishment. The annual license
fee for a Class G license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      1.   Only beer and wine are allowed to be consumed on the premises of the
holder of a Class G license;
      2.   The license holder is only allowed to provide glasses, ice and an
ice holder for the patrons;
      3.   The license holder, its agents, and/or its employees may open, but
shall be prohibited from serving, pouring, and/or storing any wine or beer for
its patrons;
      4.   It shall be unlawful for the license holder, its agents and/or its
employees to permit any patron to leave the licensed premises with open wine or
beer, and the license holder shall require the patrons who leave with such of
their own beer and wine that has not been consumed do so only in sealed or
unopened containers in compliance with Illinois law;
      5.   No consumption of wine or beer shall be permitted on the premises
unless it is served as a complement to the sale of food; or it is served as a
complement of food or ancillary to another activity whose primary purpose is
not the consumption of alcohol;
      6.   A certificate of insurance, reflecting coverage for general
liability purposes in such minimum amounts as the Liquor Commissioner may deem
necessary from time to time, shall be presented to the City by the applicant
for the Class G establishment and the City shall be named as an additional
insured on the license holder's insurance. Further, the license holder shall
agree in writing to save and hold harmless the City's agents, employees,
elected and appointed officials from any and all claims or causes of action
arising out of the consumption of alcoholic liquor on the premises as a
condition of the license;
      7.   The hours during which a Class G license holder may permit
consumption of beer and wine on its premises shall conform identically to the
hours set forth in section
3-7-23 of this chapter.
All licenses issued hereunder shall be designated by classification letter
herein provided. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014; amd. Ord. 2270, 5-26-2020)
3-7-8: LIMITATION OF LICENSES:
There shall be no limitation of liquor licenses issued by the City. The Liquor
Control Commission shall have the power to issue liquor licenses to any person
who fully qualifies under the requirements of this chapter. Application for
liquor licenses must meet the requirements of title 10 of this Code. (Ord.
2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-9: PAYMENT AND DISPOSITION OF FEES:
All license fees may be paid in two (2) installments, but each installment
shall be paid semiannually in advance. The fee to be paid shall be reduced in
proration to the full calendar months which have expired in the license year
prior to issuing such license. All such fees shall be paid to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner of the City, who shall forthwith deliver the same to the
City Treasurer. No license fee shall be refunded, except as provided under
section
3-7-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-10: ALCOHOL SELLERS AND SERVERS EDUCATION REQUIRED:
   (A)   Sellers and servers of alcoholic beverages must complete a course of
instruction approved by the Illinois Liquor Commission on the effects of
alcohol and drug abuse and which teaches how to identify and/or intervene so as
to reduce the incidence of alcohol misuse amongst patrons.
   (B)   All liquor licenses sought on or after May 1, 2018 whether original or
renewal shall be accompanied by proof of completion of the State Certified
Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training Program (BASSET)
training certification.
   (C)   For each liquor establishment, a minimum of two (2) employees or all
employees, whichever is less, must be "BASSET" certified.
   (D)   The licensee shall provide documentation when requested showing that
BASSET information was provided to all employees serving alcohol.
   (E)   A photocopy of the certificates of completion of the BASSET program
and the BASSET materials provided to employees shall be on file with the City
Police Department and maintained on the premises of the licensee.
   (F)   BASSET training certification cards are to be carried on the person
certified or exhibited in the establishment and produced for inspection by the
licensing authority when requested by a City police officer or the Liquor
Commissioner.
   (G)   The Liquor Commissioner may, in their sole discretion, extend the time
for completion of the BASSET training up to ninety (90) days. Said extension
shall only be for good cause and on a case by case basis. Any request for
extension shall be in writing.
   (H)   This section shall apply to all liquor license holders including those
who hold a temporary or special permit. (Ord. 2220, 3-27-2018)
3-7-11: REISSUE:
The Local Liquor Control Commission shall have the power of reissuing a
license. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-12: RECORDS:
The Comptroller or City Clerk shall keep a complete record of all such licenses
issued and shall furnish the Chief of Police with a copy thereof; upon
revocation or suspension of any license, the Comptroller or City Clerk shall
immediately give written notice thereof to the Chief of Police. (Ord. 2090, 3-
25-2014)
3-7-13: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year
after issuance, unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided, and shall
not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or
execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or
involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license
shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall
cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that executors or administrators
of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or
bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may
continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the
appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent
or bankrupt licensee after the death of said decedent, or such insolvency or
bankruptcy, until the expiration of such license but not longer than six (6)
months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund
shall be made of that portion of the license fee paid for any period in which
the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license, in
accordance with the provisions of this section. A licensee may renew his
license at the expiration thereof, provided he is then qualified to receive a
license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought is suitable
for such purposes; and, provided further, that the renewal privilege herein
provided for shall not be construed as a vested right. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-14: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in
the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be
changed only when, and upon the written permit to make such change issued by
the Mayor. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new
location is in compliance with the provisions and regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-15: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided that he
is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal
license is sought is suitable for such purpose; provided further, that the
renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right
which shall in any case prevent the local liquor control commissioner from
decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within his jurisdiction.
The local liquor control commission may refer a renewal license to the council
for approval if previous license(s) have been suspended or revoked for any
violation(s) of this chapter or for any violation(s) of any state law
pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-16: EMPLOYEES:
No persons under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be employed in or allowed
to work in and about any premises in which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail
during the hours alcoholic liquor is sold in said premises. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-
2014)
3-7-17: LOCAL RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school, hospital, home for aged
or indigent persons, or for veterans, their wives or children or any military
or naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels
offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food
shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
business carried on, nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor on the premises within one hundred feet (100') of a church
where such church has been established within one hundred feet (100') since the
issuance of the original license. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-18: STORES SELLING SCHOOL SUPPLIES, LUNCHES:
No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of
customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted
consists of schoolbooks, school supplies, lunches, food or drinks for such
minors. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-19: ACCESS FROM LICENSED PREMISES TO DWELLING QUARTERS:
Except in case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail
upon any premises which has any access which leads from such premises to any
other portion of the same building or structure used for dwelling or lodging
purposes and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for the use by
the public. This provision shall not prevent any connection between such
premises and such other portion of the building or structure which is used only
by the licensee, his family and personal guests. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-20: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT:
   (A)   Definitions:
    NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the
top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   PARTIAL NUDITY: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, buttocks, pubic region and nipple of the female breast.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT: Any sexual act as defined in Illinois criminal code 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-0.1 including:
1. Any act of sexual intercourse, actual or simulated.
2. Lewd exhibitions of the genitals.
3. Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or unclothed
pubic area or buttocks of a human male or female, or the breast of the female
in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
   (B)   Improper Entertainment And Exhibitions At Establishments Holding A
Savanna Liquor License:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, or any licensee or
manager or agent of the licensee to permit an employee entertainer either
professional or amateur or patron, to be on the premises of an establishment
where alcoholic beverages are sold in a state of nudity or partial nudity and
it shall be unlawful to engage in any live act, demonstration, dance or
exhibition on the licensed premises in a nude or partially nude condition, or
engage in or simulate any sexual conduct.
      2.   Entertainment, including personal appearances of amateur or
professional entertainers, shall be prohibited on all premises wherein
alcoholic beverages are sold. Provided, however, that nothing contained herein
shall prohibit amateur or professional singing or theatrical performances, the
use of musical instruments by amateur or professional entertainers, the use of
a radio, electrical transcribing machine, phonograph, or television, or patron
dancing.
      3.   The showing of motion pictures, videotapes, videodisks and the like
that show nudity, partial nudity and sexual conduct shall be prohibited on all
premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-21: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the liquor commissioner, or anyone whom he may
designate, and all of them are hereby authorized and empowered from time to
time, to inspect and examine all premises, wherein a business is licensed
hereunder, to ascertain whether the provisions of this code relating to the
carrying on of such premises are being complied with. All such premises shall
be open to inspection by the police, and local liquor control commissioner, at
all reasonable times, and at all times when the premises is open to the public
for business purposes. It shall be the duty of every licensee hereunder, when
required, to furnish samples of any carbonated, fruit or extract drinks or
beverages, or any malted, cereal, vinous, distilled or synthetic intoxicating
and nonintoxicating beverage and/or water, glasses and sterilization compound
for examination and analysis, and a record of such examination or analysis
shall be made and kept on file. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-22: ACCESS:
It shall be unlawful to refuse to grant admittance to the premises for which a
license has been issued at any time upon the verbal request of any police
officer, and the liquor commissioner, for the purpose of making an inspection
of such premises, or any part hereof. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-23: TIMES OF SALES; CLOSING HOURS:
   (A)   No person shall sell or offer for sale, at retail, or give away, in or
upon any licensed premises, any liquor, except between the hours of six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. of any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and
Sunday and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. of the following morning; and except any
person selling or offering for sale, at retail, any alcoholic liquor in the
city may remain open until the hour of three o'clock (3:00) A.M. of the morning
of January 1 of each and every year.
   (B)   All premises on which alcoholic liquors are sold at retail must be
vacated by the public by the time specified in this section for cessation of
the selling of alcoholic liquors. No person shall allow the public to be on any
premises in which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the hours the
selling of alcoholic liquor is prohibited. Provided, however, that this
provision shall not apply to clubs, hotels, restaurants, food shops or other
places of business where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal
business carried on, and such establishments may be kept open for business
during such hours, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold to or consumed by the
public during such hours. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-24: MINORS:
   (A)   Persons Under The Age Of Twenty One Years; Sale, Gift Or Delivery
Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, male or female, under the age
of twenty one (21) years to purchase or obtain any alcoholic liquor in any
tavern or other place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold.
   (B)   Persons Underage; Purchase, Acceptance Or Possession By Prohibited: It
shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in the city where alcoholic
liquor is sold.
   (C)   Persons Under Age Of Twenty One Years; Consumption By Prohibited
Persons: No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall purchase,
obtain, possess, consume, sell, deliver or dispense alcoholic liquor unless
permitted to do so pursuant to 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5.
   (D)   Persons Under The Age Of Twenty One Years Prohibited: It shall be
unlawful for the holder of any license to allow any person under twenty one
(21) years of age to attend or loiter in or about the premises wherein
alcoholic liquor is sold by said licensee, when the sale of said alcoholic
liquor constitutes the principal business of the holder of said license.
   (E)   Persons Eighteen Years Of Age Or Over; Bartending, Grocery Checking
Permitted: Anyone eighteen (18) years of age or over can serve, mix or handle
alcoholic beverages of all kinds, including ringing up liquor sales at grocery
checkout counters.
   (F)   Violation: In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Liquor
Commissioner may suspend or revoke the retail liquor dealer's license for any
violation of this section. (Ord. 2168, 5-10-2016)
3-7-25: WARNING SIGNS REQUIRED:
In every tavern, or other place in the City where alcoholic liquor is sold,
there shall be displayed at all times, on the exterior of each entrance door, a
printed sign which shall be supplied by the State of Illinois and which shall
read substantially as follows:
   WARNING
You are subject to a fine not to exceed $1000.00 under the Official City Code
of Savanna if you misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing alcoholic
liquor.
Any person under 21 years of age who consumes alcoholic liquor is subject to a
fine not to exceed $1000.00.
(Ord. 2228, 7-24-2018)
3-7-26: UNSEALED CONTAINER:
   (A)   Unsealed Alcoholic Liquor; Motor Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for any
person to transport, carry or possess or have any alcoholic liquor in or upon
or about the passenger area of any motor vehicle, except in the original
package and with the seal unbroken.
   (B)   Unsealed Alcoholic Liquor Except On Licensed Premises: It shall be
unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic
liquor in or upon or about such public places, except in the original package
and with the seal unbroken. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-27: CONSUMPTION ON LICENSED PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor in any public
place other than in or upon premises operated for the sale of alcoholic liquor
under and pursuant to a license authorizing such sale from the City. (Ord.
2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-28: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling on any premises licensed to sell
alcoholic liquor, except the following activities may be permitted:
   (A)   Bingo: The game commonly known as "bingo", when conducted in
accordance with the Bingo License and Tax Act;
   (B)   Lotteries: Lotteries when conducted by the State in accordance with
the Illinois Lottery Law;
   (C)   Raffles: Raffles when conducted in accordance with the Raffles Act;
   (D)   Charitable Games: Charitable games when conducted in accordance with
the Charitable Games Act;
   (E)   Pull Tabs And Jar Games: Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under
the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act;
   (F)   Riverboat Gambling Games: Gambling games conducted on riverboats when
authorized by the Riverboat Gambling Act;
   (G)   Gaming In Accordance With The Illinois Gaming Act: Video gaming
terminal games located in licensed establishments, licensed truck stop
establishments, licensed fraternal establishments, or licensed veterans'
establishments when conducted in accordance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act.
(Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-29: DISORDERLY HOUSE:
Every licensee hereunder shall at all times keep a good and orderly house and
it shall be unlawful for any such licensee to keep a noisy, disorderly and ill
governed house in any place where such licensee is doing business under such
license. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-30: PEDDLING:
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the city. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-
2014)
3-7-31: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage
of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinance
regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for
human consumption. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-32: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION, FINES:
The local liquor control commission may suspend for not more than thirty (30)
days or revoke, for cause, any liquor dealer's license for any violation of any
state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, as provided by law; but
no such license shall be so revoked or suspended except after a public hearing
by the local liquor control commissioner with a three (3) day written notice to
the licensee affording said licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
In lieu of suspension or revocation, the local liquor control commission may
instead levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall
not exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation;
each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into the general corporate fund of the
city. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
3-7-33: VIOLATION OF STATE LAWS:
Any violation of the laws of the state pertaining to alcoholic liquor shall
constitute and be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2090, 3-25-2014)
CHAPTER 8
OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-8-1: Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-8-2: Service Occupation Tax
3-8-3: Use Tax
3-8-4: Hotel/Motel Tax
3-8-4-1: Title And Purpose
3-8-4-2: Definitions
3-8-4-3: Tax Imposed
3-8-4-4: Exemptions
3-8-4-5: Operator's Duties
3-8-4-6: Registration
3-8-4-7: Reporting And Remitting
3-8-4-8: Penalties And Interest
3-8-4-9: Failure To Collect And Report Tax; Determination Of Tax By City Clerk
3-8-4-10: Appeal
3-8-4-11: Records
3-8-4-12: Refunds
3-8-4-13: Actions To Collect
3-8-4-14: Penalty
3-8-5: Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
3-8-1: RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the city at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of section
8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code.
Every such person engaged in such business in the city shall file on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of
revenue required by section 3 of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons
engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to purchasers for
use or consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department
of revenue, the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (1977 Code)
3-8-2: SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost
price of all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either
in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an
incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of section 8-
11-5 of the Illinois municipal code.
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of this municipality shall file, on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of
revenue required by section 9 of the "service occupation tax act", approved
July 10, 1961, as amended.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department
of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (1977 Code)
3-8-3: USE TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with provisions of section 8-11-6 of the
Illinois municipal code upon the privilege of using in the municipality any
item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at
retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of
Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the
selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have the meaning
as defined in the use tax act, approved July 14, 1955.
Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. (1977 Code)
3-8-4: HOTEL/MOTEL TAX:
3-8-4-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
The tax imposed hereunder shall be known as the hotel/motel tax. The intent and
purpose is to impose a tax upon all persons engaged in the business of renting,
leasing or letting rooms in a hotel within the city, as defined in "the hotel
operators' occupation tax act", in accordance with section 8-3-14 of the
Illinois municipal code 1  and provide a means of collection thereof. (Ord.
1698, 8-13-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-3-14.
3-8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except where the content otherwise requires, the definitions given in this
section govern the construction of this section
3-8-4:
HOTEL: Any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or
intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel,
house, rooming house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house
trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any
room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes.
OPERATOR: The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of
owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other
capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of
any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be
deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same
duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this
chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be
considered to be compliance by both.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social
club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination
acting as a unit.
RENT: The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of
space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor
or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and service of
any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
TRANSIENT: Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by
reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a
period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of
calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall
be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired
unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant
providing for a longer period of occupancy, or the occupant has paid in advance
for over thirty (30) days' occupancy. In determining whether a person is a
transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to
the effective date of this chapter may be considered. (Ord. 1698, 8-13-2002)
3-8-4-3: TAX IMPOSED:
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and
shall pay a tax in the amount of five percent (5%) of the rent charged by the
operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which
is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient
shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If
the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be
paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s
ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid
to the operator of the hotel, the city clerk may require that such tax shall be
paid directly to the city clerk. Operator shall remit such tax within thirty
(30) days of the close of the month in which such tax accrued. Failure of the
operator to remit such tax shall lead to imposition of a fifteen dollar
($15.00) late charge per month it remains due. (Ord. 1698, 8-13-2002; amd. Ord.
2295, 9-14-2021)
3-8-4-4: EXEMPTIONS:
No tax shall be imposed upon:
   (A)   Any persons as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the
power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;
   (B)   Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business;
   (C)   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.
No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time
rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the
city clerk. (Ord. 1698, 8-13-2002)
3-8-4-5: OPERATOR'S DUTIES:
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this section
3-8-4 at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The
amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged,
and each transient shall receive receipt for payment from the operator. No
operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or
indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the
operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part
will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1698, 8-13-
2002)
3-8-4-6: REGISTRATION:
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter, or within
thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator
of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the
city clerk and obtain from her a "transient occupancy registration certificate"
to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said
certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
   (A)   The name of the operator;
   (B)   The address of the hotel;
   (C)   The date upon which the certificate was issued;
   (D)   This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the
person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform
Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the City Clerk for the
purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting
said tax to the City Clerk. This certificate does not authorize any person to
conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful
manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local
applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any
board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not
constitute a permit.
(Ord. 1698, 8-13-2002)
3-8-4-7: REPORTING AND REMITTING:
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close
of each calendar quarter, make a return to the city clerk, on forms provided by
her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax due for
transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the
tax due shall be remitted to the city clerk. Returns and payments are due
immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by
operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of
the city until payment thereof is made to the city clerk. (Ord. 1698, 8-13-
2002)
3-8-4-8: PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
   (A)   Original Delinquency: Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed
by this section
3-8-4 within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the
amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.
   (B)   Continued Delinquency: Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent
remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount
of the tax and the ten percent (10%) penalty first imposed.
   (C)   Fraud: If the nonpayment of any remittance due under this section is
due to fraud, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax
shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (A)
and (B) of this section.
   (D)   Interest: In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails
to remit any tax imposed by this section
3-8-4 shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or
fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties from the date
on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.
   (E)   Penalties Merged With Tax: Every penalty imposed and such interest as
accrued under the provisions of this section
3-8-4 shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 1698, 8-
13-2002)
3-8-4-9: FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX; DETERMINATION OF TAX BY CITY CLERK:
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within
the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any
portion thereof required by this chapter, the city clerk shall proceed in such
manner as she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base
her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the city clerk shall procure such facts
and information as she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of
any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or
refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, she shall
proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and
penalties provided for this section
3-8-4. In case such determination is made, the city clerk shall give a notice
of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the
United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at
his last known address. Such operation may within ten (10) days after the
serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the city clerk
for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a
hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and
penalties, if any, determined by the city clerk shall become final and
conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the
city clerk shall give not less than five (5) days written notice in the manner
prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a hearing at a time and
place fixed in said notice why said amount specified there should not be fixed
for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear
and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be
so fixed. After such hearing, the city clerk shall determine the proper tax to
be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the
manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax,
interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after
fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in section
3-8-4-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 1698, 8-13-2002)
3-8-4-10: APPEAL:
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk with respect to the
amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city
council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15)
days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council
shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall
give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The
findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon
the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing.
Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the
service of notice. (Ord. 1698, 8-13-2002)
3-8-4-11: RECORDS:
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to
the city of any tax imposed by this section
3-8-4 to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may
be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for
the collection of and payment to the city, which records the city clerk shall
have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 1698, 8-13-2002)
3-8-4-12: REFUNDS:
   (A)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid
or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the city under this section
3-8-4 it may be refunded as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section
provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the
specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the city clerk
within three (3) years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms
furnished by the city clerk.
   (B)   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously
or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the city clerk that the person from whom the tax has been
collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a
credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either
been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the
transient to the operator.
   (C)   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than
once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a
claim in the manner provided in subsection (A) of this section, but only when
the tax was paid by the transient directly to the city clerk, or when the
transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction
of the city clerk that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from
the operator who collected the tax.
   (D)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless
the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto. (Ord. 1698, 8-13-2002)
3-8-4-13: ACTIONS TO COLLECT:
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt by the transient to the city. Any such tax
collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a
debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owning money to the city
under the provisions of this section
3-8-4 shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery
of such amount. (Ord. 1698, 8-13-2002)
3-8-4-14: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section
3-8-4 shall be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1698, 8-13-2002)
3-8-5: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   Tax imposed; Rate.
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the City at the rate of 3% of
the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that business.
      2.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 8-11-22, of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22).
   (B)   Collection of tax by retailers.
      1.   The tax imposed by this Ordinance shall be remitted by such retailer
to the Illinois Department of Revenue (Department). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this Ordinance and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
      2.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this article. (Ord. 2254, 11-26-2019)
CHAPTER 9
TOBACCO REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-9-1: Legislative Findings And Declaration
3-9-2: Definitions
3-9-3: Prohibited Sales; Delivery; Signs
3-9-4: Purchase By Minors Prohibited
3-9-5: Possession By Minors Prohibited
3-9-6: Certain Free Distributions Prohibited
3-9-7: Vending Machines; Locking Devices
3-9-8: Smoking In Public Places, Places Of Employment, And Governmental
Vehicles Prohibited
3-9-9: Exemptions
3-9-10: Enforcement; Complaints
3-9-11: License Required
3-9-12: Application
3-9-13: Fee
3-9-14: Responsibility For Agents And Employees
3-9-15: Suspension; Revocation Of License; Fines, Costs
3-9-16: Use Of Premises After Revocation
3-9-17: Penalty
3-9-18: Injunction
3-9-19: Discrimination Prohibited
3-9-20: Severability
3-9-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND DECLARATION:
   (A)   The mayor and council expressly find and declare that:
      1.   Cigarette smoking and use of electronic smoking devices are
dangerous to human health;
      2.   There exists substantial scientific evidence that the use of tobacco
products and electronic smoking devices used to inhale nicotine, or other
substances, causes cancer, heart disease and various other medical disorders;
      3.   The surgeon general of the United States has declared that nicotine
addiction from tobacco is similar to addiction to cocaine, and is the most
widespread example of drug dependence in this country;
      4.   The director of the National Institute On Drug Abuse concluded that
the majority of the three hundred twenty thousand (320,000) Americans who die
each year from cigarette smoking became addicted to nicotine as adolescents
before the age of legal consent;
      5.   The National Institute On Drug Abuse found that cigarette smoking
precedes and may be predictive of adolescent illicit drug use; and
      6.   The present legislative scheme of prohibiting sales of tobacco
products to persons under the age of eighteen (18) has proven ineffective in
preventing such persons from using tobacco products.
      7.   Existing ordinances of the city are insufficient to address the
dangers caused by cigarette smoke in bars, restaurants, public buildings and
places of employment. It is therefore the legislative intent of the city
council to adopt in the form of a local ordinance the language of the smoke
free Illinois act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 82/10, as amended herein.
   (B)   The enactment of this chapter directly pertains to and is in
furtherance of the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the city.
(Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten percent
(10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises.
"Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges,
adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
DEPARTMENT: The department of public health.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE: An electronic device which can be used to deliver an
inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances, including any component, part,
or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. "Electronic
Smoking Device" includes any such electronic smoking device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an
electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic
hookah, or any other product name or descriptor.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct
or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or her
services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or
her services for a nonprofit entity.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink,
bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or
other events.
GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the
Illinois gaming board rules of the Illinois administrative code.
GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming
and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of
accruing business revenue.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of
diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists
within these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare
facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer
that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course
of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of
employment, including a minimum distance, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances,
exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area
where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and
class rooms; breakrooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private
residence or home based business, unless used to provide licensed childcare,
foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the premises,
is not a "place of employment", nor are enclosed laboratories, not open to the
public, in an accredited university or government facility where the activity
of smoking is exclusively conducted for the purpose of medical or scientific
health related research. Rulemaking authority to implement this amendatory Act
of the 95th General Assembly, if any, is conditioned on the rules being adopted
in accordance with all provisions of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act
and all rules and procedures of the Joint Committee on Administrative Rules;
any purported rule not so adopted, for whatever reason, is unauthorized.
PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit association that: a) has been in active and
continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to January 1, 2005,
whether incorporated or not, b) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building
or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, c) is
operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political,
benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and d) only sells
alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this
definition, "private club" means an organization that is managed by a board of
directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an
annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or both to govern its
activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal
income tax as a club under 26 USC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be
considered a private residence.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the
public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in
part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, or any other public
entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission. A "public
place" does not include a private residence unless the private residence is
used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, or other similar social
service care on the premises. A "public place" includes, but is not limited to,
hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments,
elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public
conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or
partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls,
convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all
government owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles
owned, leased, or operated by the state or state subcontract, healthcare
facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service
establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas,
public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars,
taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel,
resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation
that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.
RESTAURANT: (A) An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee
shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias,
that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and
(B) A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises
for serving elsewhere. "Restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty
percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of tobacco products or tobacco
paraphernalia. "Retail tobacco store" includes an enclosed workplace that
manufactures, imports, or distributes tobacco or tobacco products, when, as a
necessary and integral part of the process of making, manufacturing, importing,
or distributing a tobacco product for the eventual retail sale of that tobacco
or tobacco product, tobacco is heated, burned, or that tobacco or tobacco
product is heated, burned, or the involved business entity: (1) Maintains a
specially designated area or areas within the workplace for the purpose of the
heating, burning, smoking, or lighting activities, and does not create a
facility that permits smoking throughout; (2) Satisfies the eighty percent
(80%)requirement related to gross sales; and (3) Delivers tobacco products to
consumers, retail establishments, or other wholesale establishments as part of
its business. "Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco department or
section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type
of liquor, food, or restaurant license. Rulemaking authority to implement this
amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly, if any, is conditioned on the
rules being adopted in accordance with all provisions of the Illinois
Administrative Procedure Act and all rules and procedures of the Joint
Committee on Administrative Rules; any purported rule not so adopted, for
whatever reason, is unauthorized.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted, heated,
or ignited cigar, cigarette, cigarillo, pipe, hookah, Electrode Smoking Device,
or any plant product intended for human inhalation.
STATE AGENCY: All officers, boards, commissions and agencies created by the
Constitution, whether in the executive, legislative or judicial branch, but
other than the circuit court; all officers, departments, boards, commissions,
agencies, institutions, authorities, universities, bodies politic and corporate
of the state; and administrative units or corporate outgrowths of the state
government which are created by or pursuant to statute, other than units of
local government and their officers, school districts and boards of election
commissioners; all administrative units and corporate outgrowths of the above
and as may be created by executive order of the governor.
TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA: Any item designed for the consumption, use, or
preparation of tobacco products.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: (1) Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or
nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated,
chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any
other means, including, but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, little cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff; and (2) Any electronic device that
delivers nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the device,
including, but not limited to an electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah;
(3) Notwithstanding any provision of subsections (1) and (2) to the contrary,
"tobacco product" includes any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco
product, whether or not sold separately. "Tobacco product" does not include any
product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic
purposes where such product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved
purpose.
UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Has the meaning ascribed to it in section 1 of
article VII of the Illinois constitution of 1970.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self- service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
tobacco products. (Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-3: PROHIBITED SALES; DELIVERY; SIGNS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell,
offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products to any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years.
   (B)   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein
shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products
for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
   WARNING
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW.
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said
letters to be at least one inch (1") in height. (Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009; amd.
Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-4: PURCHASE BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
purchase tobacco products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or use any
false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products.
(Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-5: POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
possess any tobacco products; provided that the possession by a person under
the age of eighteen (18) years under the direct supervision of the parent or
guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall
not be prohibited. In addition, possession is not an offense if the person
under eighteen (18) years of age was in possession of an unopened container(s)
of cigarettes or other tobacco product while performing their specified duties
at their place of employment. (Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-6: CERTAIN FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling
or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco products, or any
employee or agent of any such licensee or person, in the course of such
licensee's or person's business, to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco
products free of charge to any person on any right of way, park, playground or
other property owned by the city, any school district, any park district or any
public library. (Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-7: VENDING MACHINES; LOCKING DEVICES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give
away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or
delivering tobacco products by use of a vending machine, unless such vending
machine is equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking device
controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the
age of eighteen (18) years.
   (B)   Any premises where access by persons under the age of eighteen (18)
years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not
permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of
business located at such premises, shall be exempt from the requirements of
subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-
2018)
3-9-8: SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES, PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT, AND GOVERNMENTAL
VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
No person shall smoke in a public place or in any place of employment or within
fifteen feet (15') of any entrance to a public place or place of employment. No
person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the state or a
political subdivision of the state. An owner shall reasonably assure that
smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless
specifically exempted by section
3-9-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-9: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this act, smoking is allowed in the
following areas:
   (A)   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a
childcare, adult daycare, or healthcare facility or any other home based
business open to the public.
   (B)   Retail tobacco stores as defined herein. Any retail tobacco store that
begins operation after the effective date of this amendatory act may only
qualify for an exemption if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely
by the business and smoke from the business does not migrate into an enclosed
area where smoking is prohibited.
   (C)   Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking
is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing
home.
   (D)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may
be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking
or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional
nonsmoking rooms.
   (E)   Enclosed laboratories that are excluded from the definition of "place
of employment" in this chapter.
   (F)   Common smoking rooms in long term care facilities operated under the
authority of the Illinois department of veterans' affairs that are accessible
only to residents who are smokers and have requested in writing to have access
to the common smoking room where smoking is permitted and the smoke shall not
infiltrate other areas of the long term care facility. (Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009;
amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-10: ENFORCEMENT; COMPLAINTS:
   (A)   The police department shall enforce the provisions of this act through
the issuance of citations and may assess fines.
      1.   The citations issued pursuant to this act shall conspicuously
include the following:
         (a)   The name of the offense and its statutory reference;
         (b)   The nature and elements of the violation;
         (c)   The date and location of the violation;
         (d)   The name of the enforcing agency;
         (e)   The name of the violator;
         (f)   The amount of the imposed fine and the location where the
violator can pay the fine without objection;
         (g)   The time period in which to pay the fine or to request a
hearing; and
         (h)   The verified signature of the person issuing the citation.
      2.   One copy of the citation shall be provided to the violator, one copy
shall be retained by the enforcing agency.
   (B)   Any person may register a complaint with the city or the police for a
violation of this chapter. The city shall establish a telephone number that a
person may call to register a complaint under this subsection (B).
   (C)   The city shall afford a violator the opportunity to pay the fine
without objection or to contest the citation. (Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord.
2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-11: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver
or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering
tobacco products, cigarette papers or wrappers within the city without having
first obtained a tobacco dealer's license therefor pursuant to this chapter.
Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by this code.
(Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-12: APPLICATION:
Application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the city clerk
and shall state the name and residence of the applicant, and the location at
which sales are to be made. Such application shall be accompanied by evidence
that the applicant is a person of good character and reputation, and shall be
accompanied by the license fee provided in section
3-9-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-13: FEE:
The annual license fee under this section shall be set forth in section
3-2-1 of this title. (Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-14: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such
act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord.
1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-15: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES, COSTS:
   (A)   The mayor shall be charged with the administration of appropriate
provisions of this chapter and such other provisions of this code relating to
tobacco as may be enacted. The mayor may appoint persons to assist him in the
exercise of powers and the performance of the duties provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-16: USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION:
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be
granted to said licensee for the period of six (6) months thereafter for the
conduct of the business of selling "tobacco products" as defined in section
3-9-2 of this chapter in the premises described in such revoked license. (Ord.
1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-17: PENALTY:
The penalty for the violation of this chapter shall be a fine of not less than
seventy five dollars ($75.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Where an offense is ongoing and permitted to continue, each day shall
constitute a separate offense.
The penalty for the violation of section
3-9-8 of this chapter shall be as set forth. Where an offense is ongoing and
permitted to continue, each day shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
1921, 8-25-2009; amd. Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-18: INJUNCTION:
In addition to any other sanction or remedy, the city of an individual
personally affected by repeated violations may institute an action in the
circuit court to enjoin violations of this chapter. (Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-19: DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED:
No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the
exercise of any rights afforded by this chapter. (Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
3-9-20: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, clause or paragraph of this chapter shall be held invalid by
a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2233, 9-11-2018)
CHAPTER 10
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-10-1: Imposition Of Tax
3-10-2: Collection; Enforcement Of Tax
3-10-3: Effective Date
3-10-1: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
A simplified municipal telecommunications tax is hereby imposed upon the act or
privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality
intrastate or interstate telecommunications by a person under the provisions of
the simplified municipal telecommunications tax act, 35 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 636/5-1 et seq., at a rate of three percent (3%) of the gross charges
for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. (Ord. 2015, 8-
28-2012)
3-10-2: COLLECTION; ENFORCEMENT OF TAX:
The tax hereby imposed shall be collected and enforced by the department of
revenue of the state of Illinois. The Illinois department of revenue shall have
full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
1743, 9-9-2003)
3-10-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect upon its passage and publication
in pamphlet form, provided, however, that the increase in the rate of the
simplified municipal telecommunications tax to three percent (3%) shall take
effect for all gross charges billed by telecommunications retailers on and
after January 1, 2013. (Ord. 2015, 8-28-2012)
CHAPTER 11
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT LICENSING AND REGULATION
SECTION:
3-11-1: Purpose
3-11-2: Definitions
3-11-3: License Required
3-11-4: Issuance Of License
3-11-5: Application And Investigation Fee
3-11-6: Inspection
3-11-7: Expiration Of License
3-11-8: Suspension
3-11-9: Revocation
3-11-10: Transfer Of License
3-11-11: Business Records
3-11-12: Adult Entertainment Cabarets; Restrictions
3-11-13: Video Viewing Booths; Restrictions
3-11-14: Mandatory Installation Of Operable Video Cameras
3-11-15: Hours Of Operation
3-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate adult uses to protect the city from
the many types of criminal activity and deleterious effects frequently
associated with such uses. The city recognizes that such regulation cannot in
effect prohibit adult uses. This chapter has balanced the competing interest of
the community in reducing criminal activity, protecting property values and
protecting the unique character of the city of Savanna versus the rights of the
owners, operators, employees and patrons of adult uses. (Ord. 1792, 5-10-2005)
3-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: A business or establishment having a significant inventory or
sales of books, magazines or films for sale or for viewing on premises which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or "specified
anatomical areas"; or an establishment, with a segment or section devoted to
the sale or display of such materials; or an establishment that holds itself
out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage,
advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin operated
booths, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other
factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which:
(A) Features topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, lingerie
or bathing suit fashion shows;
(B) Not infrequently features entertainers who display "specified anatomical
areas"; or
(C) Features entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct perform
in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of
the patron or features entertainers who engage in, or are engaged in explicit
simulation of, "specified sexual activities".
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A building or area used for presenting materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"
for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT NOVELTY STORE: An establishment having a significant inventory or sales
consisting of toys, devices, clothing "novelties", lotions and other items
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or use for "specialized
sexual activities" or on "specified anatomical areas" or an establishment that
holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its
signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, exclusion of minors from the
establishment's premises or any other factors showing the establishment's
primary purpose is to purvey such material.
ADULT USE: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult entertainment
cabarets, and other similar uses.
EMPLOYEE: Employees, independent contractors or any other person who is
retained by the licensee or subject to dismissal from working at the licensed
premises.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: For the purpose of this section, "specified
anatomical areas" means:
(A) Less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals;
2. Pubic region;
3. Buttock;
4. Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
5. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Any of the following offenses:
(A) Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale
distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a
minor, possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness;
indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaged in organized criminal
activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of
a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under
the criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
(B) For which:
1. Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction which is the later
date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
2. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement for conviction whichever is the later date, if
the conviction is a felony offense; or
3. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction
or the date of release from confinement from the last conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses
or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurred within any twenty four (24)
month period;
(C) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: For the purpose of this section "specified sexual
activities" means:
(A) Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(B) Acts of human masturbation;
(C) Sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
(D) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock
or female breasts. (Ord. 1792, 5-10-2005)
3-11-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment
or use without a valid adult use business license issued by the city pursuant
to this chapter. The annual cost for a license shall be one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
   (B)   An application for a license shall be made on a form provided by the
city.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult use without
first obtaining a special use permit issued by the city in accordance with its
zoning ordinance.
   (D)   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information (including fingerprints) as is needed to enable the city to
determine whether the applicants meet the qualifications established in this
chapter.
   (E)   If a person who wishes to operate an adult use is an individual, the
person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who
wishes to operate an adult use is other than an individual, each individual who
has a twenty percent (20%) or greater interest in the business must sign the
application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under
the following section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if the
license is granted.
   (F)   The completed application for an adult use business license shall
contain the following information:
      1.   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his/
her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he/she is at least
eighteen (18) years of age;
      2.   If the applicant is a partnership, the partnership shall state its
complete name and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general
or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any;
      3.   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall state its
complete name, the date of incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in
good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and
capacity of all officers, directors and principal shareholders, and the name
and address of the registered corporate agent.
   (G)   If the applicant intends to operate the adult use business under a
name other than that of the applicant; he/she must state: 1) the business'
fictitious name and 2) submit any required registration documents.
   (H)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of any "specified criminal
activity" as defined in this chapter, and if so, the specified criminal
activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
   (I)   Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this chapter or
similar ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked,
including the name and location of the business which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked as well as the date of the denial, suspension or
revocation. If the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or under a
similar ordinance in another jurisdiction or an officer, director or principal
stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed under this chapter and a
license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, include the name and
location of the business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked
as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
   (J)   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or
other similar ordinance from another city or county and if so the names and
locations of such other licensed businesses.
   (K)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises
including a statement of total floor area occupied by the business. This sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises. (Ord. 1792, 5-10-2005)
3-11-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   (A)   Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a completed adult use
business license application, the city shall approve or deny the issuance of a
license to an applicant. The city shall not approve the issuance of a license
if it determines by a preponderance of the evidence any one or more of the
following:
      1.   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
      2.   The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to any
business;
      3.   The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request
for information on the application form;
      4.   The applicant has been denied a license by the city to operate an
adult use business within the preceding twelve (12) months or whose license to
operate an adult use business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12)
months;
      5.   The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity"
defined in this chapter;
      6.   The premises to be used for the adult use business have not been
approved by the city building and zoning department as being in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances;
      7.   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid;
      8.   The applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of
the adult use business. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at
or near the entrance to the business so that they may be easily read at any
time.
   (C)   The city building and zoning department shall complete their
certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance with city
codes within forty five (45) days of receipt of the application by the city.
   (D)   No adult use business license shall be issued unless the premises at
which the adult use will operate is in conformance with the restrictions set
forth in the Savanna zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1792, 5-10-2005)
3-11-5: APPLICATION AND INVESTIGATION FEE:
Every application for an adult use business license (whether a new license or
for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a five hundred
dollar ($500.00) nonrefundable application and investigation fee. (Ord. 1792,
5-10-2005)
3-11-6: INSPECTION:
   (A)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police
department, fire department and building department or other city designated
departments or agencies to inspect the premises of the adult use for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open
for business.
   (B)   A person who operates an adult use or his agent or employee violates
this ordinance if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the
premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 1792, 5-10-
2005)
3-11-7: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
   (A)   Each license shall expire on April 30 and may be renewed only by
making application as provided in section
3-11-3 of this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty
(30) days before the expiration date.
   (B)   If the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be
issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the license has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license. (Ord. 1792, 5-10-
2005)
3-11-8: SUSPENSION:
   (A)   The city may suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
days if, after a hearing, it determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee:
      1.   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
      2.   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult use business premises as
authorized by this chapter; or
      3.   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult use business
premises.
   (B)   If the licensee or an employee of the licensee has been found guilty
in a court of law of a violation of this chapter, no hearing is necessary prior
to suspension of the license. (Ord. 1792, 5-10-2005)
3-11-9: REVOCATION:
   (A)   The city shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section
3-11-8 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months or if the licensee is convicted of any "specified
criminal activity".
   (B)   The city shall revoke a license if it determines, after a hearing,
that:
      1.   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
      2.   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of alcohol
or controlled substances on the premises;
      3.   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
      4.   A licensee knowingly operated the adult use business during a period
of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
      5.   A licensee has been suspended more than once in a given licensing
year or demonstrates a history of consistent violations of the licensing
ordinance;
      6.   A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in or on the
licensed premises;
      7.   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county or state for
any taxes or fees past due; or
      8.   A licensee has knowingly or intentionally facilitated another
commission of the offense of public indecency.
   (C)   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or a revocation of any license, the applicant or
licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such action in any court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1792, 5-10-2005)
3-11-10: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another nor shall a licensee
operate an adult use business under the authority of a license at any place
other than the address on the license. (Ord. 1792, 5-10-2005)
3-11-11: BUSINESS RECORDS:
All adult uses shall file a verified report with the city showing the
licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to employees during the preceding
calendar year. In addition, all adult uses shall maintain and retain for a
period of two (2) years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed,
including independent contractors, by the licensee. (Ord. 1792, 5-10-2005)
3-11-12: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARETS; RESTRICTIONS:
All dancing and other performances shall occur on a stage intended for that
purpose which is raised at least two feet (2') from the level of the floor. No
dancing, or other performances shall occur closer than ten feet (10') to any
patron. In addition, no performer shall fondle, caress or otherwise touch any
patron and no patron shall fondle, caress or otherwise touch any performer. No
patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any performer and no
performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. Gratuities may be
indirectly given to performers by placing the gratuity on the stage. (Ord.
1792, 5-10-2005)
3-11-13: VIDEO VIEWING BOOTHS; RESTRICTIONS:
No booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms used
for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment shall have
doors, curtains or portal partitions, but all such booths, stalls or
partitioned portions or a room or individual rooms so used shall have at least
one side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to
persons in the adjacent public room. All such described areas shall be lighted
in such a manner that the persons in the areas used for viewing motion pictures
or other forms of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms, but
such lighting shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the viewing of the
motion pictures or other offered entertainment. (Ord. 1792, 5-10-2005)
3-11-14: MANDATORY INSTALLATION OF OPERABLE VIDEO CAMERAS:
All businesses operating pursuant to this chapter must have installed operable
video cameras which shall be situated so as to videotape all areas of the
facility open to the public. Said video systems must be operable and must video
record all activities within the facility during open hours. Said videos must
then be held for thirty (30) days after which time they can be destroyed. (Ord.
1792, 5-10-2005)
3-11-15: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No adult use shall be open prior to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight. (Ord. 1792, 5-10-2005)
CHAPTER 12
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
SECTION:
3-12-1: Definitions
3-12-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
3-12-3: Applicable Principles
3-12-4: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
3-12-5: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
3-12-6: Late Fees; Payments
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the city.
(A) Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not
limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, service order and service termination
charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other
charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates
pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the
holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the city. The
allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the city divided by
the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or
national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of
the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with respect to
commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network, such as a "home
shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection (A)9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
801(b).
(B) Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to
220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of
gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued authorization to the
extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service
or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally
integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from
services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without
limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information
services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including
yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or
any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo
service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in
the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the city and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the
transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity and
collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be
remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for
merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable
service or video service.
(C) Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of
gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the
affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the
fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas within
its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 1927, 10-13-2009)
3-12-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   (A)   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the city.
   (B)   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   (C)   Notice To The City: The holder shall notify the city at least ten (10)
days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the city.
   (D)   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the city. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on
the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of
the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-401(b)(6) to the city.
   (E)   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the city in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 1927, 10-13-2009)
3-12-3: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 1927, 10-13-2009)
3-12-4: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including any tax that is
or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the city's simplified
municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local
unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 1927, 10-13-
2009)
3-12-5: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   (A)   Audit Requirement: The city will notify the holder of the requirements
it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an
audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same
requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video service providers
in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute
any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the city. If all
local franchises between the city and cable operator terminate, the audit
requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant to the local
government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et
seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that
the amounts are correct.
   (B)   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the municipality's submission of an invoice
for the sum. (Ord. 1927, 10-13-2009)
3-12-6: LATE FEES; PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this municipality pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill
of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 1927, 10-13-
2009)
CHAPTER 13
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
SECTION:
3-13-1: Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law
3-13-2: Enforcement
3-13-3: Penalties
3-13-4: Customer Credits
3-13-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
   (A)   Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the city's boundaries.
   (B)   Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection
law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord. 1926, 10-13-2009)
3-13-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the
customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
city. (Ord. 1926, 10-13-2009)
3-13-3: PENALTIES:
The city, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501(r)(1), does
hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the cable
and video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the
penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per
customer.
   (A)   "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   (B)   The city shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any
alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty
(30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach.
   (C)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection (B) of this
section. (Ord. 1926, 10-13-2009)
3-13-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The city hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those
credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/22-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for
the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of
the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the
credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord.
1926, 10-13-2009)
CHAPTER 14
PUBLIC EVENTS
SECTION:
3-14-1: Public Event
3-14-2: Public Events Committee
3-14-3:    Application For A Public Events Permit
3-14-4:    Issuance Of A Public Event Permit
3-14-5: Exemptions
3-14-6:    Emergency Services
3-14-7:    Appeals To The City Council
3-14-8:    General Requirements
3-14-9:    Insurance
3-14-10: Violations
3-14-1: PUBLIC EVENT:
The term "public event" shall mean any planned public gathering which is
conducted at least in part on a street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot or land
owned by the City of Savanna. (Ord. 2320, 2-28-2023)
3-14-2: PUBLIC EVENTS COMMITTEE:
The Public Safety Committee shall review all applications for public events
permits. (Ord. 2320, 2-28-2023; amd. Ord. 2350, 4-23-2024)
3-14-3: APPLICATION FOR A PUBLIC EVENTS PERMIT:
   (A)   Unless exempted under Section
3-14-5, no person or group shall hold a public event without having first
obtained a Public Event Permit.
   (B)   All applications for Public Event Permits shall be on forms approved
by the Public Safety Committee available at City Hall. All completed
applications must be submitted to the Public Safety Committee by delivery to
the Deputy City Clerk at City Hall at least fourteen (14) days prior to a
regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee.
   (C)   All applications shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name, residential address and telephone numbers of each
applicant and designated “responsible person” for the event.
      2.   A description of the nature of the event, the location, dates and
times which it is to operate.
      3.   A listing of all other permits which will be required for the event.
      4.   A site plan showing the following locations: food and beverage
service and consumption sites, vendors, restroom facilities, hand-washing
facilities, emergency medical services, emergency routes, solid waste disposal
containers, fire hydrants, fenced-in areas, adjacent streets and alleys,
amusement equipment, stages and live music areas, and parking areas.
      5.   All applicants must agree to indemnify and save harmless the City
against all liabilities, claims, demands, any losses, including costs,
expenses, and reasonable attorney fees, for injury or death of any individual
or loss or damages to the property or business of any person arising from any
activity undertaken pursuant to the permit. No permit shall be issued unless
each applicant has signed the indemnification agreement with the application.
(Ord. 2320, 2-28-2023; amd. Ord. 2350, 4-23-2024)
3-14-4: ISSUANCE OF A PUBLIC EVENT PERMIT:
   (A)   The Public Safety Committee shall approve or deny all applications for
Public Event Permits. In making its decision whether to approve or deny an
application, the Committee shall consider any factor affecting the public
convenience or safety, and in addition shall specifically consider:
      1.   Whether the City should temporarily grant the applicant the right to
use City property.
      2.   Whether the City should temporarily close any City rights of way.
      3.   Whether the City should temporarily designate parking areas or
temporarily suspend parking regulations within designated areas.
      4.   The costs that will be incurred by the City as a result of the
event.
      5.   The capacity of th\3 City to provide support services for the event.
      6.   Any detrimental effects the City or the public might experience from
allowing the event.
      7.   The City’s exposure to liability from the holding of the event.
      8.   The number of people likely to gather for the event.
      9.   The recommendations of the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire
Department.
   (B)   If the Public Safety Committee finds that the application should be
granted, the Committee shall issue a permit with such conditions as the
Committee finds to be appropriate under this Code, The permit shall issue over
the signature of the Committee Chair.
   (C)   The privilege granted by a permit may include, in addition to any
other term or condition appropriate to the public safety and convenience, the
following:
      1.   The exclusive right to select and control vendors who shall be
authorized to operate within the area designated for such event.
      2.   The right to designate sites within such area where such vendors
shall be permitted to operate for the duration of the event.
      3.   The right to charge !Such vendors for a fee or commission for the
privilege of operating within the area designated for the event. The applicant
shall be responsible for all acts of such vendors, including all obligations
arising from the City Code. (Ord. 2320, 2-28-2023; amd. Ord. 2350, 4-23-2024)
3-14-5: EXEMPTIONS:
A Public Event Permit shall 111ot be required for the following:
   (A)   Events for which licenses or permits have been otherwise granted by
the City or the State of Illinois.
   (B)   Events required by statute or by order of the court.
   (C)   Sanctioned public or private school events occurring primarily on
school property.
   (D)   Events operated by governmental-units of the City. (Ord. 2320, 2-28-
2023)
3-14-6: EMERGENCY SERVICES:
   (A)   The chair of the Public Safety Committee shall notify the Chief of
Police and the Chief of the Fire Department of any application for a Public
Event Permit delivered to the Committee. The Chief of Police and Chief of the
Fire Department shall make recommendations to the committee for security and
safety at the proposed event along with their estimate of any costs to the City
likely to result from complying with those recommendations. In the course of
their evaluation, the Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments shall consult
with Savanna Ambulance officials as may be appropriate.
   (B)   The Chief of Police may investigate the applicant’s background and
other matters he reasonably believes pertains to security for the event.
   (C)   The Chief of Police may require such additional information from the
applicant as he deems necessary.
   (D)   The Chief of Police is authorized to temporarily restrict, direct, and
regulate motor vehicle traffic, motor vehicle parking, and movement of
pedestrians during an event as necessary for the safety of the public. All
directives of the Chief of Police under this section shall control over
contradictory provisions of the permit.
   (E)   Any Savanna police officer may require any person working at an event
to produce the Public Event Permit for inspection. If the person working at the
event fails to produce a valid permit, the Chief of Police may immediately
close the event, and may issue citations to the violator or violators. If the
Chief of Police determines that violations of the terms of the Permit are not
immediately corrected the Chief of Police, in consultation with the Mayor, may
close the event, and may issue citations to the violator or violators. The
Chief of Police will report all :violations to the Chair of the Committee. The
Chief of Police may by written order temporarily assign his authority and
duties under this Section to another Savanna police officer, a copy of which
order shall be provided to the Chair. (Ord. 2320, 2-28-2023; amd. Ord. 2350, 4-
23-2024)
3-14-7: APPEALS TO THE CITY COUNCIL:
The applicant for a Public Events Permit may appeal an adverse decision by the
Public Safety Committee to the Savanna City Council by delivering to the City
Clerk a written notice of the appeal r:io fewer than seven days before the next
regular meeting of the Council. The applicant’s notice must set forth its
objections to the Committee’s decision. The matter of the appeal shall then
appear on the agenda of the City Council for consideration. The Council shall
consider all matters in accordance with the City Code and shall approve the
decision of the committee or direct the issuance of a permit on such terms and
conditions it believes serve the public safety and convenience. (Ord. 2350, 4-
23-2024)
3-14-8: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   At all times during the event at least one applicant or a person
designated as a “responsible person” shall be present and visible at the event.
   (B)   At all times during the event the Public Event Permit shall be on
display in a conspicuous place at the site of the event. Any person working at
the event and any applicant or person designated a “responsible person” shall
produce the permit to a Savanna police officer, the Chief of Police of the
Chief of the Fire Department upon demand.
   (C)   Each applicant shall assure full compliance with all licensing and
inspections required by law.
   (D)   Unless otherwise specifically authorized by the Permit, no person
working at the event shall:
      1.   Permit ropes or other equipment to be attached to any bench, flower
planter, tree, light pole, utility poles or trash receptacle;
      2.   Permit any bench, flower planter, tree, light pole, utility pole or
trash receptacle to be used for display of merchandise or advertising
materials;
      3.   Permit equipment, goods or advertising materials to be stored on any
street, sidewalk, alley or other public place except as authorized by the
Permit; or
      4.   Allow any interference with the free flow of pedestrian or vehicle
traffic except as specifically authorized by the Permit.
   (E)   No permit shall be assigned or otherwise transferred to any person
other than the original applicant or applicants.
   (F)   All persons working at the event shall keep all areas in and around
any stationary location or display used in connection with the event clean and
free of hazards.
   (G)   At the conclusion df the event, each applicant and person designated
as a “responsible person” shall remove or cause to be removed all equipment,
including carts, tables, apparatus and merchandise placed or deposited on any
City streets, sidewalks, alleys, parking lots and other City property in the
course of the event and shall leave the site of the event in broom-clean
condition.
   (H)   Food And Beverage Vendors:
      1.   Shall comply with the State, City and Carroll County health
regulations and this title, governing food and beverages.
      2.   All food and beverage vendors shall be required to apply and pay for
their food and beverage permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the event.
   (I)   Trash Management:
      1.   The applicant shall a~range for the placement of necessary garbage
containers at the event. Containers shall be emptied as often as necessary to
keep garbage off the ground and to allow the lids to be closed tightly. Garbage
containers shall be located in an area designated for garbage and refuse
storage only and not in the general vicinity of food or amusement areas.
Perimeter fencing shall be installed as determined necessary by the City so as
to reasonably control blowing refuse.
      2.   An adequate number of lined garbage containers shall be located a
minimum of fifteen feet ( 15') from the food booths for the public.
   (J)   Temporary Restroom and Hand-Washing Facilities:
      1.   The site of the event shall have such functioning restroom
facilities as the Committee may require.
      2.   The applicants shall provide soap, water and single use towels at
each hand wash station.
      3.   Portable toilet facilities shall be a minimum of one hundred feet
(100') from any food service operation.
      4.   Portable toilet units shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours
after said event or will be subject to a one hundred dollar ($100.00) per unit
per day fine.
   (K)   Immediately after the event, the applicants shall cause to be cleaned
all areas designated by the site plan and shall leave the site in broom-clean
condition within twenty-four (24) hours after closing.
   (L)   Road Closure Requirements:
      1.   Any road closures request must be specified in the event permit
application.
      2.   Road closures will be subject to local traffic and emergency
vehicles.
      3.   Installation of any traffic control devices shall be in accordance
with local and state laws.
      4.   The applicant must notify all affected property owners in writing,
within the road closure area a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the event.
Said notice is subject to review by the Chief of Police, prior to the delivery
of said notice.
      5.   The applicants are responsible for placing and removing barricades.
   (M)   Noise: All events must comply with the City of Savanna noise
regulations. (Ord. 2320, 2-28-2023; amd. Ord. 2350, 4-23-2024)
3-14-9: INSURANCE:
   (A)   Each sponsor shall provide the City Comptroller with an insurance
binder or certificate of insurance showing that the applicant has insurance
coverage for all liabilities and obligations that may result from the
activities undertaken pursuant to the permit. If the binder is provided, a
certificate of insurance shall be provided prior to the issuance of the permit.
Such coverage shall include:
      1.   Coverage for operation, by the applicant’s employees, agents,
contractors and subcontractors.
      2.   Coverage of the City as an additional named-insured.
      3.   Coverage for personal injury to participants in the event.
      4.   Coverage for property damage occurring as a result of the event.
   (B)   The certificate of insurance shall provide that the insurance company
shall furnish the City with ten (10) day notice of cancellation, nonrenewal or
material change.
   (C)   The insurance shall 1be written in comprehensive form and shall
protect City against all claims arising from injuries to members of the public
or damages to property of others arising out of any act or omission of the
applicants, their employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors.
   (D)   The sponsor shall obtain and keep in full effect throughout the event
commercial general liability insurance coverage, covering the options allowed
under this permit with the following limits:
      1.   Event-sponsor: one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
      2.   Food vendors: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
      3.   Amusement ride vendor: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
      4.   Vendor selling alcohol: In accordance with the City’s liquor
regulations. (Ord. 2320, 2-28-2023)
3-14-10: VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Failure to produce or display a Public Event Permit as required by
Section
3-14-8 of this Code shall be punishable by a fine not less than two hundred and
fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (B)   Any other violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable under the general penalty provisions of this Code. (Ord. 2320, 2-28-
2023)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Model Codes Adopted
4-1-2: Building Permit Fees
4-1-3: Penalty
4-1-1: MODEL CODES ADOPTED:
The following codes are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference pursuant
to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3-1 to 5/1-3-6, inclusive, as amended.
Copies of said codes are available for public inspection at all reasonable
hours in the city of Savanna business offices:
   (A)   The most current edition of the following codes from the International
Code Council:
      1.   International building code published by the International Code
Council, excluding the sections related to plumbing and electricity.
      2.   Residential code published by the International Code Council.
      3.   Existing building code published by the International Code Council.
      4.   Mechanical code published by the International Code Council.
      5.   Fuel gas code.
      6.   International property maintenance code.
Covering Type (Commercial Use)
The following coverings are required on the lower four feet (4') of all
commercial buildings and structures (including buildings designed for
residential dwelling use and used or proposed to be used for commercial use)
hereafter constructed, altered, remodeled or reconstructed within any and all
business zoned districts within the city of Savanna, except that continuity of
existing wall covering materials shall be acceptable for additions to existing
buildings whereon the wall covering of said building is not removed.
Said approved coverings shall be required on all exterior walls facing any
abutting street and shall include the initial ten feet (10') measured from the
front exterior wall facing any exterior lot line whereon said exterior wall is
exposed to the public.
Covering Type (Commercial) Minimum Thickness
Covering Type (Commercial)                                Minimum Thickness
Brick and concrete masonry veneers                           2 inches
Ceramics and veneers (architectural terra cotta, anchored    1 inch
type)
Clay tile (flat slab)                                        1/4 to 1 inch
Clay tile (structural)                                       13/4 inches
Glass-fiber reinforced concrete panels                       3/8 inch
Marble slabs                                                 1 inch
Precast stone facing                                         5/8 inch
Stone (cast artificial)                                      11/2 inches
Stone (natural)                                              2 inches
Structural glass                                             11/32 inch
Stucco or exterior plaster                                   3/4 inch
Wood shingles                                                3/8 inch
Wood siding (without sheathing)                              1/2 inch
 
   (B)   National electrical code, current edition.
   (C)   Illinois state plumbing code, current edition.
   (D)   Illinois state standards for road and bridge construction, current
edition. (Ord. 1986, 11-22-2011)
4-1-2: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
Consistent with the authority granted to the City under the Illinois Municipal
Code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1 et seq., and 5/11-30-4 and other
similar authority, no person shall erect, alter, enlarge, repair, convert, move
or demolish any building or structure within the City without first obtaining a
permit to do so. Failure to obtain a permit as required herein shall lead to
the immediate imposition of a five hundred dollar ($500.00) administrative fine
and a stop work order. (Ord. 1828, 2-28-2006)
The following fees shall be charged for building permits pursuant to the
provisions of the aforesaid Building Codes, together with the processing of
applications for and the issuing of zoning certificates, use permits and
occupancy certificates:
   (A)   Refunds: There shall be no refund on any permit paid, except as
follows: 1) the Director of Public Works may authorize the reimbursement of any
building permit fee paid for the construction of any new residential,
commercial or industrial buildings if the applicant for the permit shall first
apply in writing for the refund and the Director of Public Works then finds
that the building has been completed in accordance with applicable requirements
and that the building is ready for occupation; or 2) the City Council finds
that a refund should be ordered for other good cause shown to be in the public
interest. No refund shall be authorized pursuant to this section for any
building permit paid in connection with a new subdivision, or the alteration,
repair, enlargement, conversion or replacement of an existing building. (Ord.
1683, 11-27-2001)
   (B)   Renewals: No additional fee shall be charged for a permit renewal
unless there is a change of plans, in which case the application shall be filed
as a new application with the proper fees.
   (C)   Expiration: Building permits shall expire twelve (12) months from the
date issued. (1977 Code)
   (D)   Permit Fees: Permit fees for original construction, alterations,
additions or repairs which structurally alter the building shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 2211, 11-14-2017)
4-1-3: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
or for any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be as set out in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 2
DWELLING MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Inspection
4-2-3: Enforcement; Service Of Notices; Hearings
4-2-4: Occupancy
4-2-5: Occupancy Lists
4-2-6: Minimum Standards For Basic Equipment And Facilities
4-2-7: Minimum Standards For Light, Ventilation And Heating
4-2-8: General Requirements Relative To Safe And Sanitary Maintenance
4-2-9: Minimum Space, Use And Location Requirements
4-2-10: Responsibilities Of Owners And Occupants
4-2-11: Motels, Hotels, Lodging Houses/Rooms, And Boarding/Rooming Houses
4-2-12: Designation Of Dwellings And Dwelling Units As Unfit For Human
Habitation
4-2-13: Penalty
4-2-14: Conflict
4-2-15: Owner Occupied Dwellings
4-2-16: Demolition, Repair Or Enclosure Of Unsafe Buildings
4-2-17: Building Identification Requirements
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter 1 .
BASEMENT: A portion of a building located partly underground, but having less
than one-half (1/2) its clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade
of the adjoining ground.
CELLAR: A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and
having one-half (1/2) or more than one-half (1/2) of its clear floor to ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
DWELLING: Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used
for living or sleeping by human occupants.
EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved
by the health officer or his representative.
HABITABLE ROOM: A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, corridors, closets, storage spaces
or stairways.
INFESTATION: The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents
or other pests.
OCCUPANT: Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating
in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OFFICERS OF THE CITY: One or more of the following who shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter:
(A) Mayor.
(B) Public works superintendent.
(C) Building inspector.
(D) Fire inspector.
OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part
thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered for rent
or other consideration.
OWNER: Any person who, alone or jointly with others, has legal title to any
dwelling or dwelling unit or shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling
or dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.
Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this chapter, and of rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto to the same extent as if he were the owner.
PERSON: Shall mean and include an individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership. (Ord. 2055, 8-13-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-30-3, 5/11-30-5.
4-2-2: INSPECTION:
The officers of the city are hereby authorized and directed to make inspections
when warranted or deemed expedient to the welfare of the city to determine the
condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises located
within the city in order that they may perform their duty of safeguarding the
health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public.
(1977 Code)
4-2-3: ENFORCEMENT; SERVICE OF NOTICES; HEARINGS:
   (A)   Whenever any officer of the city determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give
notice of such alleged violation to the person responsible thereof, as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
      1.   Be in writing.
      2.   Include a statement of any alleged violations.
      3.   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
      4.   Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant; provided
that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon said owner or agent
or said occupant if a copy thereof is served upon him personally; or if a copy
thereof is sent by registered mail to his last known address; or if a copy
thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by
the notice; or if he is served with such notice by any other method authorized
or required under the laws of the state of Illinois. Such notice shall contain
an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
   (B)   Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted hearing
on the matter before the officers of the city; provided, that such person shall
file in the office of the officers of the city a written petition requesting
such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within
ten (10) days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such
petition, the officer of the city shall set a time and place for such hearing
and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such
notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not
later than ten (10) days after the day on which the petition was filed;
provided further, that upon application of the petitioner, the officer of the
city may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten
(10) day period if in his judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and
sufficient reason for such postponement.
   (C)   After such hearing, the officer of the city shall sustain, modify, or
withdraw the notice, depending upon his findings as to whether the provisions
of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have
been complied with.
If the officer of the city sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed
to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to subsection (A) of this section
shall automatically become a directive to comply if a written petition for a
hearing is not filed in the office of the officer of the city within ten (10)
days after such notice is served. After a hearing in the case of any notice
suspending any permit required by this chapter or by any rules or regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, when such notice has been sustained by the officer of
the city, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any such permit
which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically
revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of the officer of
the city within ten (10) days after such notice is served.
   (D)   The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision
of the officer of the city, shall be summarized, reduced to writing, and
entered as a matter of public record in the office of the officer of the city.
Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the officer
of the city may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction,
as provided by the laws of this state.
   (E)   Whenever the officer of the city finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice
of hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such order
shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall
comply therewith immediately but upon petition to the officer of the city,
shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending
upon his finding as to whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the officer
of the city shall continue such order in effect, or modify it or revoke it.
(1977 Code)
4-2-4: OCCUPANCY:
The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not exceed one and one-
half (11/2) times the number of habitable rooms contained in such dwelling
unit. In the calculation of the number of persons occupying a dwelling unit,
children under one year of age shall not be included, and the children under
the age of twelve (12) years shall be counted as one-half (1/2) person. (1977
Code)
4-2-5: OCCUPANCY LISTS:
Each owner of real estate located within the city and each realtor who manages
real estate located within the city or each owner's and each managing realtor's
agent or trustee shall keep a list of the occupants of buildings which they own
or act as manager of and which are located within the city. The list shall
contain the names and addresses of the present tenants, lessees, renters and
occupants and the names and number of total occupants associated with each
building. Upon request, the list shall be made available to the officers of the
city. (1977 Code)
4-2-6: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES:
No person shall let, rent, or offer for a consideration to another for
occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping,
cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the following minimum
requirements:
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system.
   (B)   Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a
person within said room and which is equipped with a flush water closet and
lavatory basin in good working condition and properly connected to an approved
water and sewer system.
   (C)   Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy
to a person within said room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and
properly connected to an approved water and sewer system; said room may be
located in the same room as required under subsection (B) of this section.
   (D)   Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required
under the provisions of subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section shall be
properly connected with both hot and cold water lines.
   (E)   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish and
garbage disposal facilities or storage containers with tightfitting lids or
covers adequate to prevent access to such garbage and rubbish by insects,
rodents or other pests.
   (F)   Every dwelling shall have supplied water heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, are
properly connected with the hot water lines required under the provisions of
subsection (D) of this section, and are capable of heating water to such a
temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every
required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of
not less than one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F). Such supplied
water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this
section when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities that are required
under the provisions of this subsection are in operation.
   (G)   Every dwelling unit shall have a minimum of two (2) safe unobstructed
means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, unless of fire
resistive construction whereby one means of egress is sufficient. (1977 Code)
4-2-7: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING:
No person shall let, rent, or offer for a consideration to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein
which does not comply with the following minimum requirements:
   (A)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window facing directly to
the outdoors. The minimum total window area, computed on the basis of clear
glass surface, for every habitable room shall be seven percent (7%) of the
floor area of such room. Whenever a window of any such room faces or abuts on
any structure located less than three feet (3') from the window and extending
to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be
deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as
contributing to the required minimum total window area.
   (B)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window which can be
easily opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The
total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at
least forty five percent (45%) of the minimum window area size as required by
subsection (A) of this section except where there is supplied some device
affording adequate ventilation and approved by the officer of the city.
   (C)   Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the
light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in subsections
(A) and (B) of this section, except that no window shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathroom and water closet compartments equipped with a
mechanical ventilation system approved by the officers of the city.
   (D)   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with water heating facilities,
properly installed and maintained in good and safe working order.
   (E)   Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) separate floor or
wall type electric convenience outlets, or one such convenience outlet and one
supplied ceiling type electric light fixture; and every water closet
compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public hall shall contain
at least one supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture. Every such
outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and
safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power
in a safe manner.
   (F)   Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities which are properly
installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable
of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water
closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of
at least seventy two degrees Fahrenheit (72°F), at a distance of three feet
(3') above floor level when the outside temperature is ten degrees below zero
degrees Fahrenheit (-10°F).
   (G)   Every family unit or rooming unit to which heat is furnished from a
heating plant used in common for the purpose of heating the building shall be
supplied with heat. Without such undue restriction or ventilation as to
interfere with proper sanitary conditions, to provide a minimum temperature of
seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) at six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. and seventy
two degrees (72°) at eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and thereafter until ten
thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and a minimum temperature of sixty degrees
Fahrenheit (60°F) thereafter until six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. averaged
through the family unit or rooming unit.
   (H)   Every public hall, stairway and passageway in every multiple dwelling
containing four (4) or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all
times. Every public hall, stairway and passageway in structures devoted solely
to dwelling occupancy and containing less than four (4) dwelling units shall be
supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate
lighting system which may be turned on as needed.
   (I)   The unobstructed width of a hallway, passageway or stairway in a
multiple dwelling or rooming house shall be not less than thirty six inches
(36"). Hallways above the first story shall not extend beyond an exit doorway.
   (J)   During that portion of each year when the officers of the city deem it
necessary for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every
door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space and used, or
intended to be used, for ventilation, shall have supplied screens in good
repair and spring or other self-closing device; and every window and every
other opening to a basement or cellar used, or intended to be used, for
ventilation which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with a
screen in good repair or other device as will effectively prevent such entry.
(1977 Code)
4-2-8: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS RELATIVE TO SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE:
No person shall let, rent, or offer for a consideration to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for human habitation, which does not
comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof; shall be capable of affording
privacy; and shall be kept in good repair.
   (B)   Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; and shall be kept in good repair.
   (C)   Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be maintained in
good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstruction.
   (D)   Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious
to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   (E)   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is
required under this chapter shall be maintained in satisfactory working
condition so that it will function safely and effectively.
   (F)   No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service facility,
equipment; or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed from
or shut off from or discontinued from any occupied dwelling let or occupied by
him except such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs
or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies. The foregoing
"discontinuances of service" must be approved by the officers of the city.
   (G)   The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linens
and towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any
room to any new occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance
of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
   (H)   No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling
unit unless it is clean, sanitary, safe and fit for human occupancy. (1977
Code)
4-2-9: MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall let, rent or offer for a consideration to another for human
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein,
which does not comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least one
hundred (100) additional square feet of floor space for every additional
occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total
habitable room area.
Floor space where the ceiling height is less than five feet (5') may not be
included in calculating total habitable room area.
   (B)   In every dwelling unit of two (2) or more rooms, every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least seventy (70)
square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of
additional floor space for each occupant thereof.
   (C)   No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms
shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be
had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be
such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another
sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet compartment.
   (D)   No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.
   (E)   No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit
unless:
      1.   The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness and adequate provisions
must be made to prevent sewage backup;
      2.   The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum area sizes as required in subsection
4-2-7(A) of this chapter;
      3.   Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area; and
      4.   The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least
the minimum as required under subsection
4-2-7(B) of this chapter, except where there is supplied some other device
affording adequate ventilation and approved by the officers of the city. (1977
Code)
4-2-10: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS:
   (A)   Every owner, agent or person in charge or control of a dwelling
containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining
the shared or public area of the dwelling and premises thereof in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   (B)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep that part of
the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises thereof which he occupies and
controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (C)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
rubbish, garbage and any other waste which might provide food for rodents, in a
clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or
garbage storage containers required by subsection
4-2-6(E) of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply
such facilities or containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing
more than four (4) dwelling units and for all dwelling units located on
premises where more than four (4) dwelling units share the same premises. In
all other cases, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such
facilities or containers.
   (D)   Every owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
hanging all screens whenever the same are required under the provisions of this
chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto.
   (E)   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall
be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests
therein or on the premises and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more of
the dwelling units, in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any
dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall
be the responsibility of the owner or owners.
   (F)   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures in
a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. (1977 Code)
4-2-11: MOTELS, HOTELS, LODGING HOUSES/ROOMS, AND BOARDING/ROOMING HOUSES:
No person shall operate a hotel, motel, lodging house/room, or boarding/rooming
house, or let, rent or offer for a consideration to another for occupancy any
rooming unit in any hotel, motel, lodging house/room, or boarding/rooming
house, except in compliance with the provisions of every section of this
chapter.
   (A)   Definitions:
    BOARDING HOUSE OR ROOMING HOUSE: A dwelling or part thereof, in which
lodging is provided by the owner or operator to those unrelated to the
proprietor. A boarding house or rooming house is a facility in which rental
sleeping accommodations are provided. Access to rooms is made through principal
and secondary access points of the dwelling and connecting corridors and
staircases.
   LODGING HOUSE: A building originally designed for and used as a single- or
two-family dwelling, all or a portion of which contains rooms which accommodate
persons who are not members of the keeper's family. Lodging, or meals, or both
are provided for compensation for three (3) or more but no more than ten (10)
persons.
   LODGING ROOM: A room or suite of rooms rented as sleeping and living
quarters, but without cooking facilities and with or without an individual
bathroom. In a suite of rooms, each room which provides sleeping accommodations
shall be counted as one "lodging room" for the purpose of this title.
   MOTELS/HOTELS: The word "hotel" or "motel" within the meaning of this
section includes an establishment which is open to transient guests, in
contradistinction to a lodging house, lodging room, boarding house, or a
rooming house, and is commonly known as a hotel in the city, and which provides
customary hotel services such as: maid service, furnishings and laundry of
linens, telephone and/or desk service; the use and upkeep of furniture; and
bellboy service.
   (B)   General Provisions: No person shall operate a hotel, motel, lodging
house/room, or boarding/rooming house within the city until he has:
      1.   Made application to the city and paid the annual license fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00); and
      2.   Been inspected by the officer of the city and been found to meet all
requirements of this and all health, fire prevention and other sections
pertaining to a hotel, motel, lodging house/room, or boarding/rooming house,
and laws of the state.
It shall be the duty of the officer of the city to inspect each hotel, motel,
lodging house/room, or boarding/rooming house within a reasonable time after
being notified by the comptroller that applicant has applied for a permit to
operate a hotel, motel, lodging house/room, or boarding/rooming house and has
paid the annual license fee.
The officers of the city shall refuse the applicant the right to operate a
hotel, motel, lodging house/room, or boarding/rooming house until applicant has
complied with all provisions of this code pertaining to health and fire
prevention and all laws of the state in regard to hotels, motels, lodging
houses/rooms, or boarding/rooming houses.
   (C)   Inspection; Notice: Whenever, upon inspection of any hotel, motel,
lodging house/room, or boarding/rooming house, the officer of the city finds
that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or other health or fire prevention provisions of
this code or the laws of the state regarding a hotel, motel, lodging house/
room, or boarding/rooming house, the officer of the city shall give notice in
writing to the operator of such hotel, motel, lodging house/room, or boarding/
rooming house that unless conditions or practices are corrected within a
reasonable time, of not less than ten (10) days, the operator's right to
operate a hotel, motel, lodging house/room, or boarding/rooming house will be
suspended. At the end of such period of time, the officer shall reinspect such
hotel, motel, lodging house/room, or boarding/rooming house, and if he finds
that such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall give notice
in writing to the operator that said hotel, motel, lodging house/room, or
boarding/rooming house is closed. Upon receipt of such notice, the operator of
such hotel, motel, lodging house/room, or boarding/rooming house shall
immediately cease operating the same, and no person shall occupy for sleeping
or living purposes any rooming unit thereof therein.
   (D)   Lavatory Facilities: At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin
and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved water and sewer
system, and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each four (4)
persons or fraction thereof residing within a hotel, motel, lodging house/room,
or boarding/rooming house, including members of operator's family whenever they
share the use of such facilities; provided that in a hotel, motel, lodging
house/room, or boarding/rooming house where rooms are let to males, flush
urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half (1/2) the required number
of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within the building
as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons
sharing such facilities, within a room which affords privacy to a person within
said room. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with
hot water at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a cellar.
   (E)   Minimum Area: Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person
shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor space, and every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least
fifty (50) square feet of additional floor space for each occupant thereof.
   (F)   Means Of Egress: Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed
means of egress leading to a safe and open space at ground level as required by
the laws of the state and the provisions of this code.
   (G)   Maintenance: The operator of every hotel, motel, lodging house/room,
or boarding/rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of
all walls, floors and ceilings and the maintenance and sanitary conditions in
every part of the hotel, motel, lodging house/room, or boarding/rooming house;
he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire
premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the
operator. (Ord. 2062, 10-22-2013)
4-2-12: DESIGNATION OF DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS AS UNFIT FOR HUMAN
HABITATION:
The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation
and the procedure for the determination and placarding of such unfit dwellings
or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the following
requirements:
   (A)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit which fails to meet the requirements of
sections
4-2-6,
4-2-7,
4-2-8 and
4-2-9 of this chapter shall be declared as unfit for human habitation and shall
be so designated and placarded by the officer of the city.
   (B)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit determined as unfit for human habitation
and so designated and placarded by the officer of the city shall be vacated
within a reasonable time, not to exceed six (6) months from the date of
notification, as ordered by the officer of the city.
   (C)   No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been determined and placarded
as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until
written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the officer
of the city who shall remove such placard only when the defect or defects upon
which the determination and placarding action were based have been eliminated,
and after the dwelling or dwelling unit has been inspected and been found to
comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or
dwelling unit which has been determined as unfit for human habitation and
placarded as such, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section.
   (E)   Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning
and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the officer of the
city under the procedure set forth in section
4-2-3 of this chapter. (1977 Code)
4-2-13: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
or for any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be as set out in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code)
4-2-14: CONFLICT:
   (A)   Whenever a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any other chapters of this code, existing on the effective date of
this chapter, the chapter which establishes the higher standard for the
promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail.
   (B)   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of
this chapter should be declared invalid, such decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and
effect; and to this and the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to
be severable.
   (C)   This chapter shall be in full force and effect. Any existing dwelling
or part thereof, not complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
brought into compliance by the owner thereof within not more than six (6)
months. (1977 Code)
4-2-15: OWNER OCCUPIED DWELLINGS:
The requirements of sections
4-2-6,
4-2-7,
4-2-8, and
4-2-9 of this chapter shall apply to all dwellings within the city including
owner occupied dwellings. (Ord. 1546, 1-23-1996)
4-2-16: DEMOLITION, REPAIR OR ENCLOSURE OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS:
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-1 et seq., are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 1546, 1-23-1996)
   (A)   Program For Partial Reimbursement Of Demolition And Restoration
Expenses:
      1.   Application: The owner of an unsightly or potentially dangerous
structure may make application to the city for partial reimbursement of
demolition expenses in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The applicant must be the lawful owner of all rights, title and
interest in the property and structure for which they seek to demolish.
         (b)   The applicant must fill out, sign and submit an application as
provided by the city, proof of ownership, and two (2) quotes for demolition and
restoration shall be attached. The contractor with the lowest quote shall be
used.
         (c)   The application, demolition and restoration and reimbursement
must all be completed within the same budget year.
         (d)   A demolition permit application must be completed along with the
application for partial reimbursement of demolition and restoration expenses.
      2.   Review And Approval: The mayor and/or his or her designee will
review all applications for completeness in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The mayor, or his or her designee will review all applications
for completeness, confirm that the applicant is the lawful owner and that the
submitted quotes for demolition and restoration are valid.
         (b)   Prior to approval, the mayor shall review the budget to ensure
there are sufficient funds to cover the cost of reimbursement for each
application. If there are insufficient funds to cover the cost of any
application, the mayor may take said application to the finance committee and
city council for approval to expend additional funds.
         (c)   Upon approval, the application shall be signed and dated by the
mayor, and the applicant notified that their application has been accepted and
approved for the program.
      3.   Demolition And Restoration: Prior to beginning the demolition, the
owner shall have properly abandoned all utilities servicing the property to be
demolished. The municipal water and sewer service shall be abandoned by a
method approved by the superintendent of public works. The structure shall be
demolished and restored in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Upon approval, the applicant shall demolish the structure,
remove and properly dispose of all demolition debris and properly fill, grade
and seed the affected land in a timely manner. Steps should be taken to reduce
dust during demolition and restoration.
         (b)   Once all demolition and restoration work is completed the
applicant must contact the city to inspect the property to ensure that all work
has been satisfactorily completed.
      4.   Reimbursement: After completion of demolition and restoration the
applicant will be reimbursed pursuant to the following;
         (a)   Prior to reimbursement, the applicant must submit to the city
paid invoices for expenses actually paid in the demolition of the structure,
including expenses to remove debris and to fill, grade and seed the affected
land. No invoice will be reimbursed for work performed by the applicant or
members of his or her immediate family.
         (b)   After demolition and restoration is completed and all work
approved, the applicant will receive a signed demolition permit, which they
should take to the county assessor's office as proof that the structure has
been removed from the property.
         (c)   The maximum reimbursement will be fifty percent (50%) of the
total cost of demolition, disposal and site restoration, but in no instance
shall it exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Reimbursement
will be made after paid invoices are presented to the finance committee for
reimbursement and approved by the city council. The reimbursement check will be
received within sixty (60) days of presentation of the paid invoices in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the application. The amount of said
reimbursement may be subject to the availability of budgeted funds. (Ord. 2058,
8-27-2013)
4-2-17: BUILDING IDENTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Identification Required: All buildings within the city of Savanna,
including trailers in a trailer court, shall display identification numbers of
not less than four inches (4") in height and clearly visible from the city
street.
   (B)   Size Of Identification: Each of the figures for every street address
number shall be not less than four inches (4") in height, plainly marked so as
to be easily read and firmly and conspicuously affixed on the front of the
building.
   (C)   Alternate Location: In the event the identifying number cannot be
placed on the building so as to be visible from the street, said number may be
placed on the mailbox serving said premises. If the mailbox is not located on
the same lot or is located in a cluster of mailboxes, the building address
number may be placed on a marker forty two inches (42") in height located two
feet (2') from the street pavement.
   (D)   Violation: Any person failing to number their structure or residence
after receiving notice to do so from the police department or the public works
department shall be subject to a penalty as provided by section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1783, 2-8-2005)
CHAPTER 3
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS, AWNINGS AND MARQUEES
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Signs; Residential Zoning Districts
4-3-3: Signs, Awnings And Marquees In Business Zoning Districts And Commercial-
Recreation Zoning Districts
4-3-4: Signs; Manufacturing Zoning Districts
4-3-5: Sign Construction And Size Regulations
4-3-6: Miscellaneous Regulations
4-3-7: Permit Required, Fees
4-3-8: Penalty
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building or the name of
an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, illustration, display or device
which is affixed to, painted or represented upon a building, structure or land
and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution
or business. For the purpose of definition, a sign structure may be single face
or double face. However, a sign shall not include any display of any court,
public, or official notice nor shall it include the flag, emblem, insignia of a
nation, political unit, school, religious or charitable institution or
organization. A sign shall also include a permanent sign located completely
within an enclosed building provided such a sign is intended to be viewed
primarily from the exterior of the building.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: A structure, including a billboard on which is portrayed
information which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or
entertainment not necessarily related to the other uses permitted on the
premises upon which the sign structure is located.
SIGN, BUSINESS: The term "business sign" means a sign which directs attention
to a business, commodity, service, or other activity conducted upon the
premises upon which such sign is located.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF: The term "gross surface area of a sign" means the
entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits
of the actual surface of a single face sign. It does not include any structural
elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part
of the display. A double faced V-type sign, erected on a single supporting
structure where the interior angle does not exceed one hundred thirty five
degrees (135°) shall, for the purpose of computing square foot area, be
considered and measured as a single face sign.
SIGN, GROUND: The term "ground sign" means a sign which is supported by one or
more uprights or braces in or upon the ground.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: The term "illuminated sign" shall mean any sign with
characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights
or luminous tubes as part of the sign proper.
SIGN, POST: The term "post sign" means any letter, word, model sign, device or
representation used in the nature of an advertisement or announcement not
attached to a building and which is supported by a single stationary pole or
designed structure.
SIGN, PROJECTING: The term "projecting sign" means a sign which is affixed to
any building wall or structure and extends beyond the building wall or parts
thereof or structure more than twelve inches (12").
SIGN, ROOF: The term "roof sign" means a sign erected, constructed, and
maintained above the roof of any building.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: The term "temporary sign" as regulated shall include any sign,
banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas,
light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials with or without
fringe intended to be displayed for a short period of time.
SIGN, WALL: The term "wall sign" means a sign which is affixed to an exterior
wall of any building, when such signs shall project not more than twelve inches
(12") from the building wall or parts thereof. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1155, 11-
14-1978; Ord. 1738, 8-26-2003; Ord. 1759, 3-9-2004)
4-3-2: SIGNS; RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Nameplates which may be illuminated are permitted subject to the
following regulations:
      1.   In R-1 and R-2 zoning districts, nameplates shall not exceed one
square foot in area. In R-3 zoning districts, only such nameplates as are
permitted in R-1 and R-2 shall be permitted for a single-family or a two-family
dwelling, and for a multiple-family dwelling, a nameplate may be not more than
three (3) square feet in area, provided it indicates only the name, or name,
address and telephone number of the building; and the management thereof.
      2.   Such nameplates may be affixed flat against the building, but not
located higher than ten feet (10') above average ground grade at the building
walls or may also be located in a yard adjoining a street, provided they are
not nearer to the street than one-half (1/2) the depth of the yard, and do not
exceed four feet (4') in height.
   (B)   Unilluminated "for sale" and "for rent" signs are permitted subject to
the following:
There shall be not more than one sign per lot, except on a corner lot two (2)
signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. No signs shall exceed twelve
(12) square feet in area and be closer than eight feet (8') to any side or rear
yard, nor be closer to the front lot line than one-half (1/2) the depth of the
front yard. Such a sign, when affixed flat against buildings shall not project
higher than ten feet (10') above the average finished grade at the building
walls; and a ground sign shall not project higher than five feet (5') above a
ground grade at the sign.
   (C)   Church bulletin signs, and nameplates which may be illuminated with
nonflashing illumination, are permitted subject to the following:
      1.   There shall be not more than one church bulletin sign having a gross
surface area of not more than sixteen (16) square feet on a lot, except on a
corner or through lot one such sign shall be permitted on or in front of each
side of the principal building facing a street, provided that such a sign not
be nearer to a lot line abutting a street than one- half (1/2) the required
distance of the yard abutting a street and shall have a height of not more than
eight feet (8') above finished grade, and such a sign affixed to a building
wall shall not have a height of more than ten feet (10') above the ground or
walk below it.
      2.   A nameplate having not more than sixteen (16) square feet of gross
surface area may be affixed to the wall of the principal building containing
the main entrance doors and in a corner or through lot one additional nameplate
having not more than eight (8) square feet of gross surface area may be affixed
to each wall of the principal building containing secondary entrance doors and
facing a lot line abutting a street and no nameplate shall have a height of
more than three feet (3') above the height of the entrance doors.
   (D)   Temporary signs for unified housing developments are permitted subject
to the following:
      1.   In a unified housing development containing more than twelve (12)
dwelling units initially under single ownership or control, one sign in
addition to the nameplate may be erected along each street frontage at the
perimeter boundary of the development. Such sign may be a ground sign or
attached to a building, and contain the name and address of the developer, and
name, address, and telephone number of the sales or rental agents, provided
that such sign:
         (a)   May be illuminated with nonflashing illumination provided direct
rays of light shall not project into an adjacent lot or a street;
         (b)   Shall not project higher than thirty feet (30') above grade;
         (c)   Shall not be located nearer than fifteen feet (15') from a
property line abutting a street, except it shall not be nearer than fifty feet
(50') from the lot corner formed by the intersection of any two (2) street
right of way lines and no nearer than twenty feet (20') from a lot line of an
adjacent lot; and
         (d)   Shall be removed at the completion of construction of the
development. (1977 Code)
   (E)   Nonilluminating signs only in connection with "home occupations" as
defined in section
10-1-4 of this code are permitted subject to the following:
      1.   There shall be not more than one sign per lot. No sign shall exceed
six and one-quarter (61/4) square feet in area and be closer than eight feet
(8') to any side or rear yard, nor be closer to the front lot line than one-
half (1/2) the depth of the front yard and shall have a height of not more than
eight feet (8') above finished grade and such a sign affixed to a building wall
shall not have a height of more than ten feet (10') above the finished grade
below it. (Ord. 1504, 8-23-1994)
4-3-3: SIGNS, AWNINGS AND MARQUEES IN BUSINESS ZONING DISTRICTS AND COMMERCIAL-
RECREATION ZONING DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Awnings, marquees and nonflashing illuminated business signs with no
moving parts are permitted subject to the following:
      1.   Signs shall not be illuminated between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. or at the time of close of business, whichever is later, and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M.
      2.   A sign in direct line of vision of any traffic signal shall not have
red, green or amber illumination. (1977 Code)
      3.   The gross surface area in square feet of all signs on a lot shall be
not more than three (3) times the number of linear feet in the length of the
front lot line. (Ord. 1558, 3-12-1996; amd. Ord. 1663, 11-28-2000)
      4.   All signs shall be affixed against the building walls and may
project from a building wall not more than six feet (6') but said signs shall
not extend nearer the curb line than two feet (2'), under any circumstances,
except that ground signs are permitted subject to the following provisions:
         (a)   One ground sign facing each street which identifies the name and
address of the business and a nonflashing illuminated bulletin area for
advertising special features within may be erected in addition to signs affixed
to the building walls.
         (b)   Such ground signs shall have all supporting members on private
property and no sign shall extend over public property more than six feet (6')
and said sign shall not extend nearer the curb line than two feet (2') under
any circumstances and such ground signs extended over said public property
shall have their lowest level not less than eight feet (8') above the grade
below it.
         (c)   Ground signs projecting not more than six feet (6') above the
grade below said signs shall be not less than ten feet (10') from the lot
corner when located on an intersection of two (2) or more streets or on a
corner lot. (Ord. 1129, 9-27-1977)
      5.   In a planned development one ground sign facing each street which
identifies the name and address of the shopping center and a bulletin area for
advertising special features therein may be erected in addition to the signs
affixed to the building walls. Such ground sign shall be not less than ten feet
(10') from any lot line and have a gross surface area of not more than four
hundred fifty (450) square feet which may be in addition to the maximum gross
surface area as permitted in subsection (A)3 of this section. (1977 Code; amd.
Ord. 1558, 3-12-1996)
      6.   A sign affixed to a building shall not project higher than fifteen
feet (15') above building height.
      7.   Awning and marquee construction regulations shall be governed by the
building codes of the city. (1977 Code)
4-3-4: SIGNS; MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Business and advertising devices are permitted, subject to the
following regulations:
      1.   Signs on awnings shall be exempt from the limitations imposed by
this chapter on the projection of signs from the face of the wall of any
building or structure, provided that any sign located on an awning shall be
affixed flat to the surface thereof, shall be nonilluminated, and shall
indicate only the name and/or address of the establishment. Further, no such
sign shall extend vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of said awning.
      2.   No advertising device shall hereafter be erected or relocated within
three hundred feet (300') of the right of way line of any limited access
highway if the face thereof is visible therefrom, and advertising devices
located at a greater distance than three hundred feet (300') from the right of
way line of any limited access highway and visible therefrom shall not exceed
in gross area in square feet one two-hundredth (1/200) times the square of the
distance of such advertising device from said access highway.
      3.   Signs shall not have moving parts, but may have constant
illumination, provided that an illuminated sign located in direct line of
vision of any traffic control signal shall not have illumination of red, green
or amber color. Where a sign is illuminated by light reflected upon it, direct
rays or light shall not beam upon any part of any existing residential
buildings, nor into a residential district or into a street.
      4.   Any sign not attached to a building, which is located within three
feet (3') of a driveway parking area, or within fifty feet (50') of the
intersection of two (2) more streets, shall have the lowest elevation of at
least twelve feet (12') above the curb level.
      5.   The gross surface area in square feet of all business signs on a lot
shall not exceed six (6) times the lineal feet of frontage of the lot and each
side of the lot which abuts upon a street shall be considered a separate
frontage.
      6.   A sign, affixed to a building shall not extend outward therefrom
more than two feet (2') and a ground sign shall be located not less than thirty
feet (30') from a lot line adjoining a street, except such a sign having its
lowest elevation at least twelve feet (12') above curb level and supported by
one or not more than two (2) columns having a diameter or equivalent of not
more than twelve inches (12") excluding a structural element of greater area
projecting not more than two feet (2') above the ground at the base of the
sign, or a ground sign projecting not more than two feet (2') above the ground
below it, may be located within ten feet (10') of such lot line.
      7.   A sign attached to a building shall not project higher than four
feet (4') above building height.
      8.   Only one double faced advertising sign shall be permitted on a lot
having one hundred feet (100') or less of street frontage. It may have a gross
surface area for each display surface of not more than the gross surface area
of a standard poster panel, fifteen feet by twenty five feet (15' x 25') in
dimension. On a lot having more than one hundred feet (100') of street
frontage, one additional such advertising sign shall be permitted for each one
hundred feet (100') or part thereof of street frontage, not more than two (2)
sign structures may be adjoined or separated by not more than five feet (5') of
open space and there shall be a distance of not less than one hundred feet
(100') between the next sign or group of two (2) signs on the same adjoining
lot.
      9.   Advertising signs attached to a building wall shall not project
therefrom more than two feet (2'), nor project higher than the building height.
A ground sign shall be located no less than thirty feet (30') from a lot line
adjoining a street, twenty feet (20') from a rear lot line, five feet (5') from
a side lot line and one hundred feet (100') from a residential zoning boundary
line. (1977 Code)
4-3-5: SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND SIZE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Construction Regulations: Sign construction regulations shall be
governed by the building codes of the city, except as follows:
      1.   Ground signs located within three feet (3') of a driveway or parking
area shall have their lowest level not less than twelve feet (12') above the
grade below it.
      2.   Projecting signs extending over a driveway or parking area shall
have their lowest level not less than twelve feet (12') above the grade below
it.
      3.   All supporting members of any sign shall be on private property and
no sign shall extend over public property more than six feet (6'). (1977 Code)
4-3-6: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Free Ingress Or Egress: No sign shall be erected, relocated or
maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window or
fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire
escape.
   (B)   Location: No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this
chapter shall be located near the intersection of any streets in such a manner
as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of
the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or which makes use
of the words "stop", "look", "go", or "danger", or any other word, phrase,
symbol or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
traffic.
   (C)   Unlawful Display: It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon
any sign or other advertising device any obscene, indecent or immoral matter.
   (D)   Written Notice: If the superintendent shall find that any sign or
other advertising structure regulated herein is unsafe, insecure or not
properly maintained in any manner or is a menace to the public, or has been
constructed or erected in violation of the provisions of this chapter, he shall
give written notice to the permittee thereof. If the permittee fails to remove
or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth
within ten (10) days after such notice, such sign or other advertising
structure may be removed or altered to comply by the city superintendent at the
expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which it is located. The
city superintendent shall refuse to issue a permit to any permittee or owner
who refuses to pay costs so assessed. The city superintendent may cause any
sign or other advertising device which is an immediate peril to persons or
property to be removed summarily and without notice. (1977 Code)
   (E)   Prohibited: The following signs are prohibited within the city:
      1.   Any sign affixed to, hung, placed or painted on a fence, tree,
public utility pole, radio, television or similar tower, except call letters or
decorative emblems on commercial radio or television towers.
      2.   Any sign across a public right of way, other than official highway
signs or as approved by the city council.
      3.   Any paper posters applied directly to the wall or building or pole
or other support and letters or pictures in the form of advertising, printed or
applied directly on the wall of a building. Temporary signs may be displayed in
or attached to the inside of show or display windows provided the total sign
area does not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the show or display window area.
      4.   A permit shall not be required for mere changing or painting or
reposting of advertising copy or display matter on signs or theater marquees
designed for use of replaceable copy, provided such change does not violate the
provisions of this chapter.
      5.   A permit shall not be required for the following signs, provided
they are installed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter:
         (a)   Real Estate Signs: One nonilluminated real estate sign not
exceeding ten (10) square feet in area pertaining to the sale, rental or lease
of the premises on which the sign is displayed. Such signs may be located on
private property and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the
completion of the advertised sale, rental or lease.
         (b)   Construction Signs: One nonilluminated construction sign not
exceeding ten (10) square feet in area identifying the parties engaged in the
design or construction on a lot or premises where construction or remodeling is
in progress. Such sign may be located on private property and shall be removed
within seven (7) days after the completion of such work.
         (c)   Event Signs: Signs announcing a campaign, drive or event of a
political, civic, patriotic, philanthropic, educational or religious
organization may be displayed no more than ninety (90) days prior, nor later
than seven (7) days after the appropriate event.
         (d)   Decorations: Decorations connected with civic, patriotic or
religious holidays may be displayed no more than forty (40) days prior to, nor
more than seven (7) working days after the appropriate holiday.
         (e)   Display Windows: Display window signs on the surface of display
windows in business or industrially zoned districts only. Such window sign
shall cover no more than ten percent (10%) of the display window surface area.
         (f)   Painted On Exterior Surface: Signs painted on the exterior
surface of a building or structure in business or industrially zoned districts
only. Such sign shall not have any raised borders, letters, characters,
decorations or lighting appliances.
         (g)   Bulletin Boards: Bulletin boards not exceeding ten (10) square
feet in area for public, charitable or religious institutions. Such bulletin
board shall be located on the premises of said institutions.
         (h)   Traffic Or Other Municipal Signs: Traffic or other municipal
signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger and such temporary
emergency or nonadvertising signs as may be approved by the city council.
         (i)   Nameplate: Nameplates as defined, when placed flat against the
wall of a building.
         (j)   Signs Of Special Significance: Because of their key locations
and because they provide a public service through the dissemination of
information other than advertising, the following are deemed to be signs of
special significance in the city and are therefor exempted from the provisions
of this chapter:
            (1)   Main Street clock.
   (F)   Variations And Appeals: Variations and appeals may be made to the City
Council on a form provided by the City. (Ord. 1155, 11-14-1978; amd. Ord. 1760,
3-9-2004; Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016; Ord. 2269, 5-26-2020)
4-3-7: PERMIT REQUIRED, FEES:
   (A)   Except as permitted by the provisions of subsection
4-3-6(E) of this chapter, signs shall not be erected or attached to, suspended
from or supported on buildings or structures, or altered, until a permit has
been issued by the building official.
   (B)   Applications for permits shall be made in writing to the building
official and shall state thereon the location and size of the proposed sign,
the height of the sign and such other information as may be required by the
building official.
   (C)   A permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany each
application. Said fee shall be returned to the applicant if said permit is not
approved. (Ord. 1283, 7-9-1985; amd. Ord. 1718, 4-22-2003)
4-3-8: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
or for any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be as set out in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
4-4-1: General Provisions
4-4-2: Above Ground Elevation Private Swimming Pool
4-4-3: Below Ground Elevation Private Swimming Pool
4-4-4: General Requirements
4-4-5: Penalty
4-4-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Purpose: The intent and purpose of this chapter is to protect the
health and safety of persons constructing, using or maintaining privately owned
swimming pools within the city, by the establishment of minimum standards of
sanitation, construction and maintenance for such pools 1 .
   (B)   Private Swimming Pool Defined: "Private swimming pool" is defined as a
receptacle for water or an artificial pool or water, having a depth at any
point of thirty one inches (31") or more, intended for the purpose of immersion
or partial immersion therein of human beings, including portable or temporary
type pools of plastic, rubbersized cloth or similar materials, installed either
above or below ground elevation, and including all appurtenant equipment
constructed, installed and maintained in or above the ground outside of a
building used for a single, duplex or multiple-dwelling unit; provided further
that such private swimming pool is maintained primarily for the use of the
owner or tenant or tenants of the premises upon which same is situated, and
family friends and guests of same, and not for the purpose of profit or in
connection with any business, nonprofit club or organization.
   (C)   Compliance Required:
      1.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all private swimming
pools in the city, whether heretofore constructed; provided, however, that the
provisions contained herein relating to the construction of walls and bottom of
pools shall not apply to existing pools as of January 1, 1976.
      2.   Swimming, wading or bathing pools, whether presently existing or
which will be built at some future time, shall conform with the regulations
hereinafter set forth. (1977 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-30-9.
4-4-2: ABOVE GROUND ELEVATION PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL:
   (A)   Fences: All above ground elevation private swimming pools within the
city except swimming pools with a fence integral with the pool wall shall be
completely enclosed by a fence or other structure designed to prevent small
children from inadvertently wandering into the pool. Such fence or other
structure shall be not less than four feet (4') in height. All access gates or
doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self- closing and
self-latching device designed to keep and capable of keeping such door or gate
securely closed and locked at all times when not in actual use and to prevent
small children from opening the access door or gate; provided, however, that
the door of any dwelling forming any part of the enclosure hereinabove required
need not be so equipped. Swimming pools with a self-contained fence shall have
at least four feet (4') in total height of pool wall and fence from ground
level to the top of the fence. (Ord. 1812, 9-27-2005)
   (B)   Ladders:
      1.   Outside safety ladders are required for swimming pools with a self-
contained fence and must be of the retractable type. When the pool is not in
use, the raised ladder must be locked to hold ladder in a raised position, and
the entire pool area shall be inaccessible.
      2.   At least one such means of egress shall be provided and located on
the side of the pool.
      3.   Two (2) or more means of egress shall be provided for pools having a
shallow end and a deep end. At least one such means of egress shall be located
on a side of the pool at both the deep end and the shallow end.
      4.   Treads of ladders shall be constructed of nonslip materials and the
ladder shall have a handrail on both sides. (1977 Code)
   (C)   Permit Fees: (Rep. by Ord. 1845, 7-11-2006)
   (D)   Pool Covering And Ladder Removal: All swimming pools under thirty one
inches (31") in depth, though not requiring fencing under this section, shall
be covered and secured when not in use. All such pools shall have the pool
ladders removed and secured when not in use. (Ord. 1812, 9-27-2005)
4-4-3: BELOW GROUND ELEVATION PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL:
   (A)   Fences: All private swimming pools within the city shall be completely
enclosed by a fence or other structure designed to prevent small children from
inadvertently wandering into the pool. Such fence shall be erected along the
periphery of the pool walks. All gates or doors opening through such enclosures
shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep
and capable of keeping such door or gate securely closed and locked at all
times when not in actual use and to prevent small children from opening the
door or gate; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling forming any part
of the enclosure hereinabove required need not be so equipped.
   (B)   Steps Or Ladders: Two (2) or more means of egress in the form of steps
or ladders shall be provided for all private swimming pools. At least one such
means of egress shall be located on a side of the pool at both the deep end and
shallow end of the pool. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of
nonslip material and shall be at least three inches (3") wide for their full
length. Steps and ladders shall have a handrail on both sides.
   (C)   Walk Areas: Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty six inches
(36") wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool. The walk area
shall be constructed of impervious material, and the surfaces shall not be
smooth and shall be easily cleaned and of nonslip construction. The slope of
the walks shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth inch (1/4") to the foot,
designed so as to prevent back drainage from entering the pool.
   (D)   Inlets And Outlets:
      1.   Pools shall be provided with filtered water inlet supply fittings
permanently installed on about eight foot (8') centers in the shallow end of
the pool sixteen inches (16") to eighteen inches (18") below normal water
level.
      2.   The outlet fitting which connects to the recirculation system shall
be permanently installed at the lowest point of the pool. It shall be ample in
size with a free grating area sufficient to minimize chances of clogging or
occurrences of suctions dangerous to the safety of bathers. The grating
openings shall be such that bathers' fingers or toes will not be caught or
injured.
      3.   In swimming pools thirty feet (30') in width or less, water
circulation system outlets shall be located so as to provide at least one
outlet at the deepest point in the pool. If the pool width is more than thirty
feet (30'), multiple outlets shall be provided and spaced not more than thirty
feet (30') apart, nor closer than four feet (4') to any wall. All pool drain
outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area of openings not less
than four (4) times the cross section area of the outlet pipe. The gratings
shall be of such design so they cannot be readily removable by bathers and will
not injure bathers' fingers or toes. One outlet shall be provided for each
eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area. (1977 Code)
   (E)   Permit Fees: The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of
a private swimming pool shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). (1977 Code; amd.
Ord. 1303, 10-14-1986)
4-4-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Hours Of Use: No private swimming pool shall be made use of between
the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   (B)   Cleaning And Maintenance: Every pool shall be so designed and
constructed as to facilitate cleaning and shall be maintained and operated in
such a manner as to be clear and sanitary at all times.
   (C)   Water Supply:
      1.   The water in the pool must meet the following clarity criterion: A
black disc twelve inches (12") in diameter on the bottom the pool at the
deepest point is clearly visible from the sidewalks of the pool at all
distances up to ten (10) yards, measured from a line drawn across the pool
through the object.
      2.   The fresh water supply point of discharge to the pool, whether
through a hose or pipe, shall be firmly fixed at a point six inches (6") above
the overflow level of the pool.
   (D)   Recirculation Systems: Pools with a capacity of five thousand (5,000)
or more gallons shall be equipped with a water recirculation and filtration
system. The equipment shall be capable of effecting one turnover of the pool
volume in ten (10) hours or less at a rate of filtration not exceeding three
(3) gallons per square foot of filter area per minute.
   (E)   Water Disinfection:
      1.   Chlorine disinfectant in the form of sodium or calcium hypochlorite,
or chlorine gas or bromine, shall be applied daily as frequently as needed to
maintain a definite residual throughout the pool volume while the pool is in
use.
      2.   A test kit with permanent color standards shall be provided at all
pools and be used at frequent intervals to check on the adequacy of chlorine
treatment.
   (F)   Inspection And Testing: The representatives of the city shall have the
right and authority to inspect any pool or to check the operation thereof
during reasonable daylight hours.
   (G)   Construction, Permit Required; Location: No person shall hereafter
construct, cause to be constructed, operate or maintain a private swimming pool
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city. Written application
for such a permit shall be filed with the superintendent and, in the case of a
pool which is to be constructed or in the first application for the operation
of an existing pool, shall be accompanied by two (2) sets of plans and
specifications sufficiently detailed to enable determination of whether the
proposed pool complies with the requirements of this chapter. No such permit
for an existing pool shall be granted by the superintendent until full
compliance with this chapter has been demonstrated. Swimming pools shall be so
constructed that there will be at least ten feet (10') between the main
building and the swimming pool, and there shall be at least three feet (3')
between any auxiliary building and the swimming pool. No swimming pool shall be
built within any front yard. Pumps, filters and pool disinfecting equipment
installation shall be located at a distance of not less than three feet (3')
from any side property line. (1977 Code)
4-4-5: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
shall be as set out under section
1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 5
FENCES, WALLS, HEDGES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
4-5-1: General Regulations
4-5-2: Construction; Maintenance; Repair
4-5-3: Enforcing Authority
4-5-4: Variances
4-5-5: Permit; Fee
4-5-6: Penalty
4-5-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
The words "walls", "hedges" and "shrubs" mean a wall, hedge or a shrub intended
to be used as a fence along any property division line or as a means of
protection or confinement. (Ord. 1915, 6-9-2009)
   (A)   Permitted Fencing: Fences 1  (other than chainlink fences and similar
fences approved by the superintendent of public works), walls, hedges and
shrubs may be located in the front yard of any residential zoning district,
provided the fence, wall, hedge or shrub does not exceed three and one-half
feet (31/2') in height (or 4 feet in height as to chainlink fences and similar
fences approved by the superintendent of public works) and have at least one
access gate to one or more principal entrances to such building or structure,
except on corner lots at street intersections fences (other than chainlink
fences and similar fences approved by the superintendent of public works),
walls, hedges and shrubs shall not exceed two feet (2') in height in the
triangular portion of land designated "restricted area" in figure 1 attached to
ordinance 1359 on file in the office of the city clerk.
Fences located within a permitted yard shall be of like materials and design in
their entirety. However, a property owner may use a chainlink or wrought iron
style fence in the front yard to allow for additional height and transition
into a wood or similar style fence for the side and rear yard to allow for
increased height and privacy provided it is approved by the city zoning
officer. In the case where an existing fence is erected along a shared property
line, it shall not prohibit the applicant from erecting a fence of a differing
style and material on the remaining property lines. (Ord. 2137, 7-28-2015)
   (B)   Residential Districts: Open fences, walls, hedges and shrubs may be
located in any side yard or rear yard up to the front yard line provided they
do not exceed six feet (6') in height. Solid fences may be located in any side
yard or rear yard up to the front yard line provided they do not exceed four
feet (4') in height.
   (C)   Commercial And Industrial Districts: Open or solid fences, walls,
hedges and shrubs may be located in any yard provided they do not exceed eight
feet (8') in height.
Whenever land located in any of the commercial or industrial zoning districts
abuts land located in any of the residential districts the owner or developer
of the commercial or industrial land shall install a solid fence of not less
than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height along the entire
line of the commercial or industrial land abutting the residential land, as a
condition of the development of such commercial or industrial land. (Ord. 1915,
6-9-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-30-1.
4-5-2: CONSTRUCTION; MAINTENANCE; REPAIR:
   (A)   Height measurements shall be height required above the surface of the
ground as measured from the average natural grade of the adjoining land.
   (B)   All fence posts shall be located on the side of the fence facing the
fence owner's property.
   (C)   Fences may be constructed within the lot line along the front, side
and rear yards.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to have woven wire farm fence, or barbed wire on
any fence except in a commercial or industrial district, and then only to
protect persons from hazards and/or for security purposes, pursuant to a permit
issued by the public works superintendent. However, the public works
superintendent is authorized to issue permits for woven wire farm fences or
barbed wire on fences located in residential districts if he finds that such
barbed wire is reasonably necessary to protect the safety of persons from a
legally permitted use of potential danger such as, but not limited to, an
electrical transformer station, pump house, retention pond, transmission tower
or other similar use. In any event, any barbed wire permitted under this
chapter shall be installed no lower than six feet (6') above ground level, in a
gable configuration having five (5) strands or less or to an angled arm
supported approximately forty five degrees (45o) to the vertical and containing
not more than three (3) strands of wire. In no event shall any barbed wire
extend beyond the property line.
   (E)   Whenever a fence or wall shall become damaged or destroyed by some
casualty the fence or wall owner shall repair the same within ten (10) days
after written notice. If such owner shall neglect or refuse to repair such
fence or wall within the specified period the city shall remove the damaged
portion of said fence or wall and keep an account of all costs and expenses
attending such fence or wall and forthwith demand payment from the fence or
wall owner.
If such expense is not paid within twenty (20) days after notice of such
expense has been given, the city shall proceed to perfect and enforce its
statutory lien on said premises for such expenses, as required by law.
   (F)   Whenever a hedge or shrub shall exceed the height provisions
hereinabove regulated the owner shall cut back and trim the same within ten
(10) days of written notice. If such owner shall neglect or refuse to cut back
or trim same within the specified period the city shall cut back or trim such
hedge or shrub and keep an account of all costs and expenses attending such
fence or wall and forthwith demand payment from the owner.
If such expense is not paid within twenty (20) days after notice of such
expense has been given, the city shall proceed to perfect and enforce its
statutory lien on said premises for such expenses, as required by law. (Ord.
1359, 8-22-1989)
4-5-3: ENFORCING AUTHORITY:
The public works superintendent or his duly authorized representative, shall be
charged with the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 1359, 8-22-1989)
4-5-4: VARIANCES:
The public works superintendent shall recommend for or against and the city
council shall permit or deny the erection of or variation of the size or
structure of a fence; provided, that the public works superintendent makes
findings of fact based upon evidence presented to the public works
superintendent in each specific case that:
   (A)   The plight of the applicant is due to unique circumstances; and, the
fence, if permitted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
   (B)   The conditions upon which the application is based are not generally
applicable to other property within the same zoning classification.
   (C)   The alleged need for the fence was not created by any person presently
having an interest in the property.
   (D)   The fence, if permitted, will not be detrimental to the public welfare
or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the
fence is located.
   (E)   The fence will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of fire, or obstruct
the clear view of traffic for motorists or pedestrians, or endanger the public
safety in any manner whatsoever, or impair property values within the
neighborhood.
This provision shall not be interpreted or construed to repeal or invalidate
any fence now permitted by any other city regulation. (Ord. 1359, 8-22-1989)
4-5-5: PERMIT; FEE:
No fence, wall, hedge or shrub shall be installed or constructed without first
having obtained from the public works superintendent a construction permit.
Said permit shall be considered after there is filed a written application to
be in the form and contain such information as may be requested by the
superintendent, reasonably showing that the proposed fence, wall, hedge or
shrub is in conformity with all regulations of the city. The superintendent may
also request drawings, necessary to determine whether such proposed fence meets
the aforesaid regulations. Each applicant for a permit shall pay a fee in the
amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) to the city. (Ord. 1359, 8-22-1989)
4-5-6: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
shall be as set out under section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1359, 8-22-1989)
CHAPTER 6
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
4-6-1: Purpose
4-6-2: Definitions
4-6-3: Base Flood Elevation
4-6-4: Duties Of The Director Of Public Works
4-6-5: Development Permit
4-6-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
4-6-7: Protecting Buildings
4-6-8: Subdivision Requirements
4-6-9: Public Health And Other Standards
4-6-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
4-6-11: Variances
4-6-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
4-6-13: Penalty
4-6-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
4-6-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by
the Illinois municipal code 1  in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
4-6-3 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
(A) Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a building,
or any structural alteration to a building;
(B) Substantial improvement of an existing building;
(C) Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
(D) Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
(E) Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
(F) Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
alterations of the ground surface;
(G) Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
(1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Savanna, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, or that may be annexed into the
city, that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of the
city are generally identified as such on panel number(s) 160 and 180 of the
countywide flood insurance rate map of Carroll County prepared by the federal
emergency management agency and dated December 17, 2010. Floodplain also
includes those areas of known flooding as identified by the community. The
floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Carroll County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city
are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared for
Carroll County by the federal emergency management agency and dated December
17, 2010.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Mississippi River and Plum River
shall be as delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Carroll
County prepared by FEMA and dated December 17, 2010. The floodways for each of
the remaining floodplains of the city of Savanna shall be according to the best
data available from the federal, state or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
(A) Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
(B) Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as
contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
(C) Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
(D) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been
certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM: Illinois department of natural resources/office
of water resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary area of
six hundred forty (640) acres or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of
any stream serving a tributary area of six thousand four hundred (6,400) acres
or more in a rural area. Construction on these streams requires a permit from
the department (Ill. adm. code title 17, pt. 3700.30). The department may grant
approval for specific types of activities by issuance of a statewide permit
which meets the standards defined in section
4-6-6 of this chapter.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
4-6-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
(A) Built on a single chassis;
(B) Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
(C) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement, was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes "repetitive loss buildings" (see definition of Repetitive Loss).
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter in which the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement
or repair is started, or increases the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done. The term does
not include:
(A) Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
(B) Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of historic
places or the Illinois register of historic places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010)
4-6-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Mississippi River
and Plum River shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
countywide "Flood Insurance Study Of Carroll County" prepared by the federal
emergency management agency and dated December 17, 2010.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH
zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the
countywide flood insurance rate map of Carroll County.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Carroll
County shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Carroll County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city of Savanna, or that may be annexed into the city, shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the "Flood Insurance Study Of
Carroll County" prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated
December 17, 2010. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010)
4-6-4: DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
The director of public works shall be responsible for the general
administration of this chapter and ensure that all development activities
within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city of Savanna meet the
requirements of this chapter. Specifically, the director of public works shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with section
4-6-5 of this chapter;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
4-6-6 of this chapter;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
4-6-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built" elevation
of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
4-6-8 of this chapter;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
4-6-9 of this chapter;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
4-6-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
4-6-13 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010)
4-6-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the director of public works or his designee. The
director of public works shall not issue a development permit if the proposed
development does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
4-6-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the director
of public works or his designee shall compare the elevation of the site to the
base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by
survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has
not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is
not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this
chapter. In addition, any development located on land shown to be below the
base flood elevation and hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not
identified as floodplain on the current flood insurance rate map, is subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
The director of public works shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate
map identification.
The director of public works shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or
permit not required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The
director of public works shall not issue a permit unless all other federal,
state, and local permits have been obtained. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010)
4-6-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the Illinois department of natural resources, office of water
resources statewide permit number 2;
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 3;
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 4;
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 5;
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities such as underground utility lines,
light poles, signposts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet and
raising buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any
other activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6;
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7;
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8;
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 9;
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10;
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11;
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12;
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 13;
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in subsection (A) of this
section may be permitted only if:
      1.   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010)
4-6-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   (A)   In addition to the state permit and damage prevention requirements of
section
4-6-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section within twenty four (24) months of the date the damage
occurred.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
4-6-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         (e)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters.
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation, and
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            (3)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            (4)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.
         (d)   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the
interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed
four feet (4') at any point.
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event.
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection (B) of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile
home tiedown act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection (D) of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect.
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and
      10.   Must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the blocks to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred seventy six (576) square feet (24 feet by 24 feet).
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010)
4-6-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The Savanna city council shall take into account hazards, to the extent that
they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protection standards
of sections
4-6-6 and
4-6-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
4-6-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
4-6-6 and
4-6-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
4-6-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 1958, 10-
26-2010)
4-6-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained. In addition, the city of Savanna shall notify adjacent communities
in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the
alteration or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010)
4-6-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Savanna planning and
zoning board for a variance. The planning and zoning board shall review the
applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the
city council. The city council may attach such conditions to granting of a
variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter. (Ord.
1958, 10-26-2010; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (A)   Conditions To Be Met: No variance shall be granted unless the
applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained. (Ord. 1958,
10-26-2010)
   (B)   Notification Of Risk And Liability: The Savanna planning and zoning
board shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the
requirements of the building protection standards of section
4-6-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will: (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Historic Structures: Variances to the building protection requirements
of section
4-6-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"historic structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
4-6-6 and
4-6-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
   (D)   Agriculture: Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall
be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's
unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as
well as those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter. In order to
minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public
health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance
issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at grade and wet
floodproofed.
      1.   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farmhouses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
      2.   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
      3.   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall
framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood
elevation, must be built with flood resistant materials in accordance with
section
4-6-7 of this chapter.
      4.   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with
section
4-6-7 of this chapter. All of the building's structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
      5.   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with section
4-6-7 of this chapter.
      6.   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters in accordance with subsection
4-6-7(B) of this chapter.
      7.   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of section
4-6-6 of this chapter. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures
within any designated floodway.
      8.   Wet floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the floodplain administrator and a registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for
construction. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010)
4-6-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the city of Savanna or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010)
4-6-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the director of public works
or municipal attorney may determine that a violation of the minimum standards
of this chapter exists. The director of public works or municipal attorney
shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The city of Savanna shall make application to the circuit court for
an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order
as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      4.   The city of Savanna shall record a notice of violation on the title
of the property.
   (B)   The director of public works or municipal attorney shall inform the
owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood
damages and therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy
to be suspended.
The director of public works or municipal attorney is authorized to issue an
order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop work order
shall be in writing, indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the
action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work
order. The stop work order constitutes a suspension of the permit. (Ord. 1958,
10-26-2010)
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the Savanna planning and zoning board. Written notice of
such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state: (Ord. 1958, 10-
26-2010; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010)
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning and zoning
board shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked. (Ord.
1958, 10-26-2010; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Savanna from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-
2010)
4-6-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city of
Savanna to fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance program.
However, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance
adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this chapter repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
Where this chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 1958, 10-26-2010)
CHAPTER 7
NEW CONSTRUCTION INCENTIVES
SECTION:
4-7-1: Property Tax Refunds
4-7-1: PROPERTY TAX REFUNDS:
   (A)   The city council shall refund the city of Savanna corporate property
taxes on newly constructed any single-family residential home as provided in
this chapter if it finds that the owner (or purchaser on a contract for deed)
of the home has complied with the terms of this chapter and is entitled to such
refund.
   (B)   Refunds shall be approved where:
      1.   The applicant for the refund is the owner (or purchaser under a
contract for deed) of a newly constructed single-family house located within
the corporate limits of the city of Savanna.
      2.   The permit for the construction of the house was issued on or after
January 1, 2001.
      3.   The applicant is not delinquent in the payment of any property tax
imposed within Carroll County or on any financial obligation of any kind owed
to the city.
      4.   The applicant is the recipient of the owner occupied property tax
exemption applicable to the house.
   (C)   The amount of the refund shall be limited to:
      1.   One hundred percent (100%) of the city of Savanna corporate property
taxes imposed on the improvement to the real estate in the first year of
completed construction.
      2.   Seventy five percent (75%) of the city of Savanna corporate property
taxes imposed on the improvement to the real estate in the second year.
      3.   Fifty percent (50%) of the city of Savanna corporate property taxes
imposed on the improvement to the real estate in the third year.
In no event shall the amount refunded in a single year to any single owner
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). In no event shall the total amount
refunded by the city on all applications exceed ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00).
   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the person applying for the refund
to establish by clear and convincing evidence that he or she is eligible for
the refund requested. The applicant shall submit a verified application for the
refund to the comptroller. A new application shall be made for every year for
which a refund is sought. The comptroller may request any form of documentation
or information she believes may assist her in her determination that the
applicant for abatement is entitled thereto, and the failure of any applicant
to supply such information in a timely manner when requested shall constitute a
withdrawal of the application.
   (E)   No firm which is an alter ego, as the term is defined in the opinion
of the Illinois supreme court in Superior Coal Co. v. Dept. of Finance, 377
Ill. 282 (1941), of an ineligible person or firm shall be eligible to apply for
a refund under this chapter. A person, firm or entity seeking a refund
hereunder shall provide the comptroller with such information as she may
require to establish that the applicant is not such an alter ego.
   (F)   Applications for refund shall be on such forms as the comptroller may
prescribe and shall be completed prior to the last business day in March of the
year in which the taxes would be due.
   (G)   If the comptroller is satisfied that the applicant for a refund under
this chapter is entitled to receive the refund, the comptroller shall bring the
matter before the city council which shall authorize the refund if it finds the
requirements of this chapter have been met.
   (H)   If the city council approves an application for refund, the applicant
shall have paid the full amount of taxes imposed as if there were to be no
refund. Upon proof of that payment to the comptroller, the comptroller shall
then refund to the owner the authorized refund. (Ord. 1690, 4-9-2002)
CHAPTER 8
EXTERIOR BEAUTIFICATION PAINT PROGRAM
SECTION:
4-8-1: Program For Reimbursement Of Exterior Paint Expenses
4-8-1: PROGRAM FOR REIMBURSEMENT OF EXTERIOR PAINT EXPENSES:
   (A)   Application: The owner of the structure may make application to the
city on an application form as provided by the city seeking partial
reimbursement of exterior paint in accordance with the following:
      1.   The applicant must be the owner of all rights, title, and interest
in the structure and have the complete authority to paint the structure.
      2.   The applicant must state the start and completion date of the
painting project, identify all exterior areas to be painted (square footage if
known), state exterior surface preparation to be completed (prior to starting
the project), state the number of gallons requested, and provide a paint chip
sample of color(s) to be used.
      3.   The applicant is required to purchase the exterior paint locally
within Savanna, Illinois.
      4.   The maximum reimbursement will be up to ten (10) gallons (primer
and/or exterior paint).
      5.   The exterior beautification and painting must all be completed
within ninety (90) days of the approval of the application.
   (B)   Review And Approval: The mayor or designee will review all
applications for completeness in accordance with the following:
      1.   Prior to approval, the mayor shall review the budget to ensure there
are sufficient funds to cover the cost of reimbursement for each application.
If there are insufficient funds to cover the cost of any application, the mayor
may take said application to the finance committee and city council for
approval to expend additional funds.
      2.   Upon approval, the application shall be signed and dated by the
mayor or designee and the applicant notified that their application has been
accepted and approved for the program.
   (C)   Reimbursement: After completion of the project the applicant must
contact the city to inspect the property to ensure that all of the work has
been satisfactorily completed. Failure to satisfactorily complete said project
will result in the applicant being invoiced for all primer and/or paint
purchased by the city of Savanna. Failure to pay said invoice will result in
the invoice balance being added to the undersigned applicant's water bill.
Failure to pay said water bill may result in penalties and/or termination of
services. (Ord. 2063, 10-22-2013)
TITLE 5
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
SECTION:
5-1-1: Code Adopted
5-1-2: Enforcement; Chief Of Fire Department
5-1-3: Penalty
5-1-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The provisions of the current abbreviated edition of the fire prevention code
recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, as amended, are hereby
adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length.
Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the code hereby adopted, it shall
be held to mean the city of Savanna, Illinois. (Ord. 1206, 10-14-1980)
5-1-2: ENFORCEMENT; CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
   (A)   The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the chief of the fire
department.
   (B)   The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the code hereby adopted upon application in writing by the owner
or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties
in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the
spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial
justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and
the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon
the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the
applicant. (1977 Code)
5-1-3: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
or for any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be as set out in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE LIMITS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Fire Limits Established
5-2-2: Moving Wooden Buildings
5-2-3: Damaged Buildings
5-2-4: Junkyards
5-2-5: Condition Of Structures
5-2-6: Open Burning; Bonfires (Rep. by Ord. 1247, 11-9-1982)
5-2-7: Notice Of Violation
5-2-8: False Alarms
5-2-9: Penalty
5-2-1: FIRE LIMITS ESTABLISHED:
All that part of the city embraced within the following described territory is
constituted and declared to be the fire limits of the city:
Beginning at the northwest corner of Chicago Avenue and Third Street and
extending northerly along the westerly line of Third Street to the south line
of Webster Street, thence westerly along the south line of Webster Street to
the east bank of the Mississippi River, thence southerly along the east bank of
the Mississippi River to the north line of Chicago Avenue, thence easterly
along said north line of Chicago Avenue to the place of beginning.
(1977 Code)
5-2-2: MOVING WOODEN BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, repair or replace any wooden
building or any part thereof from one place within the above described fire
limits to any other place therein, or to move a wooden building, or any part
thereof, from without said limits to any place therein, without permission
therefor from the city council. Provided, that no such permission shall be
required in the making of repairs, whether external or internal which do not
increase the size of the building concerned or increase its condition as a fire
hazard; provided further, that all roof replacements shall be made of fire
resistant material. No such permission shall be granted by the council unless
it is satisfied that the person desiring the same will comply with all city and
state fire regulations in relation to buildings so as not to increase the
calamities of fire. (1977 Code)
5-2-3: DAMAGED BUILDINGS:
No wooden building within the fire limits which may become damaged to the
extent of fifty percent (50%) of the value thereof by fire, decay or otherwise,
shall be repaired or rebuilt. The extent of the damage that may be done to any
such building as aforesaid shall be determined by three (3) disinterested
persons, residents of the city, one appointed by the mayor, and another who may
be appointed by the owner or agent of such building and the two (2) chosen
shall elect the third. Upon failure of the said owner or agent to select such
person within five (5) days after the mayor has made his selection, it shall
then be lawful for the mayor to select a second person and the two (2) so
appointed shall select the third as in other cases. The persons so chosen shall
first be duly sworn to fairly and impartially estimate such damages and their
decision shall be final. (1977 Code)
5-2-4: JUNKYARDS:
   (A)   It shall not be lawful for any person to establish or locate any
junkyard or similar place within the fire limits of the city or to locate or
establish any junk store therein; neither shall it be lawful for any junkyard
or junk store to be located within three hundred feet (300') of any church,
public or private school, hospital, theater or other place designed for public
assemblages; nor within any block or other section encompassed by streets or
public roads, without the written consent of a majority of the owners of all
real estate therein, used either for residence or retail business purposes, or
both; nor within three hundred feet (300') of any such property fronting on any
street or public road in any other part of the property or both sides thereof;
provided that, before any junkyard or junk store shall be located as to front
on any street or public road adjacent to any block or other section where
permission as aforesaid is required, the written consent of a majority of the
same class of real estate owners on the opposite side of the street or public
road shall also be obtained.
   (B)   The written consent herein required shall be filed with the city
clerk, whose duty it shall be to present the same to the city council at the
next regular meeting thereafter, to the end that such consent may be spread at
large upon the records of such meeting and be made a matter of permanent
record. The regulations herein contained in regard to junkyards and junk
stores, including that of location, shall apply to all such enterprises,
whether retail or wholesale, and to all such businesses as may now be located
in any place within the city contrary to the provisions of this chapter, to
remove the same so as to conform to the requirements thereof. (Ord. 1434, 4-14-
1992)
5-2-5: CONDITION OF STRUCTURES:
No person shall keep or maintain any building or other structures in the city
in such a manner as to endanger persons or property because of faulty
construction, age, lack of repair or in such condition as to become especially
liable to fire, or liable to cause injury or damage by collapse or otherwise,
and no person shall permit or allow any combustible, explosive or inflammable
conditions to exist in or around any such building or structure to the extent
of endangering the same or other property. (1977 Code)
5-2-6: OPEN BURNING; BONFIRES:
(Rep. by Ord. 1247, 11-9-1982)
5-2-7: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
All buildings, structures, businesses or premises constructed, built, located
or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
held to be and are hereby declared to be nuisances and shall be abated as such
as provided by ordinances pertaining to nuisances in general, in addition to
any other penalty herein provided for. Provided, however, that before any
prosecution shall be instituted hereunder, the fire chief or any policeman, in
all cases where circumstances will permit, shall give a five (5) day written
notice to the owner of the premises involved or other person in charge of same
demanding that the nuisance complained of be abated within that time. In all
cases of urgent necessity where delay may endanger life or property, the fire
chief or any policeman may, by himself or with the help or aid of others, enter
upon the premises in question and abate the nuisance summarily in the interest
of the public welfare. (1977 Code)
5-2-8: FALSE ALARMS:
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to transmit in any manner to the Savanna
fire department a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such fire exists.
   (B)   The following is a schedule of charges for false fire alarm calls
received within a one year time period:
 
0–5 false alarm$ 0.00
6th false alarm  50.00
7th false alarm  100.00
8th false alarm  500.00
 
The Savanna fire department, at the discretion of the fire chief, may not
respond to subsequent calls after the eighth false alarm unless the alarm
company certifies that the unit has been repaired. (Ord. 1571, 7-9-1996)
5-2-9: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
unless otherwise specified, shall be as set out under section
1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1571, 7-9-1996)
CHAPTER 3
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Fireworks Defined
5-3-2: Fireworks Unlawful
5-3-3: Exception
5-3-1: FIREWORKS DEFINED:
The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any explosive composition, or any
substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing an audible effect by explosion, deflagration or deterioration, or for
the purpose of producing visual effects, and shall include blank cartridges,
toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require
fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman
candles, bombs, or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks
containing any explosive compound, or any tablets or device containing any
explosive substance, or compound, or any tablets or other device containing any
explosive substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual
effects; provided, however, that the term "fireworks" shall not include toy
pistols, toy canes, toy guns, rockets, or other devices in which paper caps
containing twenty five hundredths (0.25) grains or less of explosive compound
are used, providing they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in
contact with the cap when in place for the explosion and toy pistol paper caps
which contain less than twenty hundredths (0.20) grains of explosive mixture,
the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. (1977 Code)
5-3-2: FIREWORKS UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, use, display, ignite, sell or
offer for sale any fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, Roman candles, sky
rockets, cap pistols or other pyrotechnics within the city.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or keep with intent to sell
explosive compounds for use as rocket fuels. (1977 Code)
5-3-3: EXCEPTION:
Public exhibitions or displays of fireworks or pyrotechnics shall be permitted
when such display or exhibition is under expert supervision; provided, however,
that no public exhibition or display of pyrotechnics shall be had without first
obtaining the approval of the fire chief of the place of exhibition, the
consent of the council and the payment of a permit fee of one dollar ($1.00) to
the clerk. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GASOLINE, VOLATILE OILS AND LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Codes Adopted
5-4-2: Permit Required
5-4-3: Fees
5-4-4: Underground Tanks
5-4-1: CODES ADOPTED:
To the extent not inconsistent with this chapter, the current National Fire
Protection Association laws, rules and regulations relating to the storage,
transportation, sale and use of gasoline, volatile oils and use of liquefied
petroleum gases are hereby adopted by reference as though fully set forth
herein. (1977 Code)
5-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate in the city a
gasoline service station or a bulk station for the storage and sale or
distribution of gasoline or petroleum or any of its products, or to store at
any location in the city, gasoline or any other petroleum product or products,
for the purpose of distributing or dispensing to, or for the use as fuel in,
any motor vehicle or motor vehicles without first securing from the city
council a permit therefor, which permit, if granted, shall designate the
location of such station or place of storage. (1977 Code)
5-4-3: FEES:
   (A)   Each person maintaining or operating any such gasoline service
station, to whom a permit shall be granted pursuant to this chapter, shall pay
the city an annual fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year.
   (B)   Each person operating any gasoline bulk station or other place of
storage, other than as a service station, to whom a permit shall be granted
pursuant to this chapter, shall pay to the city an annual fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per year.
   (C)   Fees paid pursuant to this section shall be due and payable to the
city clerk on or before the third Tuesday of April of each year.
   (D)   If any service station, bulk station or place of storage is not used
or operated for any of the purposes specified in subsection (A) or (B) of this
section at any time following the third Tuesday of April, and prior to the
third Tuesday of October in any year, but is used or operated for any purpose
subsequent to the third Tuesday in October in any year and prior to the third
Tuesday of April in the year following, the license fee for the remainder of
the period until the third Tuesday in April next following, shall be fifty
percent (50%) of the annual fee prescribed by this section, payable upon the
commencement of such use or operation. (1977 Code)
5-4-4: UNDERGROUND TANKS:
   (A)   New Or Replacement Installation:
      1.   Underground flammable liquid storage tanks shall be installed and
tested in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association flammable
and combustible liquids code no. 30-1965, chapter 2, tank storage and chapter
7, service stations; and in accordance with the recommended practice of NFPA
no. 320-1965. Installations incorporating submersible pumps shall be equipped
with a pump actuated leak detector.
      2.   Before the installation of any tank intended for the use of storage
of flammable liquids is covered from sight, the fire chief, or such member of
his department as he shall direct, shall inspect the installation and give
approval. The installer, in the presence of an inspector from the fire
department, shall subject the tank and its piping to a leak test in accordance
with NFPA no. 30-1969, section 26. The test shall be conducted after the tank
has been set in place and all piping has been permanently connected but before
the tank or piping are covered. The test shall be run with air pressure if the
water table permits. When air tested, all joints shall be examined for leakage
detected and there shall be no drop in indicated gauge pressure in thirty (30)
minutes. Hydrostatic leak testing may be conducted with the product.
   (B)   Tanks In Service:
      1.   Accurate inventory control records shall be maintained by the
operator or operator licensee for each underground tank in accordance with NFPA
no. 30-1969, chapter 7, paragraph 7017, and NFPA 329-1965, chapter 2. The
licensee shall promptly report abnormal loss of stock to the fire department.
He shall make his stock control records available for checking by the fire
department.
      2.   Retesting of the installed system shall be conducted in accordance
with either of the following: NFPA 329-1965, chapter 3; or tests approved by
the American Petroleum Institute; or, a test of equal reliability or
sensitivity when approved by the fire department. When testing is required,
such tests shall be made by a person, firm or corporation qualified to test
such underground flammable storage systems and shall be conducted in the
presence of an inspector from the fire department.
      3.   The fire department shall require retesting at any time when it is
suspected that an underground tank or its connected piping may be leaking or
when stock control records indicate an abnormal loss.
      4.   Station owners shall conduct periodic (at least monthly) tests for
the presence of water in submerged tanks in accordance with NFPA 329-1965,
chapter 2.
   (C)   Filing Of Codes And Technical Documents: There shall be on file with
the city clerk three (3) copies of the codes and other technical documents
referred to in subsections (A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   Report Of Tests; Issuance Of Certificate Of Inspection: A report of
the test made pursuant to subsection (A) of this section shall be made to the
fire department and if the report of the test indicates that the storage tank
is found to be in a satisfactory condition, the tanks shall be approved by the
fire department and a certificate of inspection issued by the fire department.
   (E)   Defective Tanks, Report; Notice Prohibiting Use: Should an underground
flammable liquid storage tank be found defective as a result of such test, the
fire department shall report that fact to the owner or lessee of the premises
on which it is maintained, and it shall be the duty of the fire department to
post a notice prohibiting the use of such defective storage tank until the
defect or defects are eliminated and corrected. If repairs will not overcome
the defects, the future use of the underground flammable storage tanks and
equipment shall be prohibited.
   (F)   Use Prohibited Until Correction Of Defects; Removal Of Notice: After
the posting of a notice pursuant to subsection (E) of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to use the defective tank until such time as the
defects are eliminated and corrected to the satisfaction of the fire
department, and the notice so posted removed by the fire department. (1977
Code)
CHAPTER 5
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
5-5-1: Definitions
5-5-2: General
5-5-3: Exceptions To Provisions
5-5-4: Violation
5-5-5: Penalty
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Any vegetable or plant refuse including, but not limited to,
tree trimmings, weeds, leaves, grass, yard trimmings and crop residues.
OPEN BURNING: The combustion of any matter in such a way that the products of
the combustion are emitted to the open air. (Ord. 1247, 11-9-1982)
5-5-2: GENERAL:
The use of burn barrels and the burning of any garbage, waste, refuse, rubbish
or substance of any kind within the city limits are prohibited. (Ord. 1844, 6-
27-2006)
The terms of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the burning of
fuels for cooking purposes in a domestic fireplace in areas where such burning
is consistent with other laws, provided no garbage shall be burned in such
cases.
Open burning shall be prohibited within the corporate limits of the city except
as permitted under the following conditions and subject to any pollution laws
adopted by the city. (Ord. 1247, 11-9-1982)
5-5-3: EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS:
The following activities are not in violation of section
5-5-2 of this chapter: (Ord. 1247, 11-9-1982)
   (A)   The open burning of landscape waste, but only:
      1.   Between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., prevailing time, and
sunset on the second and fourth Friday and following Saturday of the month, and
      2.   When atmospheric conditions will readily dissipate contaminants, and
      3.   On the premises on which such waste is generated, and
      4.   When such burning does not create a visibility hazard on streets,
alleys and public sidewalks, and
      5.   When it can be affirmatively demonstrated that no economically
reasonable alternative method of disposal is available, and
      6.   When such burning does not become a nuisance, annoyance or
discomfort to any other person by reason of the emission of smoke, fumes, fly
ash, dust or soot or noxious odor, and
      7.   When such burning is constantly attended by a competent person until
such burning is extinguished. Such person shall have fire extinguishing
equipment readily available for use as deemed necessary by the fire official,
and
      8.   When the location of the burning is a safe distance from any
structure and adequate provisions are made to prevent fire from spreading to
any structure or the fire is contained in an approved burner located safely not
less than fifteen feet (15') from any structure. (Ord. 2017, 10-23-2012)
5-5-4: VIOLATION:
Violation of any of the conditions shall be the basis for issuance of a
citation to the violator by the police department and imposition of a fine.
(Ord. 2017, 10-23-2012)
5-5-5: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
or for any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be as set forth
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1247, 11-9-1982)
CHAPTER 6
WOOD BURNING FURNACES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definitions
5-6-2: Outdoor Wood Burning Furnace
5-6-3: Indoor Wood Burning Furnace
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
INDOOR WOOD BURNING FURNACES: For purposes of this chapter, "indoor wood
burning furnace" means an appliance designed to be located inside living space
ordinarily used for human habitation and designed to transfer or provide heat,
through the burning of wood, pellets, corn and the like. An indoor wood burning
furnace does not include a wood burning, gas or electric fireplace.
OUTDOOR WOOD BURNING FURNACES: For purposes of this chapter, "outdoor wood
burning furnace" means an accessory structure or appliance designed to be
located outside living space ordinarily used for human habitation and designed
to transfer or provide heat, through the burning of wood, pellets, corn and the
like. An outdoor wood burning furnace does not include a fire pit, wood fired
barbecue or chimney. (Ord. 1864, 1-9-2007)
5-6-2: OUTDOOR WOOD BURNING FURNACE:
No person shall construct, install, operate or use an outdoor wood burning
furnace, unless it complies with the following:
   (A)   Installation of the outdoor wood burning furnace is not less than two
hundred feet (200') from the nearest residence not serviced by the outdoor wood
burning furnace;
   (B)   Installation of the chimney of the outdoor wood burning furnace is
less than fifty five feet (55') in height but taller than the height of the
roof peaks of the residences located within two hundred feet (200') of the
outdoor wood burning furnace;
   (C)   Installation and operation of the outdoor wood burning furnace must be
in accordance with the manufacturer's written instructions, provided such
instructions do not conflict with the provisions of this section;
   (D)   An inspection of the furnace has been performed by the city and a
permit for its use issued;
   (E)   Burning of household waste and the like is prohibited. (Ord. 1864, 1-
9-2007)
5-6-3: INDOOR WOOD BURNING FURNACE:
No person shall construct, install, operate or use an indoor wood burning
furnace, unless it complies with the following:
   (A)   The indoor wood burning furnace chimney must have a height that
extends above the rooftop of the structure;
   (B)   Installation and operation of the indoor wood burning furnace must be
in accordance with the manufacturer's written instructions, provided such
instructions not conflict with the provisions of this section;
   (C)   Burning of household waste and the like is prohibited. (Ord. 1864, 1-
9-2007)
TITLE 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
MISDEMEANORS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Circuses, Carnivals Prohibited
6-1-2: Disorderly Conduct
6-1-3: Weapons, Discharge Of
6-1-4: Homeland Security
6-1-1: CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any unlicensed traveling circus, carnival, menagerie,
sideshow, medicine show, minstrel show and any and all other traveling
exhibitions, performances and entertainments from outside the city to give,
conduct, produce, present or offer any exhibition, performance or entertainment
in or upon any public street, alley or other public place within the corporate
limits of the city. (Ord. 1832, 4-11-2006)
6-1-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
   (A)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
   (B)   With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or not
conversation thereby ensues; or
   (C)   Transmits in any manner to the fire department a false alarm of fire,
knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such fire exists; or
   (D)   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a
bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such a bomb or explosive
is concealed in such place. (1977 Code)
6-1-3: WEAPONS, DISCHARGE OF:
It shall be unlawful to discharge any weapon (firearm, air gun, bow and arrow,
or any missile that could be construed as a weapon) within the city; provided
that this section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law
from discharging a weapon in the performance of his duty; nor to any citizen
from discharging a weapon when lawfully defending person or property; nor to
any properly enclosed and supervised pistol or archery range, provided that
such ranges have a backstop capable of stopping projectiles (arrows, shot, or
sling) shot into the backstop without spatter or ricochet. These ranges (pistol
or archery) must be in a secluded or restricted rear so as to ensure that
public life and property shall not be endangered. (1977 Code)
6-1-4: HOMELAND SECURITY:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to standardize actions to
be taken by the city of Savanna and the county of Carroll as a result of
increased terrorist levels within the United States and the state of Illinois.
   (B)   Guidelines: The guidelines attached as exhibit A to the ordinance
codified herein prepared by the Illinois terrorism task force related to the
implementation of the state of Illinois homeland security advisory system are
hereby adopted. (Ord. 1711, 3-11-2003)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMALS
SECTION:
Article I. General Provisions
6-2-1: Definitions
6-2-2: Cruelty
6-2-3: Exhibition Of Animals
6-2-4: Noises
6-2-5: Animal Restraint
6-2-6: Killing Dangerous Animals
6-2-7: Housing
6-2-8: Impounding
6-2-9: Removal Of Dog And Other Animal Defecation From Public And Private
Properties
Article II. Kennels And Pet Shops
6-2-10: License
6-2-11: Sanitation
6-2-12: Health Officer
Article III. Dogs And Cats
6-2-13: Enforcement
6-2-14: Animal Bite
6-2-15: Keeping, Licensing Of Dangerous Animals
6-2-16: Limitations On Cats Running At Large
6-2-17: Stray And Feral Cats
6-2-18: Responsibilities Imposed On Those Who Feed Stray Cats
6-2-19: Responsibilities Imposed On Those Who Feed Feral Cats
Article IV. Urban Chickens
6-2-20: Purpose
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
ANIMAL:               Any animal, other than man, which may be affected by
                      rabies.
CHICKEN:              Any breed or stage of the common domesticated fowl known
                      as a chicken.
                      A person who is responsible for the maintenance of a
CHICKEN KEEPER:       chicken coop/enclosure and its resident chickens as well
                      as all associated materials, equipment and products.
COOP:                 A structure where chickens are kept and can roost.
ENCLOSURE:            A secure fenced area inside of which a coop and its
                      resident chickens are kept.
                      Any homeless, wild or untamed cat which: a) is born in
                      the wild or the offspring of an owned or feral cat and is
FERAL CAT:            not socialized, b) is a formerly owned cat that has been
                      abandoned and is no longer socialized, or c) lives on a
                      farm.
HEN:                  A female chicken.
                      Shall be construed to include any establishment for the
                      raising, training, boarding or selling of dogs, cats,
KENNEL AND PET SHOPS: birds, mice, rats or other small animals for hire or
                      profit, or where more than three (3) dogs or cats or
                      other small animals are harbored for sixty (60) days or
                      more or until weaned.
                      Animals associated with agricultural operation, commonly
                      kept or raised as a part of an agricultural operation
LIVESTOCK:            including, but not limited to, rabbits, chickens, ducks,
                      turkeys, fowl, cattle, horses, asses, mules, swine, sheep
                      and goats,
ROOSTER:              A male chicken. Prohibited under city ordinance.
                      Any cat whose owner or keeper from time to time allows
STRAY CAT:            the cat to run free off of the property of the owner or
                      keeper. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015; amd. Ord. 2338, 2-27-2024)
 
6-2-2: CRUELTY:
No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the city in any way; and any person
who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this section. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
6-2-3: EXHIBITION OF ANIMALS:
Exhibitions or parades of animals which are Ferae naturae (in a wild nature or
disposition) in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a
permit from the chief of police. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
6-2-4: NOISES:
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by
loud noises at any time, day or night. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
6-2-5: ANIMAL RESTRAINT:
It shall be unlawful to permit any animal to run at large in the city. Any
animal running at large in the defined city limits, creating a public nuisance,
may be impounded. It shall further be unlawful to picket or tie any animal on
any public owned property for the purpose of grazing or feeding. (Ord. 2122, 4-
28-2015)
6-2-6: KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
The members of the police department and/or other police authorized persons in
the city are authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when it is
necessary for the protection of any person or property. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
6-2-7: HOUSING:
No person shall cause or allow any place where any animal is or may be kept to
become unclean or unwholesome. It shall be unlawful to keep or raise any
livestock other than chickens within the city limits.
Raising of chickens is allowed only by permit issued by the Savanna Zoning
Administrator and in compliance with this ordinance. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015;
amd. Ord. 2338, 2-27-2024)
6-2-8: IMPOUNDING:
Animals running at large in violation of the provisions of this code may be
seized by any person, as directed by the mayor, and impounded at the Carroll
County animal shelter. The owner of the animal will be charged a redemption fee
of twenty dollars ($20.00) to redeem the animal, in addition to any other
charges which the shelter may impose. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
6-2-9: REMOVAL OF DOG AND OTHER ANIMAL DEFECATION FROM PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
PROPERTIES:
An owner or person having custody of any dog or any other animal shall not
permit said dog or any other animal to defecate on any school ground, public
street, alley, sidewalk, tree bank, park or any other public grounds or any
private property within the city, other than the premises of the owner or
person having custody of said dog or other animal, unless said defecation is
removed immediately. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
ARTICLE II. KENNELS AND PET SHOPS
6-2-10: LICENSE:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a kennel or pet shop anywhere within
the corporate city limits without first securing a license therefor. The annual
fee for such license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the city council, at its discretion, may issue one kennel
license annually, without fee, to a not for profit corporation doing business
in Savanna, Illinois.
   (B)   No new license to operate a kennel or pet shop shall be issued unless
each of the following requirements are met:
      1.   The applicant submits to the city a signed statement by a licensed
veterinarian that he has inspected the premises to be used as a kennel or pet
shop and the premises meets the criteria of section 6-2-11 of this chapter.
      2.   The premises to be used as a kennel or pet shop contains adequate
fencing or other enclosures necessary to prevent the escape of animals to be
kept on the premises.
      3.   The use of the premises as a kennel or pet shop is in conformance
with city zoning regulations. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
      4.   The applicant establishes by the preponderance of the evidence
produced at a public hearing before the city planning and zoning board, with
notice thereof published at least one time not less than ten (10) days nor more
than thirty (30) days in a paper of general circulation within the city at the
expense of the applicant, that the proposed use of the premises as a kennel or
pet shop will not materially reduce the value of surrounding property. (Ord.
2122, 4-28-2015; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (C)   No existing license to operate a kennel or pet shop shall be renewed
or reissued unless the requirements of subsections (A), (B)1, (B)2 and (B)3 of
this section are met.
   (D)   Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by an order of the mayor
if at any time the mayor finds that the premises are not operated in accordance
with this chapter, after first giving the holder of the license due notice and
an opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
6-2-11: SANITATION:
Every place used as a kennel or pet shop shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and no refuse or waste material shall be allowed to remain thereon
for more than twenty four (24) hours. All animals shall be humanely treated;
and any animal having any disease shall be properly isolated and treated. (Ord.
2122, 4-28-2015)
6-2-12: HEALTH OFFICER:
The health officer shall have the right to inspect such premises during normal
working hours. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
ARTICLE III. DOGS AND CATS
6-2-13: ENFORCEMENT:
The mayor shall direct the actions to be taken to enforce the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
6-2-14: ANIMAL BITE:
Whenever any animal bites a person, the owner of said animal shall immediately
notify the chief of police, who shall order the animal to be held on the
owner's premises or shall have the animal impounded for a period of ten (10)
days. The animal shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and
again at the end of the ten (10) day period. If, at the end of this ten (10)
day period a veterinarian is convinced that the animal is free from rabies, he
shall order the animal released from quarantine or the pound, as the case may
be. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
6-2-15: KEEPING, LICENSING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
This code is hereby amended to adopt 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11 et
seq., as amended. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
6-2-16: LIMITATIONS ON CATS RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any cat owner to permit a cat to run free outside the
residence of its owner or keeper unless the cat has been:
   (A)   Neutered or spayed to prevent it from procreating;
   (B)   Immunized against rabies and vaccinated in compliance with the laws of
the state of Illinois;
   (C)   Appropriately "tipped" on an ear to signify that it has been neutered/
spayed and immunized. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
6-2-17: STRAY AND FERAL CATS:
The city council finds and declares that the proliferation of feral cats and
stray cats poses a potential danger to the health, safety, and general welfare
of the public. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
6-2-18: RESPONSIBILITIES IMPOSED ON THOSE WHO FEED STRAY CATS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to feed stray cats, if such
feeding causes a nuisance to neighbors or creates a condition contrary to the
health, safety, and welfare of the community.
   (B)   Any person who undertakes to feed stray cats shall assume
responsibility and be liable for any damage to persons or property caused by
the cats. In addition such person shall be liable for and assume responsibility
for seeing that the stray cats are:
      1.   Neutered or spayed to prevent procreating;
      2.   Immunized against rabies and vaccinated in compliance with the laws
of the state of Illinois;
      3.   Appropriately "tipped" on an ear to signify that they have been
neutered/spayed and immunized. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
6-2-19: RESPONSIBILITIES IMPOSED ON THOSE WHO FEED FERAL CATS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to continue to feed feral cats, if
such feeding causes a nuisance to neighbors or creates a condition contrary to
the health, safety, and welfare of the community.
   (B)   Any person who undertakes to feed feral cats shall assume
responsibility and be liable for any damage to persons or property caused by
the cats. In addition such person shall be liable for and assume responsibility
for seeing that the feral cats are:
      1.   Neutered or spayed to prevent procreating;
      2.   Immunized against rabies and vaccinated in compliance with the laws
of the state of Illinois;
      3.   Appropriately "tipped" on an ear to signify that they have been
neutered/spayed and immunized. (Ord. 2122, 4-28-2015)
ARTICLE IV. URBAN CHICKENS
6-2-20: PURPOSE:
   (A)   The purpose of this ordinance is to establish certain requirements
which are intended to reduce problems that may otherwise be associated with the
keeping of chickens in urban areas and to encourage high quality chicken
keeping practices. Keeping of chickens shall be done in accordance with this
Ordinance and any other applicable laws.
   (B)   Permit Required:
      1.   No person shall keep chickens within the City without first
obtaining the appropriate permit(s) issued by the City. Chickens cannot be
possessed until such permit is issued. A one-time zoning application and permit
is required.
      2.   At the time of the application for a chicken keeping permit, the
applicant shall submit the following:
         a.   A completed application as provided by the city.
         b.   A scaled SITE PLAN of the proposed coop and enclosure that shows
compliance with this article.
         c.   At the time of application payment, the city will send a one-time
notice to all contiguous property owners of the proposed chicken permit by
regular mail.
         d.   When the applicant is leasing the subject property, written proof
that the property owner consents to the establishment of a chicken enclosure.
Additionally, in the case of multi-family dwelling, written proof that all
households in the dwelling consent to the establishment of a chicken enclosure
on the property.
         e.   All city fees, fines or assessments, to property and applicant in
question, must be paid in full at the time of application.
         f.   Denial, suspension, revocation. The permitting officer or
designee may deny, suspend or revoke any permit issued on the following
grounds:
         (1)   False statements on any report required by this section.
         (2)   Failure to pay any city fees, fines, bills or assessments made
against permittee or property.
         (3)   Failure to correct deficiencies or comply with any provision
assigned to permittee or property,
         (4)   Inspections and Re-inspections, The permitting officer or
designee may coordinate with the permittee to inspect conditions of property as
deemed necessary and associated with the permit issued.
         (5)   The fee for a chicken permit shall be a one-time application fee
of $75.
   (C)   Keeping of Chickens: Chicken Hens: It shall be unlawful and is hereby
declared to be a nuisance to raise, maintain, or have upon any property within
the city any chickens except under the following conditions:
      1.   No roosters are permitted within city limits.
      2.   Slaughtering of chickens is prohibited.
      3.   Hens must be kept in an enclosure and provided a coop. Coops shall
be designed with a minimum of four 14) square feet per chicken. They shall also
be enclosed on all sides, have a roof, secured entrance and adequate
ventilation. Chickens shall be secured within a coop between dusk and dawn. The
permittee shall not allow chickens to roam off property.
      4.   No more than six hens on properties with less than one acre of area.
      5.   Properties larger than one acre may have up to 10 hens.
      6.   Chickens must be kept in an enclosed area and provided a coop and
run:
         a.   The coop and run must be at lease 20 feet from the nearest
property line.
         b.   The coop must have a minimum of 4 square feet per chicken.
         c.   The run (fenced in portion) must have a minimum area of 10
square-foot per chicken.
         d.   Enclosures may not exceed 100 square feet and coops may not
exceed 24 square feet in area and eight feet in height.
         e.   Location. Coops and enclosures must not be visible from the
street, must be located in a rear yard, and must comply with all applicable
setback requirements.
         f.   Coop and run must be kept clean to avoid noxious smells.
         g.   Coops and enclosures shall be maintained in clean and sanitary
condition at all times.
         h.   All soiled bedding material will be disposed of off the premises.
         i.   The materials used in construction of coops and enclosures shall
be uniform for each element of the structure such that the walls are made of
the same material, the roof has the same shingles or other covering, and any
windows or openings are constructed using the same materials. The use of scrap,
waste board, sheet metal or similar materials is prohibited.
         j.   There shall be no more than one enclosure and one coop therein on
any given property.
         k.   The keeping of chickens shall be of a non-commercial nature.
         l.   Permits on vacant properties prohibited. The permittee must
occupy the residence associated with permit.
      7.   Food, Water, and Health:
         a.   Chicken keepers shall provide adequate feed to chickens and
secure said feed in such a fashion as to avoid attracting predators or nuisance
species.
         b.   Chicken keepers shall ensure that a fresh, convenient source of
water is available to chickens at all times.
         c.   Chickens shall be monitored for health problems common to their
species and cared for using common best practice methods, which may include the
removal of unhealthy hens.
         d.   It shall be unlawful to keep chickens on any property in a manner
that threatens the public health or safety, or creates a nuisance.
      8.   Waste, Storage and Removal:
         a.   All stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed container
or structure with roof or lid. Waste shall not be allowed to accumulate and
shall be removed periodically as to not cause a nuisance or health concern. The
property shall be kept free from all trash, waste or other debris.
      9.   All provisions subject to TITLE 7 HEALTH AND SANITATION, CHAPTER 1.
NUISANCES. (Ord. 2338, 2-27-2024)
CHAPTER 3
CURFEW
SECTION:
6-3-1: Loitering Of Minors
6-3-2: Responsibility
6-3-3: Loitering
6-3-1: LOITERING OF MINORS:
It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to be present
at or upon any public assembly, building, place, store or highway at the
following times unless accompanied by and supervised by a parent, legal
guardian or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of age
approved by a parent or legal guardian, or unless engaged in a business or
occupation which the laws of this state authorize a person less than eighteen
(18) years of age to perform:
Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. Saturday;
Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. Sunday; and
Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day. (1977 Code)
6-3-2: RESPONSIBILITY:
   (A)   Parents: It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person
to knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate section
6-3-1 of this chapter.
   (B)   Owners Of Amusement Places: It is unlawful for any person operating
places of amusement and entertainment to permit any minors under the age of
seventeen (17) years to enter or remain in such places of amusement and
entertainment during the hours prohibited under this chapter; provided,
however, that the provisions of this section do not apply when the minor is
accompanied by his parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion at
least eighteen (18) years of age approved by a parent or legal guardian. (1977
Code)
   (C)   Defense Of A Violation: It is a defense to a violation under this
chapter that the child engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      1.   Engaged in business or occupation which the laws of Illinois
authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform;
      2.   Accompanied by the child's parent, legal guardian, custodian,
sibling, stepbrother or stepsister at least eighteen (18) years of age;
      3.   Accompanied by an adult at least eighteen (18) years of age approved
by the child's parent, guardian or custodian;
      4.   Participating in, going to, or returning from:
         (a)   Employment which the laws of the state authorize a person less
than seventeen (17) years of age to perform;
         (b)   A school recreational activity;
         (c)   A religious event;
         (d)   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an eminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
         (e)   An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights
protected under the first amendment to the United States constitution or
article I, sections 3, 4 and 5 of the constitution of the state of Illinois, or
both;
         (f)   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that
provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the supervision
of one or more adults. (Ord. 1767, 5-11-2004)
6-3-3: LOITERING:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
    LOITERING: Remaining in one location in a place, or at a time or in a
manner not usual for law abiding individuals.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: all
places maintained by public funds such as streets, public restrooms, sidewalks,
parks, alleys, and public buildings, and all places privately owned but open to
the general public.
   (B)   Determination Of Probable Cause For Alarm, Or Disturbance Of Others:
Without limitation, the following activities may be considered in determining
probable cause for alarm or concern:
      1.   The flight of a person upon the appearance of a police officer.
      2.   Refusal of a person to identify himself or herself at the request of
a police officer.
      3.   Attempted concealment of a person or any object upon the appearance
of a police officer.
      4.   The systematic checking by a person of doors, windows, or other
means of access to buildings, houses, or vehicles.
      5.   Continuous presence by a person in close proximity to any building,
house, vehicle, or any other property when the activity of such person
reasonably manifests possible unlawful activity or reasonably presents a threat
or hazard to another person or to the security of any property in the vicinity.
(Ord. 1367, 11-28-1989)
      6.   Obstructing the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
      7.   Obstructing, molesting or interfering with any person lawfully in
any public place. This subsection shall include the making of unsolicited
remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated
to annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose hearing, the remarks are made.
(Ord. 1539, 8-8-1995)
   (C)   Loitering; Police Order To Disperse:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, either alone or with
others, in a public place under circumstances which may reasonably alarm or
disturb others after receiving an order to move or disperse by a police
officer.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, either alone or with
others, in a public place in such a manner so as to obstruct the free and
uninterrupted use of any public place after receiving an order to move or
disperse by a police officer. (Ord. 1367, 11-28-1989)
CHAPTER 4
NOISE
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definition
6-4-2: Noise Prohibited
6-4-3: Automobile Warning Devices
6-4-4: Whistles
6-4-5: Vehicles
6-4-6: Mufflers
6-4-7: Pets
6-4-8: Loud, Disturbing, Unnecessary Noises
6-4-1: DEFINITION:
"Noise" shall mean any sound or sounds which cause annoyance to residents of
the city. (1977 Code)
6-4-2: NOISE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to make, or cause to be made, any noise or sounds of such
volume or of such a nature as to cause annoyance to residents of the city.
(1977 Code)
6-4-3: AUTOMOBILE WARNING DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful to use an automobile horn or other warning device to emit
an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or whistle, except to give audible warning
to ensure safe operation of a vehicle. (1977 Code)
6-4-4: WHISTLES:
It shall be unlawful to blow, or cause to be blown, any steam whistle of any
stationary engine or steam engine in the city, except as a signal for starting
or stopping work or in emergencies to avoid injury to persons or property.
(1977 Code)
6-4-5: VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or
unnecessary noise. (1977 Code)
6-4-6: MUFFLERS:
No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless such vehicle is
provided with such muffler in efficient actual working condition, and the use
of a cutout is prohibited. (1977 Code)
6-4-7: PETS:
It shall be unlawful to keep any animal which makes any noise or sounds of such
volume or of such a nature as to cause annoyance to residents of the city.
(1977 Code)
6-4-8: LOUD, DISTURBING, UNNECESSARY NOISES:
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises
in violation of this chapter, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, namely:
   (A)   Noises Near Schools, Hospitals, Churches: The creation of any
excessive noise on any street near any school, institution of learning, church
or court while the same is in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which
unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof. (1977 Code)
   (B)   Noises To Attract Attention: The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other
instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of
noise and/or music for the purpose of show or display of merchandise. (Ord.
1983, 10-11-2011)
   (C)   Loudspeaker Or Amplifiers: The unreasonable use of any amplifiers or
loudspeakers in the course of any public address.
   (D)   Operation Of Motor Vehicles: The operation of any motor vehicle so as
to cause squealing of tires. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PARADES, OPEN AIR MEETINGS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definitions
6-5-2: Permit Required
6-5-3: Application
6-5-4: Hours Parades And Open Air Meetings Allowed
6-5-5: Number Of Vehicles, Persons
6-5-6: Procedure On Applications
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter the following terms shall be defined:
OPEN AIR MEETING: Any congregation of citizens held outdoors and upon any
public property for the purpose of hearing speakers or discussing some matter
of common interest where the number of participants expected may reasonably be
assumed to exceed fifty (50).
PARADE: Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of
any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public
place in the municipality. (Ord. 2068, 11-26-2013)
6-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall participate in a parade or open air meeting held on any public
way or on any public property unless a written permit therefor shall first be
approved from the chief of police and mayor. The chief of police shall obtain
permission as required from the Illinois department of transportation when a
state highway is utilized for parade purposes. (Ord. 2068, 11-26-2013)
6-5-3: APPLICATION:
An application to conduct a parade or open air meeting shall be submitted three
(3) weeks prior to the requested parade date and three (3) days prior to an
open air meeting to the chief of police or mayor, by a representative of the
group seeking the permit, and shall set forth the following information:
   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the
parade chairman or chairman of the open air meeting;
   (B)   The date when the parade or open air meeting is to be conducted;
   (C)   The route to be traveled, the starting point, the termination point
and the location of speakers' platforms;
   (D)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which
will constitute such parade or open air meeting; the type of animals, and
description of the vehicles;
   (E)   The hours when such parade or open air meeting will start and
terminate;
   (F)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion
of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
   (G)   The location by streets of any assembly for such parade or open air
meeting;
   (H)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas. (Ord. 2068, 11-26-2013)
6-5-4: HOURS PARADES AND OPEN AIR MEETINGS ALLOWED:
   (A)   All parades shall be held during daylight hours at the time other than
peak traffic periods that is determined by the chief of police.
   (B)   All open air meetings shall conclude by twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and shall not be held before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sunday.
(Ord. 2068, 11-26-2013)
6-5-5: NUMBER OF VEHICLES, PERSONS:
Parades and open air meetings shall be limited to such numbers as will not
obstruct traffic either vehicular or pedestrian, in an unreasonable manner, and
in any event no such parade or open air meeting shall consist of more than five
hundred (500) persons. (Ord. 2068, 11-26-2013)
6-5-6: PROCEDURE ON APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   If the chief of police shall receive more than one application for a
parade or open air meeting at the same time and the same place, or on the same
day, the application filed first in the time shall take precedence. An
application shall be considered to be "at the same time" if the event is
scheduled to commence within two (2) hours before or after the holding of
another event. An application shall be considered to be "at the same place" if
the requested parade route comes at any point within six (6) blocks or any
equivalent distance from the route of another parade or if the open air meeting
is to be conducted within one-half (1/2) mile of another open air meeting. If
the chief of police receives an application for more than one parade or open
air meeting in a single day, he may set a time for the duration of each parade
or open air meeting which time shall not, without the consent of the group
seeking the permit, be less than three (3) hours.
   (B)   The chief of police shall issue permits for more than a single parade
during one day in accordance with the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section; provided, however, that he may not issue multiple permits beyond the
point at which the issuance of an additional permit would require the
continuing diversion of so great a number of police officers or other municipal
personnel so as to prevent normal police protection or other services to the
municipality. (Ord. 2068, 11-26-2013)
CHAPTER 6
ABANDONED PROPERTY
SECTION:
6-6-1: Application Of Act
6-6-2: Police Shall Have Custody
6-6-3: Sale Of Unclaimed Property
6-6-4: Contraband Property
6-6-5: Proceeds Of Sale
6-6-6: Recovery Of Property
6-6-1: APPLICATION OF ACT:
All personal property which possession is transferred to the police department
of the city under circumstances supporting a reasonable belief that such
property was abandoned, lost or stolen or otherwise illegally possessed, except
property seized during a search and retained and ultimately returned, destroyed
or otherwise disposed of pursuant to an order of court, shall be disposed of as
provided in this code. (1977 Code)
6-6-2: POLICE SHALL HAVE CUSTODY:
Property believed to be abandoned, lost, stolen or otherwise illegally
possessed shall be retained in the custody of the chief of police or principal
law officer of the police department of the city who shall make reasonable
inquiry and efforts to identify and notify the owner or other persons entitled
to possession thereof and shall return the property to said person provided
reasonable and satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession is made
and reimbursement is made to the police department for all reasonable expenses
of such custody. (1977 Code)
6-6-3: SALE OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
All property so obtained by the police department of the city which the
identity or location of the owner or other person entitled to possession has
not been ascertained within six (6) months after the police department obtains
such possession, the chief of police shall effectuate the sale of the property
for cash to the highest bidder at public auction, notice of which, including
time, place and a brief description of such property, shall be published at
least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where such
official has authority at least ten (10) days prior to such auction. If
official notice is given and property offered, but not sold at such public
auction, it may be offered and sold at subsequent public auction without
notice. (1977 Code)
6-6-4: CONTRABAND PROPERTY:
Any property received or possessed or transferred to the police department of
the city which is considered contraband property by reason of the nature of the
property or any dangerous weapon may not be sold and shall be destroyed under
the direct supervision of the chief of police of the city. (1977 Code)
6-6-5: PROCEEDS OF SALE:
Proceeds of the sale of the property at public auction less reimbursement to
the law enforcement agency for the reasonable expenses of custody and
conducting the sale and advertising shall be deposited in the treasury of the
city. (1977 Code)
6-6-6: RECOVERY OF PROPERTY:
The owner or other person entitled to possession of such property may claim or
recover possession of the property at any time before its sale at public
auction upon providing reasonable and satisfactory proof of ownership or right
to possession and reimbursement of the police department of the city for all
reasonable expenses of the custody and sale advertisements thereof. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 7
ABANDONED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-7-1: Definitions
6-7-2: Abandonment
6-7-3: Notify Police Department
6-7-4: Removal Authorized
6-7-5: Record Of Removed Vehicles
6-7-6: Unknown Owner
6-7-7: Identification
6-7-8: Proof Of Ownership
6-7-9: Sale Of Unclaimed Vehicles
6-7-10: Disposition Of Vehicles
6-7-11: Record Of Transactions Maintained
6-7-12: Proceeds
6-7-13: Liability For Damages
6-7-14: Penalty
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as follows:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of disrepair
rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition, or any motor
vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7)
consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted. The movement of such a
vehicle shall be interpreted that such vehicle must be operated and driven from
its location of abandonment a minimum distance of five hundred feet (500').
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE: A motor driven vehicle with treads or wheels designed to
travel on rough or uneven ground.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or other vehicle twenty five (25) years of
age or older.
BOAT: A boat propelled usually by an internal or external combustion engine.
CAMPER: A portable dwelling incorporated into a motor vehicle or placed on
wheels (for example a specially equipped trailer or automotive vehicle) for use
during casual travel and camping.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or
on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or
otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall include any motor vehicle or
boat which is not properly licensed with the state of Illinois. "Inoperable
motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered
temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to
perform ordinary service or repair operations, vehicles temporarily stored in
duly licensed commercial garages and storage yards; and vehicles kept inside a
fully enclosed garage or storage building.
LAWN MOWER: A motor driven machine with a rotating blade for cutting grass.
MOTOR HOME: A motor vehicle built on a car, truck or bus chassis and designed
to serve as self-contained living quarters for recreational travel.
MOTOR VEHICLE: An automobile, truck, bus, motorcycle or similar motor driven
conveyance.
MOTORCYCLE: A two (2) wheeled motor driven vehicle resembling a heavy bicycle.
TRAILER: A nonautomotive vehicle designed for transporting something or a motor
vehicle equipped with living quarters. (Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977; amd. Ord. 1162,
4-10-1979; Ord. 1657, 6-13-2000; Ord. 1995, 2-14-2012; Ord. 2047, 7-9-2013)
For purposes of this chapter reference to motor vehicle or inoperable motor
vehicles shall include all-terrain vehicles, boats, campers, lawn mowers,
motorcycles, motor homes, motor vehicles and similar motor driven conveyances
as well as trailers. (Ord. 2047, 7-9-2013)
6-7-2: ABANDONMENT:
The abandonment of a motor vehicle or the keeping of an inoperable motor
vehicle, whether on public or private property within this city, is unlawful
and subject to penalties as set forth herein. An abandoned vehicle or an
inoperable motor vehicle or any part thereof may be authorized for removal by
or upon order of the chief of the police department of the city, after at least
seven (7) days' notice to the vehicle owner and/or the owner of the private
property on which the vehicle may be located. However, nothing in this section
shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not in
use, to operable antique vehicles, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a
place of business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles. (Ord.
1657, 6-13-2000)
6-7-3: NOTIFY POLICE DEPARTMENT:
When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle
comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in this state not
the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the police
department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the city. Upon
receipt of such notification, the chief of the police department shall
authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of the abandoned,
lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service
will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record of the
tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person legally
entitled to possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as provided in this
chapter. (1977 Code)
6-7-4: REMOVAL AUTHORIZED:
   (A)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof is abandoned
on a highway, street, alley, city parking lot or other public property in the
city seven (7) days or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized
by order of the chief of the police department of the city.
   (B)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled
motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its
position in relation to the highway, street or alley, or its physical
appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal by a
towing service may be authorized by order of the chief of the police department
of the city. (Ord. 1162, 4-10-1979)
   (C)   When a vehicle removed from either public or private property is
authorized by order of the chief of the police department of the city, the
owner of the vehicle will be responsible for all towing costs. (1977 Code)
6-7-5: RECORD OF REMOVED VEHICLES:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the
police department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed,
listing the manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification
number and license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record
shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location
towed to, reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
(1977 Code)
6-7-6: UNKNOWN OWNER:
When the city police department does not know the identity of the registered
owner or other legally entitled person, they will cause the motor vehicle
registration records of the state of Illinois to be searched by a directed
communication to the secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.
The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the Illinois
state police to be searched by a directed communication to the Illinois state
police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the Illinois state
police files are searched with negative results, the information contained in
the national crime information center (NCIC) files will be searched by the
Illinois state police. The information determined from these record searches
will be used by the police department in sending a notification by certified
mail to the owner or legally entitled person advising where the vehicle is
held, requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale
information. (1977 Code)
6-7-7: IDENTIFICATION:
When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of
a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from the registration
files of this state or from the registration files of a foreign state, if
applicable, the police department shall notify the Illinois state police for
the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person legally entitled
to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the Illinois
state police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency having
custody of the vehicle for notification of the owner. (1977 Code)
6-7-8: PROOF OF OWNERSHIP:
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or
disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally entitled to
its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police department
proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. No
vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this section until
all towing and storage charges have been paid. (1977 Code)
6-7-9: SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer, remains unclaimed by the registered
owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of sixty
(60) days after notice has been given as provided herein, the police department
having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public sale to
the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in
a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the
premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten (10) days prior to
the sale, the police department shall cause a notice of the time and place of
the sale to be sent to the registered owner or other person by certified mail
by the police department or towing service to be legally entitled to the
possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete description of
the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled
person to reclaim the vehicle.
In those instances where the certified notification specified herein has been
returned by the postal authorities to the police department due to the address
obtained from the registration records of this state, the sending of a second
certified notice will not be required. (Ord. 2167, 5-10-2016)
6-7-10: DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES:
When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to
the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years of
age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in this chapter,
the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in the manner
authorized by this chapter without notice to the registered owner or other
person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is impounded as
specified by this chapter, it will be kept in custody for a minimum of ten (10)
days for the purpose of determining ownership, the contacting of the registered
owner by the U.S. mail, public service or in person for a determination of the
Illinois state police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted
information. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period, without the benefit
of disposition information being received from the registered owner, the chief
of police will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.
A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique vehicle is excluded
from this chapter. (1977 Code)
6-7-11: RECORD OF TRANSACTIONS MAINTAINED:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the police department
is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled person, or when
the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this
chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the police
department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.
(1977 Code)
6-7-12: PROCEEDS:
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the city is authorized to
be towed away by the chief of police and disposed of as set forth in this
chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of
towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the city treasury.
(1977 Code)
6-7-13: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be
held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered
owner, former registered owner, or his legal representative, or any other
person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle
when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this
chapter. (1977 Code)
6-7-14: PENALTY:
In addition to being responsible for towing costs, any person, firm or
corporation violating this chapter shall be fined a sum not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for any one offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each and every day which a violation continues or exists
after the seven (7) day notice period. (Ord. 1657, 6-13-2000)
CHAPTER 8
VANDALISM; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
6-8-1: Definitions
6-8-2: Offenses
6-8-3: Penalties
6-8-4: Restitution By Parent Or Legal Guardian
6-8-5: Common Law Damages
6-8-6: Civil Practice Act In Proceedings Under Section
6-8-4 
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years but has not yet
attained eighteen (18) years of age.
PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN: One or both of the natural parents of a minor and/or
any person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of
this state or a court of foreign jurisdiction, but does not include a person
appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act 1 .
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind, including, but not by way of limitation, the city of
Savanna, any school district, library district, park district or fire
protection district.
PROPERTY OF ANOTHER: Any and all real estate, including any and all
improvements thereon and any and all property, personal, tangible or
intangible, in which the offender has no interest. (Ord. 1145, 3-14-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.
6-8-2: OFFENSES:
No person, including any minor, shall, within the corporate limits of the city
of Savanna:
   (A)   Wilfully or maliciously damage any property of another person without
such other person's consent.
   (B)   Wilfully or maliciously by means of fire or explosion, damage any
property of another person.
   (C)   Wilfully or maliciously start a fire in or upon the property of
another person without such person's consent.
   (D)   Wilfully or maliciously deposit in or upon the property of another
person any stink bomb or other offensive smelling compound without the consent
of such other person. (Ord. 1145, 3-14-1978)
6-8-3: PENALTIES:
Any person, not a minor, determined to have committed an act prohibited by
section
6-8-2 of this chapter shall be fined in a sum not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for any one offense. (Ord. 1145, 3-14-1978)
6-8-4: RESTITUTION BY PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN:
The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor defendant who resides
with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable for actual damages arising
as a consequence of the performance of the unemancipated minor offender of the
wilful or malicious acts specified in section
6-8-2 of this chapter. However, no recovery under this section may exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each separate and distinct occurrence of such
wilful or malicious conduct by any unemancipated minor found to have caused
such injury or damage. Such actual damage shall be in addition to any and all
court costs. (Ord. 1145, 3-14-1978)
6-8-5: COMMON LAW DAMAGES:
No provision of this code shall affect the recovery of damages in any other
cause of action where the liability of parent or legal guardian is predicated
on a common law basis. (Ord. 1145, 3-14-1978)
6-8-6: CIVIL PRACTICE ACT IN PROCEEDINGS UNDER SECTION 6-8-4:
The Illinois civil practice act, as the same may from time to time be amended
and modified, shall apply to all actions brought by and on behalf of the city
of Savanna under the provisions of section
6-8-4 of this chapter.
All damages assessed under the provisions of section
6-8-4 of this chapter shall be payable to the person or persons who have
suffered such actual damages. (Ord. 1145, 3-14-1978)
CHAPTER 9
FAIR HOUSING ORDINANCE
SECTION:
6-9-1: Statement Of Policy
6-9-2: Purpose And Scope
6-9-3: Jurisdiction
6-9-4: Interpretation
6-9-5: Construction Of Terms
6-9-6: Selected Definitions
6-9-7: Effect On Other Rights
6-9-8: Disclaimer Of Liability
6-9-1: STATEMENT OF POLICY:
   (A)   When certain individuals are treated differently in the housing market
because of racial, religious or other prejudices, the entire community suffers.
Discrimination frequently denies its immediate victims their right to acquire a
decent home in a safe and pleasant neighborhood. Discrimination also typically
causes neighborhoods to become highly segregated, and engenders instability on
the fringes of such areas. This instability seriously impairs any sense of
community responsibility and accelerates neighborhood decay. Neighborhood decay
reduces the housing supply and deflates the tax base. Concurrently, it
increases the need for government services and necessitates a higher tax rate.
   (B)   Although discrimination in housing is proscribed by the United States
and Illinois constitutions and by various federal laws, the problem is best
handled at the local level because: 1) there is no statewide enforcement
program, and 2) the federal enforcement machinery is disturbingly slow,
inadequate and sometimes simply unresponsive to local needs.
   (C)   In light of the above, the council hereby declares that it is the
public policy of this municipality to endeavor to ensure all persons an equal
opportunity to provide for themselves a home of their own choosing that is as
sufficient as their individual talents, industry and circumstances may permit.
(Ord. 1507, 8-23-1994)
6-9-2: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the policy set forth above by:
   (A)   Prohibiting discrimination based on race, color, creed, ancestry,
national origin or physical or mental handicap in the marketing, disposition
and financing of housing; and
   (B)   Establishing procedures for the fair and efficient administration and
enforcement of such regulations. (Ord. 1507, 8-23-1994)
6-9-3: JURISDICTION:
This chapter shall be applicable within the corporate limits of this
municipality. (Ord. 1507, 8-23-1994)
6-9-4: INTERPRETATION:
Every provision of this chapter shall be construed liberally to further the
policy and purpose of this chapter, and every requirement imposed herein shall
be deemed minimal. (Ord. 1507, 8-23-1994)
6-9-5: CONSTRUCTION OF TERMS:
In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this chapter, the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them
in section
6-9-6 of this chapter unless the context clearly indicates otherwise; terms not
defined in section
6-9-6 of this chapter shall have their standard English dictionary meanings.
   (B)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders.
   (C)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
   (D)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
the plural the singular.
   (E)   The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is discretionary.
   (F)   The term "this municipality" shall mean the city of Savanna, Illinois.
   (G)   All time periods expressed in days shall be construed as calendar
days, not working days.
   (H)   Captions (i.e., titles of sections, subsections, etc.) are intended
merely to facilitate general reference, and in no way limit the substantive
application of the provisions set forth thereunder.
   (I)   References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections
within that section; but a reference to a particular subsection designates only
that subsection.
   (J)   A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific
terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly limited.
(Ord. 1507, 8-23-1994)
6-9-6: SELECTED DEFINITIONS:
COMMISSION: The human relations commission of this municipality (or any other
agency designated by the council to administer this chapter).
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof containing one or more dwelling
units, or any parcel of land offered for sale or lease for the construction or
placement of such building.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed or used as living quarters by one
family.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any bank, savings and loan association, insurance
company, or any other person or firm whose business consists, in whole or in
part, of making or guaranteeing loans.
HOUSING: Synonym for "dwelling".
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, organization or corporate body
acting in any capacity.
RENT: To lease, sublease, let or otherwise grant or receive for consideration
the right to occupy any dwelling not owned by the occupant. (Ord. 1507, 8-23-
1994)
6-9-7: EFFECT ON OTHER RIGHTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any person from exercising any right or
seeking any remedy to which he might otherwise be entitled. (Ord. 1507, 8-23-
1994)
6-9-8: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY 1 :
   (A)   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
official, commission member, agent or employee of this municipality shall
render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
duties under this chapter.
   (B)   Any suit brought against any official, commission member, agent or
employee of this municipality, as a result of any act required or permitted in
the discharge of his duties under this chapter, shall be defended by the
municipal attorney until the final determination of the legal proceedings.
(Ord. 1507, 8-23-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. 745 ILCS 10/1-101.
CHAPTER 10
PARK RULES
SECTION:
6-10-1: Regulating Use Of Parks
6-10-1: REGULATING USE OF PARKS:
   (A)   Adoption Of Park District Rules By Reference: The Savanna park
district board's park rules and regulations governing the use of parks and park
facilities are adopted as a part of this chapter. Any subsequent amendments or
revisions to the park district rules and regulations governing the use of parks
and park facilities shall automatically become a part of this code and shall be
made available for public inspection at city hall.
   (B)   Enforcement Of Park Rules And Regulations By The Savanna Police: The
Savanna police department is authorized to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Penalties: Any person violating or disobeying any provision of this
section shall be fined a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in
accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1720, 5-13-2003)
CHAPTER 11
SEIZED AND IMPOUNDED VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-11-1: Title
6-11-2: Purpose
6-11-3: Construction
6-11-4: Definitions
6-11-5: Vehicles To Be Seized And Impounded
6-11-6: Administrative Fee
6-11-7: Commencement Of Impoundment
6-11-8: Notice Of Seizure And Impoundment
6-11-9: Cash Bond
6-11-10: Admission Of Liability
6-11-11: Administrative Hearing
6-11-12: Defenses
6-11-13: Hearing Officer Fee
6-11-14: Administrative Review Law
6-11-15: Enforcement
6-11-16: Abandoned Vehicles
6-11-17: Severability
6-11-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the VEHICLE IMPOUND
ORDINANCE OF SAVANNA. (Ord. 2127, 4-28-2015)
6-11-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to offset the costs incurred in the preparing,
prosecuting, hearing, and disposing of criminal and traffic cases, and recover
the costs associated with the towing, impounding, or seizing of motor vehicles
used during the commission of criminal, traffic, or other offenses within the
corporate limits of the city of Savanna. (Ord. 2127, 4-28-2015)
6-11-3: CONSTRUCTION:
The following shall apply in construction of this chapter:
   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number; words used in the
masculine gender shall include the female gender; and such inclusive words
shall be reciprocal.
   (B)   The word "may" is permissive or discretionary.
   (C)   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. (Ord. 2127, 4-28-
2015)
6-11-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning designated below, except when a particular context clearly requires
a different meaning:
CITY: The city of Savanna, Carroll County, Illinois.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Every officer authorized to make arrests and issue
citations for criminal and traffic offenses occurring within the city.
LESSEE: The person authorized by a written lease agreement to possess the
vehicle and as properly registered with the Illinois secretary of state, or if
registered in a state other than Illinois, as properly registered with the
administrative agency responsible for registration in that state.
PERSON: An individual, firm, organization, public or private corporation,
government, partnership or unincorporated association.
REGISTERED OWNER: The record titleholder(s) of the vehicle as properly
registered with the Illinois secretary of state, or if registered in a state
other than Illinois, record titleholder as properly registered with the
administrative agency responsible for registration in that state. (Ord. 2127,
4-28-2015)
6-11-5: VEHICLES TO BE SEIZED AND IMPOUNDED:
Any vehicle, regardless of whether the registered owner or lessee is operating
said vehicle, within the corporate limits of the city, shall, under this
section, be subject to seizure and impoundment, any time the vehicle is used in
accordance with one or more of the following offenses:
   (A)   Operation or use of a vehicle in connection with the commission of any
felony offense; or
   (B)   Operation or use of a vehicle in connection with the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, an offense for which a vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to section 36-1 of the Illinois criminal code of 1961, as
now enacted and as amended from time to time; or
   (C)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501, as now enacted and as amended from
time to time (unless the law enforcement officer, in his discretion, determines
that said vehicle may be released to a sober passenger or co-owner); or
   (D)   Operation or use of a vehicle in connection with the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Illinois cannabis
control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550 et seq., as now enacted and as
amended from time to time; or
   (E)   Operation or use of a vehicle in connection with the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois controlled
substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570 et seq., as now enacted and
as amended from time to time; or
   (F)   Operation or use of a vehicle in connection with the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of section 24-1, 24-1.5, or
24-3.1 of the Illinois criminal code of 1961, as now enacted and as amended
from time to time; or
   (G)   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a
vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
303, as now enacted and as amended from time to time; except that vehicles
shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is for an
unpaid citation (parking or moving); or
   (H)   Operation or use of a vehicle in connection with soliciting,
possessing, or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled
substance, as defined by the Illinois cannabis control act or the Illinois
controlled substances act, as now enacted and as amended from time to time; or
   (I)   Operation or use of a vehicle by a person against whom a valid warrant
is outstanding for which the city of Savanna is within geographical limits; or
   (J)   Operation or use of a vehicle in connection with the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of article 16 of the Illinois
criminal code of 1961, as now enacted and as amended from time to time; or
   (K)   Operation or use of a vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt
to commit, the offense of fleeing to elude a police officer, in violation of
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-204.1, as now enacted and as amended from
time to time; or
   (L)   Any other offense now codified or subsequently enacted, that directs
or authorizes a law enforcement officer to seize, impound, or tow the vehicle
in question. (Ord. 2127, 4-28-2015)
6-11-6: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
An administrative fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be
imposed on the registered owner or lessee of any vehicle impounded under this
chapter.
   (A)   Said fee is an established fixed amount for the actual administrative
costs incurred by the city agencies as the result of towing and impounding of
vehicles, and the preparing, prosecuting, hearing and disposing of criminal or
traffic cases involving the use of vehicles.
   (B)   The administrative fee shall be in addition to: 1) any other penalties
that may be assessed by a court of law for the underlying violations; 2) any
towing or storage fees, or both, charged by the towing company; and 3) any
hearing officer fee imposed under this chapter.
   (C)   If there exists more than one registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle in question, each registered owner or lessee shall be jointly and
severally liable to the city for the administrative fee.
   (D)   Any funds collected under this chapter as an administrative fee shall
be deposited to and become a part of the general fund of the city of Savanna to
be used at the recommendation of the chief of police, or his designee, subject
to approval of the city council without need for appropriation, for law
enforcement related activities including, but not limited to, the purchase or
maintenance of police vehicles, equipment or training. (Ord. 2127, 4-28-2015)
6-11-7: COMMENCEMENT OF IMPOUNDMENT:
Whenever a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to impoundment, under this chapter, the officer shall provide for
the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the city. Said vehicle
shall be impounded and held until such time as the administrative fee is paid
or the vehicle is subject to release under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2127, 4-28-2015)
6-11-8: NOTICE OF SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
Upon seizure and impoundment, the law enforcement officer shall provide notice
as directed under this section:
   (A)   Initial Notice: At the time the vehicle is towed, the officer shall
notify, or make a reasonable attempt to notify, the registered owner, lessee or
person identifying himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or
any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged offense, of the fact of the seizure, and of the registered owner's or
lessee's right to an administrative hearing.
      1.   Any notice under this section shall be in writing, and said notice
shall indicate that the vehicle will remain impounded pending the completion of
an administrative hearing, unless the registered owner, lessee, or a lienholder
of record posts with the chief of police, or his designee, a bond equal to the
administrative fee and hearing officer fee, as provided by ordinance, and pays
for all towing and storage charges.
      2.   Said notice shall inform the recipient of the right to an
administrative hearing, and shall provide instructions on the exercise of that
right.
   (B)   Owner Or Lessee Is Passenger Or Driver: If a registered owner or
lessee is found to be a passenger or driver of any vehicle seized under this
chapter, then he or she shall be personally served with written notice under
this section.
   (C)   Owner Or Lessee Is Not Passenger Or Driver: If no registered owner or
lessee is found to be a passenger or driver of any vehicle seized under this
chapter, then the written notice shall be served on the registered owner or
lessee, either by personal service or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to
the address as registered with the secretary of state.
      1.   All notices shall be served upon the registered owner or lessee
within five (5) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded; and
      2.   Said notice shall indicate that the vehicle will remain impounded
pending the completion of an administrative hearing, unless the registered
owner, lessee, or a lienholder of record posts with the chief of police, or his
designee, a bond equal to the administrative fee and hearing officer fee as
provided by ordinance, and pays for all towing and storage charges. (Ord. 2127,
4-28-2015)
6-11-9: CASH BOND:
The registered owner, lessee, or a lienholder of record of any vehicle seized
pursuant to this chapter may retrieve the vehicle seized prior to the
evidentiary hearing by posting a cash bond at the Savanna police department, in
addition to the payment of applicable towing and storage fees.
   (A)   The bond shall be an amount totaling the administrative fee and
hearing officer fee established in this chapter.
   (B)   Upon posting of bond, the vehicle shall be released to the registered
owner, lessee, or the lienholder of record who posted said bond.
   (C)   Any bond posted under this section shall be retained by the Savanna
chief of police, or his designee, until the disposition of the administrative
hearing held under this chapter. (Ord. 2127, 4-28-2015)
6-11-10: ADMISSION OF LIABILITY:
The registered owner or lessee of any vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter
may retrieve the vehicle seized prior to the evidentiary hearing by admitting
liability to the city for the administrative fee, and, in addition to the
payment of applicable towing and storage fees, remits the full amount of the
administrative fee established in this chapter. Said admission of liability
shall be deemed a waiver of the administrative hearing, and upon the entry of
an admission of liability, any administrative hearing scheduled shall be waived
and canceled. (Ord. 2127, 4-28-2015)
6-11-11: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
Subject to the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3, and in
a manner consistent with other statutes or ordinances regulating administrative
hearings, a registered owner or lessee may request an administrative hearing to
review the imposition of the administrative fee under this chapter.
   (A)   Request For Hearing: A registered owner or lessee of any vehicle
seized pursuant to this chapter may request a hearing within ten (10) business
days of the date of seizure and impoundment or by the service of the notice of
seizure and impoundment, whichever is later.
      1.   All requests for hearing shall be in writing and must include the
following:
         (a)   The name and mailing address of the registered owner or lessee
making the request for hearing;
         (b)   The name and mailing address of any registered owner or lessee
having an interest in the seized vehicle;
         (c)   The make, model and registration number of the vehicle seized;
         (d)   The date and location of the seizure;
         (e)   The identity of the driver who was operating or in control of
the vehicle at the time of the seizure; and
         (f)   All requests for hearing must be delivered to the Savanna police
department by personal service.
   (B)   Waiver Of Hearing: Unless the registered owner or lessee properly
delivers a request for hearing within the time allowed under this chapter, said
hearing shall be deemed waived, and any right to an administrative hearing
shall be forfeited.
   (C)   Notice Of Administrative Hearing: Upon receiving a request for
hearing, the chief of police, or his designee, shall provide written notice
that the vehicle shall remain impounded pending the completion of an
administrative hearing, unless the registered owner, lessee, or a lienholder of
record posts with the chief of police, or his designee, a bond equal to the
administrative fee and hearing officer fee, as provided by ordinance, and pays
for all towing and storage charges.
      1.   This written notice shall be served upon the registered owner,
lessee, and any lienholder of record;
      2.   The written notice shall be served either by personal service or by
first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address as registered with the
secretary of state;
      3.   All notices shall be served upon the registered owner, lessee, and
any lienholder of record within five (5) business days after the request for
hearing is received; and
      4.   The written notice shall contain the date, time and location of the
administrative hearing. An initial hearing shall be scheduled not less than
seven (7) days and no more than forty five (45) days after the date of the
mailing of the notice of hearing.
   (D)   Administrative Hearing Officer: The administrative hearing shall be
conducted by a hearing officer designated by the city, who is an attorney
licensed to practice law in this state for a minimum of three (3) years.
   (E)   Responsibility For Costs: The party challenging the imposition of the
administrative fee shall be responsible for the costs associated with use of
the administrative hearing officer, as described in this chapter.
   (F)   Appearance At Hearing: The party challenging the hearing must appear
personally or through a licensed attorney at law. A failure of the challenging
party to appear shall result in a default ruling sustaining the vehicle
impoundment.
   (G)   Opportunity To Be Heard: All interested persons shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing.
   (H)   Formal Rules Not Applicable: The formal rules of evidence shall not
apply and hearsay evidence shall be admissible.
   (I)   Burden Of Proof: The burden shall be on the party challenging the
administrative fee to prove one of the available defenses by a preponderance of
the evidence.
   (J)   Written Decision: At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the
hearing officer shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling
the vehicle impoundment.
   (K)   Impoundment Sustained: If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is
sustained by the administrative hearing officer, any administrative fee,
hearing officer fee, or bond posted to secure the release of the vehicle shall
be forfeited to the city.
   (L)   Fees And Charges Paid Before Release Of Vehicle: Unless the
administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for the vehicle impoundment,
no vehicle shall be released to the registered owner, lessee, or lienholder of
record until all administrative fees, hearing officer fees, and towing and
storage charges are paid.
   (M)   Impoundment Overturned: If the administrative hearing officer
overturns the basis for the vehicle impound, the vehicle shall be released to
the registered owner, lessee, or lienholder of record challenging such fee,
provided all towing and storage charges are paid. The administrative hearing
officer shall not have the authority to waive towing and storage charges. (Ord.
2127, 4-28-2015)
6-11-12: DEFENSES:
At any hearing reviewing the imposition of the administrative fee, the
administrative hearing officer shall only consider defenses recognized by this
section:
   (A)   There shall only be three (3) recognized defenses to the imposition of
the administrative fee:
      1.   The vehicle was stolen at the time the illegal item was found in the
vehicle, and the theft was reported within twenty four (24) hours after the
theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered;
      2.   The vehicle was operating as a common carrier and the violation
occurred without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle;
      3.   The vehicle was not used in connection with an offense described in
this chapter.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the limitations set forth in subsection (A) of this
section, the following circumstances shall not constitute a defense to the
imposition of the administrative fee:
      1.   The registered owner, lessee, or lienholder of record was not the
driver of the vehicle during the commission of the offense in question;
      2.   Any criminal charge related to the incident giving rise to the
impoundment has been adjudicated not guilty;
      3.   Any criminal charge related to the incident giving rise to the
impoundment has been dismissed or otherwise disposed of; or
      4.   Any other circumstances not specified in subsection (A) of this
section. (Ord. 2127, 4-28-2015)
6-11-13: HEARING OFFICER FEE:
The party challenging the imposition of the administrative fee shall be
responsible for the costs associated with use of the administrative hearing
officer. Said fee shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and shall be
used to pay for the costs associated with the use of the administrative hearing
officer, subject to the following:
   (A)   If the party challenging the imposition of the administrative fee
posts bond under this chapter, the hearing officer fee must be included in said
bond.
   (B)   If the registered owner or lessee of any vehicle seized pursuant to
this chapter admits liability as provided in this chapter, provided said
admission occurs more than forty eight (48) hours prior to the scheduled
administrative hearing, no hearing officer fee shall be assessed. A failure to
admit liability and waive the administrative hearing in a timely manner will
result in the imposition of the hearing officer fee on the registered owner or
lessee of the vehicle in question.
   (C)   If no admission of liability or waiver of administrative hearing is
received prior to the deadline described in subsection (B) of this section, the
hearing officer fee shall be imposed on the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle in question.
   (D)   If the administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for the
vehicle impound, no hearing officer fee shall be assessed, and any previously
posted hearing officer fee shall be refunded.
   (E)   Every registered owner or lessee of the subject vehicle shall be
jointly and severally liable to the city for any hearing officer fee imposed
under this chapter. (Ord. 2127, 4-28-2015)
6-11-14: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW:
All administrative hearing rulings shall be subject to review under the
provisions of the administrative review law, as codified as 735 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (Ord. 2127, 4-28-2015)
6-11-15: ENFORCEMENT:
Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any administrative fee
imposed under this chapter, which remains unpaid in whole or in part after the
expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under the administrative
review law, may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court
of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2127, 4-28-2015)
6-11-16: ABANDONED VEHICLES:
Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility within
sixty (60) days after the administrative hearing officer issues a written
decision shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of article II of chapter 4 of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 2127,
4-28-2015)
6-11-17: SEVERABILITY:
If any provisions in this chapter or the application thereof is held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter not
specifically included in such ruling or which can be given effect without the
unconstitutional or invalid provision or application; and to this end, the
provisions of this chapter are declared severable. (Ord. 2127, 4-28-2015)
CHAPTER 12
CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
6-12-1: Possession Of Cannabis
6-12-2: Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia
6-12-1: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS:
   (A)   Definitions: All terms and phrases used in this section shall have the
same meaning as ascribed to them in the Cannabis Control Act 1 , as amended.
   (B)   Possession Defined: A person commits the offenses of possession of
cannabis by knowingly possessing ten grams (10 g) or less of any substance
containing cannabis unless permitted or authorized to do so pursuant to the
Cannabis Control Act 2 .
   (C)   Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be subject to a
mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus
administrative costs, or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus
administrative costs, per offense. (Ord. 2195, 3-28-2017, eff. 3-28-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
2 2. 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
6-12-2: POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   (A)   Definitions: All terms and phrases used herein shall have the same
meaning as ascribed to them in the Drug Paraphernalia Control Act 1 , as
amended.
   (B)   Violation: It shall be a violation of this section for any person to
knowingly possess an item of drug paraphernalia which is intended to be used
unlawfully in planning, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body
cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the Cannabis Control Act,
the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, or the Methamphetamine Control and
Community Protection Act, or a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in
violation of the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
   (C)   Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be subject to a
mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus
administrative costs, or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus
administrative costs, per offense. (Ord. 2195, 3-28-2017, eff. 3-28-2017)
 
Notes
1 3. 720 ILCS 600/1 et seq.
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
7-1-0: Nuisances Prohibited
7-1-1: Nuisances Declared
7-1-2: Public Nuisance Defined
7-1-3: Public Nuisances Affecting Health
7-1-4: Public Nuisances Affecting Peace And Safety
7-1-5: Abatement By City
7-1-6: Abandoned Motor Vehicles (Rep. by Ord. 1994, 2-14-2012)
7-1-7: Control And Extermination Of Rats
7-1-8: Inoperable Motor Vehicles (Rep. by Ord. 1993, 2-14-2012)
7-1-9: Graffiti; Definitions
7-1-10: Graffiti; Prohibited Conduct
7-1-11: Graffiti; Abatement
7-1-12: Penalty
7-1-0: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
No person shall possess, erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit
to exist any public nuisance within the city. (Ord. 1962, 3-8-2011)
7-1-1: NUISANCES DECLARED:
Any thing, condition or activity which endangers health, or offends the senses,
or obstructs or interferes with free use and comfortable enjoyment of life or
property and the following acts or omissions thereof are hereby declared to be
nuisances and the creation or maintenance of same anywhere within the city is
hereby prohibited. (Ord. 1962, 3-8-2011)
7-1-2: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
PUBLIC NUISANCE: A thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which
shall continue for such length of time as to:
(A) Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health or safety of
the public;
(B) In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property;
(C) Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or
(D) Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct
or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of
water or other public way. (Ord. 1962, 3-8-2011)
7-1-3: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH:
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but shall not be construed
to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of "public
nuisance" above:
   (A)   All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold
or offered for sale to the public;
   (B)   Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise disposed
of in a sanitary manner within twenty four (24) hours after death;
   (C)   Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish,
rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, abandoned vehicles or machinery,
scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease carrying
insects, rats or other vermin may breed or which create a fire hazard;
   (D)   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can
multiply;
   (E)   Garbage cans which are not flytight;
   (F)   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly
ash or industrial dust within the city limits in quantities as to endanger the
health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or any act in violation of the
Illinois environmental protection act;
   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, river or body of
water by sewage or industrial wastes or other substances or any act in
violation of the environmental protection act;
   (H)   Any use of property, substances or things within the city emitting or
causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors,
effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary
persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any
appreciable number of persons within the city;
   (I)   All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public use;
(Ord. 1962, 3-8-2011)
   (J)   (Rep. by Ord. 2000, 3-13-2012)
   (K)   Any obstruction in or across any watercourse, drainage ditch or
ravine;
   (L)   The deposit of garbage, rubbish or any offensive substance on any
street, sidewalk or public place or on any private property, except as may be
permitted by ordinance;
   (M)   Any noxious weeds on private property, as defined by Illinois Compiled
Statutes chapter 505, act 100, section 2 and as further set forth in section
7-2-1 of this title; and/or
   (N)   Any and all unattended clothing donation containers on private or
public property anywhere in the city. (Ord. 1962, 3-8-2011)
7-1-4: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY:
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but the
enumerations shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public
peace or safety coming within the provisions of the definition of "public
nuisance" above:
   (A)   All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the
provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to materials and manner of
construction of buildings and structures;
   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a
clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk;
   (C)   All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than
eight feet (8') above the surface thereof or less than ten feet (10') above the
surface of a public street;
   (D)   All use or display of fireworks, except as provided by the laws of the
state, except the city council may grant a permit for public display of
fireworks under the conditions as it may impose;
   (E)   All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to
be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use;
   (F)   All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less
than fifteen feet (15') above the surface of the street or ground;
   (G)   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all
excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the
city or which, although made in accordance with the ordinances, are kept or
maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose thereof has
been accomplished;
   (H)   All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements
freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk;
   (I)   All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and other
covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for
opening from the inside by pushing only with the strength of a small child;
   (J)   Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public
street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes
large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the
streets or sidewalks;
   (K)   Any advertisements or signs affixed to any building, wall, fence,
sidewalk, street or other private or public property without permission of the
owner thereof;
   (L)   Any sign, marquee or awning which is in an unsafe condition or which
overhangs any roadway or which overhangs any sidewalk less than eight feet (8')
above the sidewalk surface;
   (M)   Any structure, material or condition which constitutes a fire hazard
or will impair the extinguishing of any fire;
   (N)   Any inscription, design, writing or drawing sprayed, painted or
otherwise placed onto property, either public or private, with the intent, or
having a tendency, to deface or mar the property; and
   (O)   Any nuisance so defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 1962,
3-8-2011)
7-1-5: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided, or if the owner,
occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the director of public
works or some other city official whom the mayor shall designate shall cause
the abatement or removal of the public nuisance.
   (A)   If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance
exists on private premises, but that the nature of the nuisance is not such as
to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace,
morals or decency, he or she shall file a written report of his or her findings
with the mayor, who shall cause an action to abate the nuisance to be commenced
in the name of the city. (Ord. 1962, 3-8-2011)
7-1-6: ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES:
(Rep. by Ord. 1994, 2-14-2012)
7-1-7: CONTROL AND EXTERMINATION OF RATS:
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
    RAT: Animals of the rodent family which are known to be dangerous to the
health and safety of the community.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the
existence of rats anywhere within the city and it shall be unlawful for the
owner, occupant or person in custody of any real property and any buildings
therein to permit the same to become occupied by rats.
   (C)   1. Whenever the building inspector or public works director shall be
of the opinion that any real property or any building or structure therein is
infested and occupied by rats, he or she shall file a written statement to this
effect with the city clerk. The clerk thereupon shall cause written notice to
be served upon the owner, occupant or person in custody of the real property or
structure by registered mail or by personal service.
      2.   The notice shall state that the real property or building has been
declared to be a hazard to the health and safety of the residents of the city
because of the occupancy of the premises by rats and that the rats must be
exterminated and that the extermination must be done at once.
   (D)   1. If the person receiving notice has not complied therewith or taken
appeal from the determination of the officer or employee finding the existence
of rats therein within ten (10) days from service of notice by personal service
or registered mail, the building inspector or public works director may proceed
to arrange for the extermination of rats.
      2.   The costs and expenses of rat extermination shall be billed to the
owner, occupant or person in custody of the premises and, if not paid within
sixty (60) days, a lien shall be filed against property.
   (E)   1. Any person violating any provisions of this section or permitting
rats to remain on its premises, after receiving due notice thereof mentioned
aforesaid, shall be subject to the penalty provided for violation of this code.
      2.   The penalty may be in addition to paying the cost of rat
extermination. (Ord. 1962, 3-8-2011)
7-1-8: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES:
(Rep. by Ord. 1993, 2-14-2012)
7-1-9: GRAFFITI; DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purpose of sections
7-1-10 and
7-1-11 of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
    GRAFFITI: Any inscription, design, writing or drawing sprayed, painted or
otherwise placed onto property with intent, or having a tendency, to deface or
mar the property.
   MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 1963, 3-8-
2011)
7-1-10: GRAFFITI; PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   (A)   No person shall sell or otherwise transfer any spray paint to a minor
unless said minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian at the time of
purchase or transfer.
   (B)   No minor shall, at the time of purchase of any spray paint container,
furnish fraudulent evidence of majority.
   (C)   No minor shall, except while accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian, possess a spray paint container on any public property or any private
property except with the express permission of the lawful owner or manager of
said private property.
   (D)   Absent express permission to the contrary by the owner or other person
having control thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess a spray
paint container, liquid paint in cans or other containers in any public
building, or upon any public facility or private property with intent to use
the same to deface the building, facility or property.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or mar public or private
property through graffiti. (Ord. 1963, 3-8-2011)
7-1-11: GRAFFITI; ABATEMENT:
   (A)   The owner of all houses, buildings, and property situated within the
city are required at their expense to remove graffiti from their property
within seven (7) days of notice and order issued by the police chief. The
notice shall contain:
      1.   The street address and any additional description sufficient to
adequately identify the location of the property upon which graffiti is sought
to be removed; and
      2.   An order requiring that the graffiti be removed within seven (7)
days upon receipt of the order.
   (B)   The notice and order shall be served upon the record owner of the
affected property either by personal service or by mailing a copy of such
notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt required.
(Ord. 1963, 3-8-2011)
7-1-12: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation violating this chapter shall be fined not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), for each offense. Each day there is a violation constitutes a
separate offense. Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and shall be abated in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 2040, 5-28-
2013)
CHAPTER 2
NOXIOUS WEEDS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Nuisance Declared
7-2-2: Height Limit
7-2-3: Notice To Abate
7-2-4: Failure To Abate
7-2-5: Charges; Lien; Special Assessment
7-2-6: Foreclosure Of Lien
7-2-7: Penalty
7-2-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, or other weeds
of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city are hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to
grow or remain in any such place. (Ord. 1418, 8-27-1991)
7-2-2: HEIGHT LIMIT:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other
than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants, to grow to a height
exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in the city. Any such plants or weeds
exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 1875, 6-26-
2007)
7-2-3: NOTICE TO ABATE:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to serve or cause to be served a
notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants are
permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this chapter and to demand
the abatement of the nuisance within five (5) days. (Ord. 1418, 8-27-1991)
7-2-4: FAILURE TO ABATE:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five (5) days, the
city may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of
the abatement, and such expense shall be charged and paid by such owner or
occupant. (Ord. 1418, 8-27-1991)
7-2-5: CHARGES; LIEN; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT:
   (A)   Charges To Be A Lien: Charges for such weed removal shall be a lien
upon the premises. Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for sixty
(60) days after it has been rendered, the clerk may file with the recorder of
deeds of Carroll County a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain
a legal description of the premises, the expenses and costs incurred and the
date the weeds were cut, and a notice that the city claims a lien for this
amount.
   (B)   Notice: Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the
premises if his address is known. Provided, however, that failure of the clerk
to record such lien claim or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to
receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for such
charges as provided in the following section.
   (C)   Treatment As A Special Assessment: In addition to the other methods
prescribed by this section for collection of said charges, and provided that a
lien has been filed of record by the city of Savanna in the office of the
recorder of deeds, then the unpaid costs may be collected as a special
assessment on the property. Upon payment of the costs by the owner of record or
persons interested in the property, the lien shall be released by the
municipality and the release shall be filed or recorded in the same manner as
the filing of notice of lien. (Ord. 1788, 3-8-2005)
7-2-6: FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
   (A)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting charges shall be
sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied
to pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in equity in the name of the city.
   (B)   The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings, in the name of the city, in any court having jurisdiction over
such matter, against any property for which such bill has remained unpaid sixty
(60) days after it has been rendered. (Ord. 1418, 8-27-1991)
7-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating this chapter shall be fined a sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for a first offense occurring in a calendar year and a separate
offense may be deemed committed for each and every day during which a violation
continues or exists.
Any person committing a second offense on the same property within the same
calendar year will be fined a sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and a
separate offense may be deemed committed for each and every day during which a
violation continues or exists.
Any person committing a third or subsequent offense on the same property within
the same calendar year will be fined a sum of three hundred fifty dollars
($350.00) and a separate offense may be deemed committed for each and every day
during which a violation continues or exists. (Ord. 2174, 8-23-2016)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
SECTION:
7-3-1: Definitions
7-3-2: Residential Collection Services
7-3-3: Residential Garbage Services
7-3-4: Curbside Recycling Service
7-3-5: Christmas Tree Program
7-3-6: Private Garbage Disposal
7-3-7: Compliance
7-3-8: Supervision Of Garbage And Recycling Collection And Disposal
7-3-9: Charges, Authorization; Computation
7-3-10: Bills; Nonpayment Of Bills, Penalty Waiver, Reinstatement Fee
7-3-11: Collection Fees
7-3-12: Solid Waste Transfer Station Fees
7-3-13: Special Privileges
7-3-14: Transporting Solid Waste Over Streets
7-3-15: Deposits Prohibited
7-3-16: Exceptions
7-3-17: Penalty
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
BULKY WASTE: Rubbish such as stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, washing
machines, "white goods", furniture and other waste materials other than
construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste, automobile parts, or stable
matter with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for approved
containers.
COLLECTION UNIT: A dwelling unit, or small commercial uses that wish to
participate in residential collection services for garbage, recyclables, and
landscape waste for a determined fee.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Waste building materials resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair or demolition operations.
CONTRACTOR: The person/company who is currently under contract with the city
for residential collection services.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as
living quarters for one family unit only. Individual bathroom and complete
single kitchen facilities, permanently installed to serve the entire family,
shall always be included within each "dwelling unit".
FAMILY UNIT: One or more persons occupying premises and living as a single
residential dwelling unit, whether or not related to each other by birth,
adoption or marriage, but no unrelated group shall consist of more than four
(4) persons, as distinguished from a group occupying a duly licensed lodging
house.
GARBAGE: Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce;
ashes from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings. Waste generated in
the normal operation of a household. Not including "bulky waste" or
"construction debris".
GARBAGE CONTAINER: A trash can of standard waterproof construction of durable
metal or plastic material, with a tightfitting cover and with handles suitable
for lifting by one person, or plastic garbage bags. Except as hereinafter
provided, such trash cans and/or plastic garbage bags shall have a capacity of
not less than ten (10) gallons or more than thirty three (33) gallons, and a
full weight of not more than forty (40) pounds.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Waste, in any amount, which is defined, characterized or
designated as hazardous by the United States environmental protection agency or
appropriate state agency by or pursuant to federal or state law, or waste, in
any amount which is regulated under federal or state law. The term hazardous
waste shall include, but not be limited to, oil of any kind, paint, unless lid
is removed so that paint is dry, lead paint, batteries, tires, chemicals of any
kind, and any other material that would constitute hazardous material as
defined in Illinois or federal statutes.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Compostable organic material consisting of dead plants, weeds,
tree or hedge trimmings, grass clippings, and leaves, but excluding tree limbs
greater than two inches (2") in diameter and longer than four feet (4') in
length.
LODGING HOUSE: A building originally designed for and used as a single- or two-
family dwelling, all or a portion of which contains rooms which accommodate
persons who are not members of the keeper's family. Lodging or meals, or both,
may be provided for compensation for five (5) or more persons, but not more
than ten (10) persons. Rooming houses containing lodging spaces for more than
ten (10) persons shall be considered commercial units.
RECYCLABLE ITEMS: Shall include newsprint, magazines, catalogs, phone books,
softcover books, hardcover books with covers removed, file folders, envelopes,
junk mail, fliers, brochures, food boxes and cartons, wet strength beverage
packaging, cardboard boxes. All types of food and beverage containers such as
glass and plastic jars and bottles, tin and aluminum cans, aluminum foil
products, pie and cake tins.
RECYCLING: The use (collection, remanufacturing, etc.) of secondary materials
as feedstock for the production of new materials or products.
RECYCLING CONTAINER: An eighteen (18) gallon plastic container stamped with the
city approved logo, or other containers not exceeding thirty three (33) gallons
in capacity that are clearly marked for recycling.
REFUSE: Shall have the same meaning as "garbage".
RESIDENT: All persons whose residence is within the corporate limits of the
city.
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION SERVICES: Services provided to residents for the
collection of garbage, recyclables and landscape waste for a determined fee.
Collection services will not be provided for multi-family residential dwellings
with more than five (5) dwelling units.
ROOMING HOUSE: Shall have the same meaning as "lodging house".
SOLID WASTE: Shall have the same meaning as "garbage". (Ord. 2053, 7-23-2013)
7-3-2: RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION SERVICES:
   (A)   Established: There is hereby created and established residential
collection services to be paid for, kept and maintained by the city through a
special tax levy not to exceed statutory limits and residential collection
service fees to be determined by the city council and contractor.
   (B)   Bids: Every four (4) years the city council shall advertise for bids
for residential collection services unless the city and the current contractor
choose to extend the contract an additional four (4) years by mutual agreement.
There shall be no limit to the number of times a contract can be extended.
   (C)   Contract: Garbage and recycling collection and disposal contract shall
be for a four (4) year period, commencing May 1 and ending April 30. Contract
shall be executed with the lowest responsible responsive bidder for residential
collection services. The contract shall set forth the terms and conditions
relative thereto, as well as residential collection service fees. The contract
shall be approved by the mayor and city council and shall be executed by the
mayor and city clerk under the corporate seal of the city. The person with whom
any such collection contract may be made shall be known as the collector.
At the expiration of said four (4) year term, the contract shall be considered
to be automatically renewed for an additional four (4) year renewal term,
unless either party shall notify the other party by registered mail, return
receipt requested, not less than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the
then term of the contract, notifying the other party that the party giving said
notice does not desire to renew this contract for said additional term.
   (D)   Bond: The collector shall execute and deliver to the city an official
bond in a reasonable amount to be set by the city council with sureties to be
approved by the mayor and city council. The bond shall be conditional upon the
faithful execution and performance of the contract. The bond shall be deposited
with the city comptroller.
   (E)   Commercial Collection Services: Small business and office uses may
participate in the residential collection services. However, multi-family
dwellings with more than five (5) units, as well as large business and
industrial establishments shall be required to make private arrangements for
collection and disposal of all solid waste and recyclables in a prompt and
sanitary manner.
   (F)   Residential Collection Service Accounts: Residential collection
service accounts shall be in the name of the owner of the property serviced,
and only such owner shall be recognized as the consumer, except as noted
hereinafter. The owner of the respective premises serviced shall be held
responsible for the payment of all solid waste service charges and all other
proper charges in connection with the residential collection services to said
respective premises, but such payments will be accepted from the tenant or
tenants of said respective premises if rendered by them, but the acceptance of
such payments from said tenant or tenants, shall not relieve the owner from the
responsibility of and for the payment of residential collection service fees or
service charges not paid when due.
Residential collection service accounts may be established in the name of a
tenant only after the owner has been advised of his responsibility for payment
and only after the owner has affixed his signature on an affidavit form
supplied by the city. A copy of said signed affidavit shall be provided to the
property owner.
   (G)   Termination Of Residential Collection Services: Whenever a collection
unit's water and sewer services are discontinued, it shall automatically cause
the discontinuance of residential collection services. The customer will be
billed for services rendered on a monthly basis. Services rendered for any
portion of a month shall be considered a full month's service.
Whenever a collection unit is to be vacated or closed for a period of time
exceeding thirty (30) days and the water and sewer services remain active,
application in writing shall be made at the business office on forms supplied
by the city to discontinue residential collection services, conditioned as
follows:
      1.   The owner of said collection unit shall, on an affidavit form
supplied by the city, agree to notify the city whenever the collection unit is
occupied.
      2.   The owner of said collection unit shall also agree, on said
affidavit form supplied by the city, to provide the date on which services are
to be discontinued and the estimated date to reestablish services. The date to
reestablish service may be amended in writing by the owner.
Once all conditions are met and the affidavit is signed, the services will be
discontinued. The customer will be billed for the services rendered on a
monthly basis. Services rendered for any portion of a month shall be considered
a full month's service. If it is determined that the collection unit is being
occupied during the period indicated on the affidavit to suspend residential
collection services, the owner of said collection unit will be charged
retroactively to the date that residential collection services were suspended.
(Ord. 2053, 7-23-2013)
7-3-3: RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE SERVICES:
   (A)   Service; Schedule: Each separate occupied residential family unit
shall use the residential collection services and pay the regular charges
therefor. The collector shall collect solid waste once weekly from each
occupied residential family unit within the corporate limits of the city
beginning May 1 of each contract year and ending April 30 of each contract year
for the per unit sum approved by the mayor and council.
Residential garbage service shall be provided on a weekly basis for the
collection of garbage to every residential dwelling within the city up to and
including multi-family units of five (5) units or less. The weekly schedule
will be approved by the city council and made available to residential
occupants by the city and the contractor. In the event that the scheduled day
for any pick up shall fall on one of the following legal holidays: January 1,
Memorial Day, 4th Of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day - all
pick ups, during the week of such holiday for the day of such holiday and for
each succeeding day of said week, will be delayed one day.
A dwelling for which a bed and breakfast license has been issued by the city
and which shall have five (5) or less guestrooms shall be deemed to be a
residential dwelling. Any such dwelling with more than five (5) guestrooms
shall be deemed to be a commercial establishment and not subject to residential
garbage services.
   (B)   Quantity And Capacity Of Garbage Containers: With the exception of
recyclables, which are hereinafter provided for, each residential collection
unit shall be able to place up to two (2) 33-gallon garbage containers each
week of properly prepared household garbage, on the scheduled weekly day as
outlined in the refuse contract. The weight of each garbage container shall not
exceed forty (40) pounds. Lids shall be kept on garbage containers if
applicable. Perishable, nonstandard containers will not be emptied by the
contractor. Ashes will be collected by contractor only if contained in a paper
or plastic bag to assure that no hot coals remain.
Additional bags may be picked up by contractor provided they have attached to
them a refuse waste tag which shall be available for purchase at a price agreed
to by the city of Savanna and contractor.
   (C)   Placement Of Garbage Containers: With the exception of recyclable
items, all residential garbage for collection shall be placed in an "approved
container" and placed within five feet (5') of the traveled portion of the
alleyway. If the residence is not served by an alleyway or if the alleyway is
closed or inaccessible, the collection container shall be placed within five
feet (5') of the traveled portion of the street in front of the affected
residence.
The garbage shall be placed by six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the scheduled day of
collection. Any person who shall place, unload, pile or deposit any garbage in
or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public place more than twelve (12) hours
prior to the scheduled collection date and allow it to remain thereon more than
twelve (12) hours after the scheduled collection date shall be guilty of
maintaining a nuisance and subject to penalties in accordance with section
7-1-12 of this title.
   (D)   Excluded Items: Construction debris, bulky waste, rocks, landscape
waste and soil shall not be included for residential collection. Residents
shall be required to make arrangements with a licensed contractor for removal
of these items and payment arrangements shall be made between residents and
contractors for these services. (Ord. 2053, 7-23-2013)
7-3-4: CURBSIDE RECYCLING SERVICE:
   (A)   Recyclable materials shall be collected on an alternating weekly
basis. Contractor will collect properly prepared materials as spelled out in
exhibit B of the garbage and recycling collection and disposal contract.
Collection will occur throughout the city on Monday. The collection of
recyclable materials will occur at all residential dwelling units. The
contractor may offer recycling to multi-family dwellings of five (5) or more
units at its own discretion. Contractor may establish reasonable rules for
placement and collection of recyclable materials and agrees to provide to the
city and each dwelling unit a written copy of all such rules.
   (B)   Recyclable materials may be deemed by contractor to be unacceptable
for collection. However, contractor is required to give written notice on forms
provided by contractor, informing the occupants of the residential dwelling
unit that recyclable materials are in an unacceptable condition for collection.
The notice shall also give instruction for proper and improper preparation of
recyclable materials. On the first occurrence, improperly prepared recyclable
materials shall be picked up by contractor. Subsequent instances of
unacceptable recyclable materials may be rejected.
   (C)   Contractor shall only pick up and dispose of recyclable materials in
approved recyclable containers. All residential customers entitled to
collection under this agreement shall be provided with a new eighteen (18)
gallon recycling bin by the contractor. These containers shall remain the
property of the contractor. The city shall provide recycling bins to new
residents and residents of territories annexed to the city. Residents may
purchase additional recycling containers from the city. In addition, each such
customer shall receive from contractor a written statement explaining the
recycling program including the material that will be accepted for recycling
and the manner in which recycling materials must be made available for pick up
by contractor.
   (D)   The city agrees that the city will provide replacement recycling
containers for a fee when notified by a resident or contractor that a recycling
container is damaged or missing. If contractor is at fault, contractor must
notify the city promptly and the city will replace the container seeking
reimbursement from contractor for the replacement container. If the resident is
at fault (i.e., a lost container, damaged container), a replacement container
will be provided by the city and the resident will be required to pay the city
for the replacement container. If the container is stolen, the resident must
report the theft to the city police department. Upon verification of theft, the
city will secure a replacement container only for the resident at the city's
expense. Residents moving into a new home within the city or residents of a
territory newly annexed to the city will contact the city for a recycling
container. Residents moving into a home previously owned will be given the bin
assigned to the existing resident as the bin will be registered to the home's
street address. (Ord. 2053, 7-23-2013)
7-3-5: CHRISTMAS TREE PROGRAM:
The collection of Christmas trees following the holiday season of each year is
provided by the contractor. Each tree will be considered as one container, or
can be affixed with a refuse sticker. The pick up is not limited to single-
family homes and also includes multi-family establishments up to five (5)
units. The collection date will commence immediately after Christmas and
continue until no more Christmas trees appear at the curb. (Ord. 2053, 7-23-
2013)
7-3-6: PRIVATE GARBAGE DISPOSAL:
   (A)   No person, operating as a waste disposal firm, unless contracting
directly with the city as its solid waste collector, shall remove waste from
any premises in the city without first having secured a license for performing
such waste disposal service from the city council. The annual license fee shall
be due on January 1 of each year and shall expire on December 31 following the
date of issuance, and when issued for a period of less than one year, the fee
to be paid shall be a proportionate part of the annual fee. The license fee for
waste collection and disposal service shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00)
annually. The city council shall have the right to reject any license. (Ord.
2053, 7-23-2013)
   (B)   Anyone placing a garbage dumpster on private property for permanent
and/or extended use (any period exceeding 30 consecutive days), must screen
said garbage dumpster from view of adjacent properties, with a fence or
landscaping, or place said garbage dumpster in accordance with the accessory
use regulations set forth in the zoning ordinance. In those instances where
environmental barriers prevent full screening, best efforts must be used to
minimize the view to adjacent properties. Any garbage dumpster placed on the
public right of way for temporary use must be approved by the superintendent of
public works prior to its placement. Permanent garbage dumpsters placed on
public property must be approved by the superintendent of public works. (Ord.
2124, 4-28-2015)
   (C)   No solid waste shall be burned, dumped or buried within the city
limits.
   (D)   In addition to the residential refuse service as set forth in this
chapter, refuse may be delivered to the municipal solid waste transfer station
for disposal at the rate set by the city council. (Ord. 2053, 7-23-2013)
7-3-7: COMPLIANCE:
   (A)   No person shall permit any solid waste to accumulate on his premises,
except in approved containers or as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (B)   All commercial, industrial and institutional establishments shall
remove or cause to be removed all waste at least once each seven (7) days, or
more often if necessary, to protect the health and safety of the inhabitants of
the city. Waste containers for such establishments may be as defined in this
chapter or as approved by the city superintendent and the collector.
   (C)   Every person in possession of any premises in the city shall have the
duty to cause all garbage on or produced on any premises to be thoroughly
drained of all surplus liquid, securely wrapped or bound to prevent the
scattering of same by the wind and shall be deposited in an approved waste
container as prescribed herein.
All garbage of a size or nature which renders it unsuitable for deposit in
waste containers shall be considered special materials and it shall be the duty
of the person producing said waste materials to make private arrangements for
collection of said special materials. (Ord. 2053, 7-23-2013)
7-3-8: SUPERVISION OF GARBAGE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL:
All matters relating to or affecting the collection, removal or disposal of
solid waste, unless specifically placed under the direction of the health
officer, shall be subject to and under the supervision and direction of the
superintendent of public works. (Ord. 2053, 7-23-2013)
7-3-9: CHARGES, AUTHORIZATION; COMPUTATION:
The city, in providing for service of collecting and disposing of all garbage
accumulated within the city for the purpose of preventing unsanitary,
unsightly, hazardous, unhealthful and dangerous conditions caused by the
accumulation of garbage and refuse, shall from time to time by ordinance
establish and collect a service charge fee to defray the cost and maintenance
of service and administration thereof, and to pay any person contracting with
the city for the collection and disposal of garbage and recycling, the fees and
charges provided by the contract for the collections and disposal thereof. Such
service charges and fees shall be computed, based and charged to the owners and
occupants of dwelling units as nearly as practicable upon the basis of volume
or time expended in the collection and disposal and administration thereof.
(Ord. 2053, 7-23-2013)
7-3-10: BILLS; NONPAYMENT OF BILLS, PENALTY WAIVER, REINSTATEMENT FEE:
   (A)   Bills: Bills for residential collection of garbage and recycling shall
be made quarterly one month after the expiration of the quarterly period by
zones established for the water department, for which service has been supplied
and the charges shall be payable within fifteen (15) days after the first day
of the month that such bill is due and payable.
   (B)   Nonpayment Of Bills: A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to
the total net bill of customers failing to pay such residential garbage
collection service bill in full within fifteen (15) days after the first day of
the month that such bill is due and payable.
If said bill has not been paid within twenty five (25) days after the first day
of the month that such bill is due and payable, the customer shall be sent a
final notice that such service shall be terminated thirty (30) days after the
first day of the month that such bill is due and payable. Said service shall
not be reestablished until the service bill is paid in full.
If said service has been terminated for nonpayment and the customer is a
tenant, the owner shall be notified that such service has been terminated and
said bill is due and payable by said owner.
Failure to receive a solid waste service bill will not relieve a property owner
or customer from payment for garbage and recycling services supplied. Written
notice must be given by the owner or authorized agent to forward service bills
to any other address than the premises supplied.
   (C)   Penalty Waiver: Upon request by the customer, the city may waive the
ten percent (10%) penalty charge on the current billing period, but not more
than once each calendar year. (Ord. 2053, 7-23-2013)
7-3-11: COLLECTION FEES:
Collection fees shall be paid monthly and shall be as regulated by the garbage
and recycling collection and disposal contract approved by the city council.
The current rate effective May 1, 2025, is $16.65 per month. (Ord. 2053, 7-23-
2013; amd. Ord. 2291, 6-22-2021; Ord. 2306, 4-26-2022; Ord. 2325, 4-25-2023;
Ord. 2344, 4-9-2024; Ord. 2371, 4-8-2025)
7-3-12: SOLID WASTE TRANSFER STATION FEES:
Miscellaneous fees related to the solid waste transfer station:
Item Fee Per Item
Item                             Fee Per Item
Miscellaneous:                    
Bathtub                          $ 20.00
Box springs                      14.00
Carpet and carpet padding        To be determined based on quantity
Chair                            $ 12.00
Garbage bag                      2.00
Mattress                         14.00
Sofa                             20.00
Tires:                            
Car                              2.00
Car with rim                     3.00
Truck up to 19.5 inches          3.00
Truck up to 19.5 inches with rim 4.00
Truck > 19.5 inches              24.00
Truck > 19.5 inches with rim     30.00
Farm and construction equipment  To be determined based on size
Truckloads:                       
Short pickup truck (S-10)        $ 30.00
Full size pickup truck           40.00
Dump truck/trailer               150.00
 
(Ord. 2053, 7-23-2013)
7-3-13: SPECIAL PRIVILEGES:
In situations which are not contemplated or considered by the terms and
conditions of this chapter, the mayor shall have the power and the authority to
grant special rights and privileges on a temporary basis for the collection,
hauling and disposal of solid waste where such special privileges are required
in order to maintain the health and sanitation of the city and its inhabitants
or such right and privilege is required to avoid the creation of a public
nuisance. (Ord. 2053, 7-23-2013)
7-3-14: TRANSPORTING SOLID WASTE OVER STREETS:
No person shall transport waste or cause waste to be transported over the
streets or other public ways in the city unless such waste being transported is
entirely and securely covered. Garbage shall not be transported except in a
liquid tight vehicle or container as approved by the city superintendent. (Ord.
2053, 7-23-2013)
7-3-15: DEPOSITS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Deposits In Streets Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to pour,
empty, sweep, throw, deposit or place into or upon any street, avenue,
sidewalk, alley, parkway or public place in the city, or in the sewers or
gutters thereof, any garbage, slop, dirt, waste, wastepaper, grass, lawn
clippings, leaves or other refuse matter.
   (B)   Illegal Deposits: It is unlawful for any person to pour, empty, sweep,
throw, deposit or place within the limits of the city any garbage, slop, dirt,
waste, wastepaper, grass, lawn clippings, leaves or other refuse matter, in
such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the action of the wind,
rain or snow into or upon any street, avenue, sidewalk, alley, parkway or
public place in the city, or the sewers or gutters thereof. (Ord. 2053, 7-23-
2013)
7-3-16: EXCEPTIONS:
If any of the language in this chapter is conflicting with the garbage and
recycling collection and disposal contract in regards to the collection and
disposal of garbage and recycling, the contract shall govern. (Ord. 2053, 7-23-
2013)
7-3-17: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the penalty prescribed for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or for any rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be as set out in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2053, 7-23-2013)
CHAPTER 4
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
SECTION:
7-4-1: Model Code Adopted
7-4-1: MODEL CODE ADOPTED:
415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 through 5/10, as amended, is hereby adopted
and incorporated by reference as the rules and regulations for the prevention
of air pollution within the city. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 5
SEWER REGULATIONS, CONNECTIONS 1
SECTION:
7-5-1: Definitions
7-5-2: Plumbing
7-5-3: Sewers
7-5-4: Building Sewers And Connections
7-5-5: Use Of Public Sewers
7-5-6: Protection From Damage
7-5-7: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
7-5-8: Public Sewer Main Extensions
7-5-9: Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-20-10, 5/11-139-5, 5/11-141-1.
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
ACT: The federal water pollution control act, as amended, 33 United States Code
et seq.
ADMINISTRATOR: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection agency.
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The mayor and city council of the city of Savanna acting
by and through the city superintendent, being their duly authorized agent or
representative.
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams
per liter.
BASIC USER CHARGE: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer
system.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other
approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
CITY: The city of Savanna and any reference to "within the city" shall mean all
territory within the perimeter of the city of Savanna boundaries.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal
coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are
discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for a city representative
to sample and/or measure discharges.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of
interest, principal and coverage of revenue bonds outstanding and shall be
computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of users connected
to the wastewater facilities.
DIRECTOR: The chief administrative officer of the state of Illinois
environmental protection agency.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT CRITERIA: Any applicable "NPDES permit".
FEDERAL GRANT: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by title II, grants for
construction of treatment works, of the act.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Any pollutant which is not a "compatible pollutant" as
defined in this section.
INDUSTRIAL USER: Any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works
identified in the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office Of
Management And Budget", as amended and supplemented, under the following
divisions:
(A) Division A; agriculture, forestry and fishing.
(B) Division B; mining.
(C) Division D; manufacturing.
(D) Division E; transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary
services.
(E) Division I; services.
A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined by the
waterworks superintendent that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic
wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted
to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing commercial or business
establishment or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
INFILTRATION: The water entering a sewer system, including building drains and
sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to, defective
pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. (Infiltration does not
include and is distinguished from inflow.)
INFILTRATION/INFLOW: The total quantity of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the source.
INFLOW: The water discharged into a sewer system, including building drains and
sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders; cellar, yard
and area drains; foundation drains, unpolluted cooling water discharges; drains
from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers, cross connections from storm
sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff, street
wash waters or drainage. (Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from
infiltration.)
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment
works that:
(A) Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average workday;
(B) Has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste;
(C) Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under section 307(a) of the act; or
(D) Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the issuance
of an NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste,
to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
MAY: Is permissible.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is one thousandth grams of the constituent in one thousand
milliliters of water (0.001 g/1,000 ml). It has replaced the unit formerly used
commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in
reporting the results of water and wastewater analysis.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
administrator, or where appropriate, by the director, after enactment of the
federal water pollution control amendments of 1972, to regulate the discharge
of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the act.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body
of surface or ground water.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed in grams per liter of solution. It shall be determined by one of the
procedures outlined in "standard methods".
POPULATION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing seventeen hundredths (0.17)
pounds of BOD and twenty hundredths (0.20) pounds of suspended solids. The
impact on a treatment works is evaluated as the equivalent of the highest of
the three (3) parameters. Impact on a stream is the higher of the BOD and
suspended solids parameters.
PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the city of
Savanna. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary
or combined sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with city funds.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories,
or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were
designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL USER: Any user of the treatment works not classified
as an industrial user or excluded as an industrial user as provided for by this
section.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and ground waters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business
building, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices; structures and equipment
for treating sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
SEWERAGE: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
SHALL: Is mandatory.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water, Sewage,
And Industrial Wastes", published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
STATE ACT: The Illinois antipollution bond act of 1970.
STATE GRANT: The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois antipollution
bond act and for making such grants as filed with the secretary of the state of
Illinois.
STORM SEWER: A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage but
excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: That portion of the rainfall that is drained into the
sewers.
SUPERINTENDENT: The public works superintendent of the city of Savanna or his
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SURCHARGE: The assessment in addition to the "basic user charge" and "debt
service charge", as both are defined herein, which is levied on those persons
whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established
in section
7-6-2 of this title.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "standard methods".
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated and shall be twenty (20) years from the date
of startup of any wastewater facilities constructed with a state grant.
USER CHARGE: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance including replacement and the cost of any bond debt
of such works and shall consist of both basic user charges and surcharges, as
such terms are herein defined.
USER CLASS: The type of user either "residential" or "commercial" or
"industrial" as defined herein.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it
may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water, and storm water that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a waterway.
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE: The charge per quarter or month levied on all users
of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined
in section
7-6-2 of this title and shall consist of the total or the basic user charge,
the debt service charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution
control plant".
WATER QUALITY STANDARDS: Defined in the water pollution regulations of
Illinois.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUND: The principal accounting designation for all
revenues received in the operation of the waterworks and/or sewerage system.
These revenues shall be segregated so that water system revenues shall be
credited to the waterworks account of the waterworks and sewerage fund and
revenues of the sewerage system shall be credited to the sewerage account of
the waterworks and sewerage fund. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1248, 11-23-1982)
7-5-2: PLUMBING:
   (A)   Permit Required: No plumbing shall be installed in any place in the
city unless a permit therefor is first obtained. Applications for such permits
shall be made to the superintendent and shall state thereon the name of the
person or contractor intended to have charge of the installation, and the
nature and extent of the proposed installation.
   (B)   New Plumbing; Exposure For Inspection: In all buildings hereafter
erected, both public and private, and in all buildings already built or erected
wherein any plumbing is hereafter installed or wherein any sewer or connection
pipe shall be hereafter repaired or changed, except for minor repairs, on the
sewer side of the trap, the drain, soil, rainwater and other pipe or pipes
directly or indirectly connected into any drain, soil or water pipe, and all
traps shall be exposed for view for inspection and test by the superintendent
and shall not be covered until such test is made.
   (C)   Specifications; Adoption Of State Plumbing Code: The plumbing and
fixtures installed in any building in the city must be installed to comply with
the state plumbing code, promulgated by the state department of public health
which is hereby adopted as the standard of specifications for plumbing. It
shall be unlawful to install any plumbing or fixtures which do not comply with
the above regulations.
   (D)   Enforcing Officer: The city superintendent shall enforce the
provisions of the state plumbing code in the city.
   (E)   Copy Of Plumbing Code: The city superintendent shall keep on file in
his office, three (3) copies of the most recent edition of the state plumbing
code, which shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times.
   (F)   Separate Systems: Each house sewer and drainage system shall be
independent of that of any other building, except that upon approval of the
city superintendent, existing systems may be combined.
   (G)   Standards: All work done on any plumbing system shall be performed in
an efficient and workmanlike manner.
   (H)   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this section, or continuing to work in violation of a stop order
issued by the superintendent shall be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1977 Code)
7-5-3: SEWERS:
   (A)   Use Of Public Sewers Required:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to
be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
      3.   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
      4.   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley, or right of way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is
hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after
date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within two
hundred feet (200') (61 m) of the property line.
   (B)   Private Sewage Disposal:
      1.   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions
of subsection (A)4 of this section, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this
subsection.
      2.   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the
superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
      3.   A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty
eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent.
      4.   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state of Illinois
private sewage disposal licensing act and code with the state of Illinois
environmental protection agency. No permit shall be issued for any private
sewage disposal system employing insufficient subsurface soil absorption
facilities. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge into any
public sewer or natural outlet.
      5.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection (A)4 of
this section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
compliance with this chapter and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
      6.   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
      7.   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health
officer.
      8.   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage disposal
system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank run gravel or
dirt. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1248, 11-23-1982)
7-5-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent.
   (B)   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the federal act and more stringent state and local standards.
   (C)   1. Permit Classes: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer
permits:
         (a)   For residential and commercial services, and
         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for a residential or commercial building sewer permit shall be
paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
A building sewer permit only will be issued and a sewer connection only shall
be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities,
including sanitary sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities,
have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately handle the additional
anticipated waste load. The applicant, as a condition of permit authorization,
must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics and type of activity.
      2.   Main Trunk Sanitary Sewers: The city shall be responsible for the
construction, maintenance, repair, and proper operation of the main trunk
sanitary sewers wherever located within the city limits.
      3.   Sanitary Sewer Service Lines:
         (a)   The property owner shall be responsible for the construction,
connection, maintenance, repair and proper operation of the sanitary sewer
service line from the point where it connects with the city sanitary sewer main
to the property owner's building. All costs incident to the construction,
maintenance, repair and proper operation, including street surface repairs,
shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
         (b)   Where there is an obstruction in the city sanitary sewer main or
in the sanitary sewer service line which causes the sewage to back up into the
building, the property owner shall notify the public works department. The
public works department shall inspect the city sanitary sewer main to determine
its condition. Where the obstruction is determined to be in the city sanitary
sewer main, the city shall be responsible for the cost of removing said
obstruction. Where the obstruction is determined to be in the sanitary sewer
service line from the point where it connects with the city sanitary sewer main
to the property owner's building, the property owner shall be responsible for
the cost of removing said obstruction.
         (c)   Any disputes concerning sanitary sewer service line
construction, maintenance, repair or operation shall be resolved in accordance
with section
7-6-16 of this title. (Ord. 1458, 6-22-1993)
   (D)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   (E)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer.
   (F)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing codes, per subsection
7-5-2(D) of this chapter, or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM
and WPCF manual of practice no. 9 and "Standard Specifications For Water And
Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" shall apply. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1248,
11-23-1982)
   (H)   The building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation
above the basement floor, to permit gravity flow to the public sewer. No direct
basement floor drains shall be permitted, except as approved by the council.
Removal of basement floor drains: It is declared to be the policy of the city
to encourage the removal of sanitary sewer floor drains and to that end, the
mayor and council have established a program wherein property owners wishing to
disconnect their sanitary sewer floor drains can apply for partial
reimbursement of said removal expenses. Anyone seeking to participate in this
program shall make application to the city on a form provided by the city
public works department. The terms and conditions of such program as well as
the maximum reimbursement paid to the participant shall be as provided in said
application. (Ord. 1782, 1-25-2005)
   (I)   The maintenance and connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer is prohibited.
Existing roof drains, footing tile, or other illegal connection to the public
sanitary sewers will be disconnected from said sewers within ninety (90) days
after written notice from the city to do such work. The expense of such work
shall be paid by the property owner. The superintendent shall determine if the
disconnection has been made in satisfactory fashion.
Existing roof drains discharging at the foundation wall shall be extended by a
suitable means, as approved by the superintendent, to a point, at least six
feet (6') away from the foundation wall. This work shall be done and paid for
by the owner. All such roof drains must be extended away from the footing wall
within six (6) months after written notice from the city to do such work. All
new homes must have extended roof drains as a part of construction.
Violators may be subject to penalties per section
7-5-9 of this chapter.
   (J)   Each connection shall be made at the "Y" designated for that property.
Only where the designated "Y" is not located within three feet (3') of the
point of measurements furnished by the superintendent, will a tap in connection
be allowed.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in the appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF manual of practice no. 9 and the
"Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois".
Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by
the superintendent before installation.
   (K)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. Each and every part of a sewer connection shall be
inspected and approved by the waterworks superintendent or his representative
before being concealed or backfilled.
   (L)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall comply with the
provisions of this code relating to excavations in streets 1  and shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1248, 11-23-1982)
   (M)   Upon the completion of a sanitary sewer service line by the property
owner, the city public works department may perform site restoration and may
reimburse the property owner in the amount up to five hundred dollars ($500.00)
in the instance of a residential building or up to seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) in the instance of a commercial or industrial building, on the
following terms and conditions: 1) prior to the commencement of such work, the
property owner submitted to the director of public works a written application
to the city for site restoration or reimbursement on a form approved by the
director of public works; and 2) prior to the commencement of such work, the
application was approved by the director of public works. The application shall
include a complete waiver of claims and hold harmless agreement made by the
property owner in favor of the city for all claims that may arise in the course
of the provision of services hereunder. No reimbursement for services shall be
authorized pursuant to this section for any work in connection with a new
subdivision, or the alteration, repair, enlargement, conversion or replacement
of an existing building. (Ord. 1683, 11-27-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 3 of this code.
7-5-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water
or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the
superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, or to cause the effluent from
the treatment works to violate applicable effluent standards.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies,
including the NPDES permit of the city.
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
      2.   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0 and
65°C).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the superintendent.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances beyond the maximum allowable
concentrations as determined by the superintendent.
The superintendent will evaluate each toxic or objectionable substance waste on
a concentration dilution basis and will establish maximum allowable discharge
concentrations for each individual person to protect against the following:
         (a)   Decreased sewage plant treatment process efficiencies and
degraded effluent qualities exceeding the current requirements of the
regulatory agencies.
         (b)   Concentrations of any toxic or objectionable substance in the
sewage treatment plant effluent exceeding the current maximum limits
established by the regulatory agencies for such plant effluent flows.
         (c)   Any concentrations of toxic or objectionable substances in plant
effluent flows which will result in concentrations of such substances in the
receiving waters which will exceed the regulatory agency's maximum allowable
limits for these substances in the receiving waters.
      6.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 milligrams
per liter as Hg at any time except as permitted by the superintendent in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
      7.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.1 milligrams per liter at any time except
as permitted by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state and
federal regulations.
      8.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
      9.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      10.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      11.   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
      12.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters;
   (E)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection (D) of this section, and/or which
are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA
rules and regulations, subchapter D, water programs part 128- pretreatment
standards, federal register volume 38, no. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and
amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise creates a hazard to life or constitutes a public
nuisance, the superintendent may:
      1.   Reject the wastes, and require the violator to cease and desist
discharging said materials into the sewer system immediately.
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers, as outlined above.
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
      4.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of subsection (I) of this section.
If the superintendent permits the treatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the superintendent and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   (F)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (G)   Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
   (H)   Each new industry shall be required to install a control manhole and,
when required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and
shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (I)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Waste Water", published by the American Public Health Association or
methods approved by the Illinois environmental protection agency and shall be
determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at
said control manhole. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular
analysis involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite of all outfalls of
a premises is approximate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24 hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic
grab samples.)
Any person discharging wastes having concentrations greater than the "normal"
concentrations as set forth herein shall, upon notification by the approving
authority, install a composite sample with a compatible pacing (metering)
device for monitoring said substances. The pacing and sampling devices shall be
of a type approved by the superintendent.
   (J)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge.
The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the
owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but no less than once per year the
industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater
discharge to assure that compliance with federal, state and local standards are
being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory
analysis to the city at such times and in such a manner as prescribed by the
city. The owner shall bear the expenses of all measurements, analysis, and
reporting required by the city. At such times as deemed necessary, the city
reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside
laboratory.
   (K)   No industrial user may discharge sewage into any public sewer until
the city has adopted an industrial cost recovery system which:
      1.   Meets the requirements of section 204(b)(1)(B) of the federal water
pollution control act amendments of 1972 and applicable federal regulations,
and
      2.   Has been approved by the agency in accordance with the conditions of
any grant made to the city by the United States environmental protection agency
or by the state for the construction of any part of the sewer system or sewage
treatment works of the city.
   (L)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with the city user charge system. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1248, 11-23-
1982)
7-5-6: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating these
provisions shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct. (1977 Code)
7-5-7: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   (A)   The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city,
the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the United States
environmental protection agency bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The superintendent or his representatives shall
have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical,
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or
waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection (A) of this section, the superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the city, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the
U.S. environmental protection agency shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify
the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company
to maintain safe conditions as required in subsection
7-5-5(H) of this chapter.
   (C)   The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1248, 11-23-
1982)
7-5-8: PUBLIC SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
   (A)   General Policy: It is hereby established as the policy of the city
that all sewer mains proposed to be extended within the corporate limits of the
city shall be constructed in accordance with the following:
      1.   Preliminary Survey: When the owner of one or more building sites
within a lot, block, tract or parcel of land, within the corporate limits of
the city, which is not served by the city sewer system requests an extension of
the sewer system to serve the property owned by him, the city superintendent
shall make a preliminary survey of the premises, and report to the city council
on the feasibility of the proposed construction.
      2.   Plans, Specifications, Estimate Of Cost: If it appears from the
report of the city superintendent that the city sewer system, as it then
exists, is of ample size and design to accommodate the properties which will be
served by such extension and it is determined by the city council to proceed
with the extension as proposed, the city superintendent shall be directed to
cause the preparation of the plans and specifications for the sewer main
extension in accordance with the environmental protection agency regulations,
including an estimate of cost of the proposed extension, including construction
costs, material costs and engineering fees.
The property owner(s) requesting said sewer main extension shall deposit with
the city the amount of the estimated engineering fees prior to authorizing the
preparation of the plans and specifications. Except as otherwise provided, said
deposit shall be returned if it is decided to construct the sewer main
extension.
When the plans and specifications for the proposed construction of the sewer
main extension together with the estimated costs thereof are completed, the
property owner(s) requesting such extension shall be advised of the estimated
cost of the work; and if he decides not to proceed further, the money he has
deposited will be used to pay the engineers' charges for preparing the plans,
specifications and estimated cost of the work.
Such plans and specifications shall contain a map showing properties to be
benefited by the sewer main extension together with the legal description of
such properties.
      3.   Bids: If the cost estimate is acceptable to the property owner(s)
requesting the sewer main extension, the city council shall authorize the city
superintendent to advertise for bids for the construction work specified in the
plans and specifications and exhibit such bids to the property owner(s)
requesting the sewer main extension.
If one of the bids is acceptable to the city council and the property owner(s)
requesting the sewer main extension, the city council shall authorize the city
superintendent to advertise for bids for the construction work specified in the
plans and specifications and exhibit such bids to the property owner(s)
requesting the sewer main extension.
If one of the bids is acceptable to the city council and the property owner(s)
requesting the sewer main extension, the property owner(s) requesting the sewer
main extension shall be required to deposit with the city a sum equal to
charges hereinafter established for reimbursement charges. Upon receipt of said
sum(s) of money, the city council shall authorize the purchase of such
materials.
      4.   Reimbursement Charge: The city council hereafter is providing for a
sewer property reimbursement charge to reimburse the city for funds expended in
the extension of sewer mains. As closely as possible, such charges are to be
established so as to be equivalent to the pro rata share of the cost of said
extension benefiting the abutting property owner(s) along the extension.
Sewer main extensions shall be constructed by contract and the reimbursement
property charges shall include any labor costs, street replacement costs,
engineering fees, legal fees and material costs required to complete the sewer
main extension. Such costs and fees shall be apportioned equally among the
number of linear frontage feet abutting the improvement.
The sums herein provided for shall be in addition to and exclusive of all other
charges required and fixed by this code in connection with sewer service
installations.
The property owner(s) requesting the sewer main extension shall apply for
connecting (during construction) to the sewer main extended and pay the cost of
labor and materials required to install and connect said sewer service line
with the sewer main. All applications, before approval, shall be accompanied by
the requisite sewer property reimbursement and sewer connection charge in
certified funds or cash.
Whenever the owner(s) of the remaining unaccessed properties abutting said
sewer main extension thereafter apply to the city for a sewer service line
connection with said sewer main extension, then the city superintendent shall
certify to such applicant the reimbursement charge and all sewer service line
connection applications before approval shall be accompanied by the requisite
sewer property reimbursement charge and sewer service line connection charge.
      5.   Records: The city comptroller shall record in the files of the city
the location of the sewer main extended, the total project costs, the
reimbursement charges as established at the time of construction and the
abutting property descriptions of the properties benefited, together with a
current record of the reimbursement charges paid and unpaid.
All sewer mains extended under this section, except as otherwise provided for,
shall become part of the city's sewer distribution system upon completion of
the construction of said sewer main extension.
   (B)   Sewer Main Extensions Beyond The Corporate Limits: It is the policy of
the city council to exercise discretion in approving sewer main extension or
service line connections to owner(s) and user(s) who are outside the corporate
limits of the city. In the event that the city council approves the sewer main
extensions or a service line connection without the corporate limits of the
city, said extension or connection thereof shall be constructed in accordance
with subsection (A) of this section, except that said charges shall be at the
rate of one and one-half (11/2) times the charge then applicable to those
properties within the corporate limits. (Ord. 1165, 4-24-1979)
7-5-9: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
section
7-5-6, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations . or take the necessary
corrective actions to abate a violation. Due to the potential life and safety
issues that can result from a failure to comply with this chapter, or to take
the necessary corrective actions to abate the violation, non-compliance may
result in the water service being shut-off to the property in violation. If the
property does not have water service, the City may terminate the sewer service
to the City sewer main. The cost of all work associated with this action will
be charged to the property owner, as well as the cost to reinstate the sewer
service lateral. Failure to pay any and all cost may result in a lien being
placed against the property in question.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection (A) of this section, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day in which
any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the
city by reason of such violation. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1248, 11-23-1982; Ord.
2283, 12-8-2020)
CHAPTER 6
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES
SECTION:
7-6-1: Application For Wastewater Service
7-6-2: Basis For Wastewater Service Charges
7-6-3: Measurement Of Flow
7-6-4: Sewer Funds
7-6-5: Basic User Rate
7-6-6: Surcharge Rates
7-6-7: Computation Of Surcharges
7-6-8: Computation Of Wastewater Service Charges
7-6-9: Industrial Cost Recovery
7-6-10: Billing
7-6-11: Wastewater Statements
7-6-12: Bills; Nonpayment Of Bills, Penalty Waiver, Reinstatement Fee
7-6-13: Lien; Foreclosure
7-6-14: Termination Of Wastewater Service
7-6-15: Water Loss
7-6-16: Disputes
7-6-17: Revenue In Separate Accounts
7-6-18: Sewerage Fund
7-6-19: Penalty
7-6-20: Access To Records
7-6-21: Sewer Inspection Fee
7-6-22: Plugged Sewer Charges
7-6-1: APPLICATION FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE:
Persons desiring to avail themselves of the services of the city's wastewater
system shall make application therefor with the city comptroller on a form
provided for that purpose.
Wastewater service accounts shall be in the name of the owner of the property
serviced and only such owner shall be recognized as the consumer, except as
noted hereinafter. The owner of the respective premises serviced shall be held
responsible for the payment of all wastewater charges and all other proper
charges in connection with the wastewater services to said respective premises,
but such payments will be accepted from the tenant or tenants of said
respective premises if rendered by them, but the acceptance of such payments
from said tenant, shall not relieve the owner from the responsibility of and
for the payment of water rentals or other service charges not paid when due.
Wastewater service accounts may be established in the name of a customer other
than the owner only after the owner has been advised of his responsibility for
payment and only after the owner has affixed his signature on an affidavit form
supplied by the city. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977)
7-6-2: BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the
wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of a basic user charge for
operation and maintenance plus replacement, a debt service charge and a
surcharge, if applicable.
The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service
of all outstanding revenue bonds by the number of users. Through further
divisions, the monthly and quarterly debt service charges can be computed.
The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters
and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal concentrations:
   (A)   A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD) of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l).
   (B)   A suspended solids content of two hundred forty milligrams per liter
(240 mg/l).
It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement and shall
be computed as follows:
   (A)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain
the wastewater facilities including a replacement fund.
   (B)   Estimate the projected annual billable water and/or wastewater volumes
from past meter reading records.
   (C)   Compute the user rate by dividing the annual operation, maintenance
and replacement costs by the annual billable water and/or wastewater volume.
A surcharge will be levied to all users whose wastewater exceeds the normal
concentrations for BOD5 of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/L) and/or
suspended solids of two hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/L). The
surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or
wastewater meters for all wastes which exceed the two hundred milligrams per
liter (200 mg/L) and two hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/L)
concentration for BOD5 and suspended solids respectively. The surcharge will be
computed by multiplying the excess quantity of BOD5 in pounds per billing
period and/or the excess quantity of suspended solids in pounds per billing
period by the unit treatment costs for BOD5 and suspended solids which shall be
computed as follows:
   (A)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain
the wastewater facilities including a replacement fund (same as paragraph 4,
subsection (A) of this section).
   (B)   Proportion annual operation, maintenance and replacement costs to
major wastewater treatment plant categories.
   (C)   Proportion major wastewater treatment plant category costs to volume,
BOD5, and suspended solids.
   (D)   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of BOD5 and pounds of suspended
solids to be treated annually.
   (E)   Compute unit treatment costs for volume (dollars per 1,000 gallons),
for BOD5 (dollars per pound) and for suspended solids (dollars per pound) by
dividing the annual volume, BOD5 and suspended solids costs by the annual plant
loading.
Section
7-6-7 of this chapter specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.
The adequacy of the user charge shall be reviewed annually and the wastewater
service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in debt
service or a change in operation, maintenance and/or replacement costs. (Ord.
1245, 9-28-1982)
7-6-3: MEASUREMENT OF FLOW:
   (A)   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and
surcharges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even
increments of one thousand (1,000) gallons.
   (B)   If the person discharging the wastes into the public sewers procures
any part, or all of his water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by
the Superintendent for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained
from these other sources.
   (C)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the Superintendent if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the
metered water consumption records. Metering devices for determining the volume
of waste shall be installed, owned, and maintained by the person. Following
approval and installation, such meters may not be removed without the consent
of the Superintendent. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977)
7-6-4: SEWER FUNDS:
   (A)   Sewer System Improvement Fund: A service charge of three dollars
($3.00) per month per service account, payable on monthly or quarterly billing
periods, is hereby established to each user of the sewage facilities to be
applied to the Sewage System Improvement Fund to be used for maintenance and
improvements to the City's sewer works system.
   (B)   Sewer Reserve And Replacement Fund: A reserve and replacement charge
of four dollars ($4.00) per month per service account, payable on monthly (or
quarterly) billing periods, is hereby established to each user of the sewage
facilities to be applied to the Reserve and Replacement Fund to be used by the
City for repair and replacement of the wastewater facilities. (Ord. 2185, 12-
13-2016)
   (C)   Sewer Debt Service Fund: A debt service fee of twenty dollars ($20.00)
per month per service account, payable on monthly (or quarterly) billing
periods, is hereby established to each user of the sewerage facilities to be
applied to the annual debt payment associated with the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency's loan for the in-system sewer improvements and the new
wastewater treatment plant projects.
Such debt service will be put in place and will remain in effect until the
annual debt associated with the IEPA loan has been repaid. The City shall
annually review the debt service fee to ensure enough revenues are earned to
pay the annual debt. (Ord. 2218, 2-27-2018)
7-6-5: BASIC USER RATE:
There shall be and there is hereby established a minimum charge and a basic
user rate for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities
of the City. On May 1 of each year, beginning with May 1, 2011, the minimum
charge and basic user rate for schedules 1 and 2 of this section shall be
increased by three percent (3%) and an ordinance passed by the City Council
amending said fees.
Schedule 1: All accounts of users consuming within city limits other than
Schedule 2 Below. A minimum charge of twelve dollars and thirty-six cents
($12.36) per billing period shall be applied to all users whose water
consumption does not exceed two thousand (2,000) gallons per billing period.
A basic user rate of six dollars and eighteen cents ($6.18) per one thousand
(1,000 gallons shall be applied to all resident users for water consumption in
excess of two thousand (2,000) gallons per billing period.
Schedule 2: All governmental Accounts deriving their principal revenues from
property taxes raised within city limits:
A minimum charge of six dollars ($6,00) per billing period shall be applied to
all users whose usage does not exceed two thousand (2,000) gallons per billing
period.
A basic user rate of three dollars ($3.00) per-one thousand (1,000) gallons
shall be applied to all Governmental Accounts for consumption in excess of two
thousand (2,000) gallons per billing period.
Schedule 3: Nonresident Users:
All nonresident users shall be metered on the water supply or the sewer
service, as approved by the city council. Each account shall pay double the
rates as established in schedules 1 and 3 of this section, and section
7-6-6 of this chapter.
In the event a metering device is not provided, a flat rate as determined by
the city council shall be established as a minimum flat rate charge. The
adequacy of the flat rate charge shall be reviewed annually by the city council
and the rate revised to reflect a change in service. The minimum flat rate
charge shall in no case be less
than one hundred seven dollars and sixteen cents ($107.16) per month, which
includes sewer system improvement fee, sewer reserve and replacement fee,
public ways and property improvement fee, and sewer debt service fee. In the
event that use of the wastewater facilities is determined to be in excess of
seven thousand (7,000) gallons per month, the city may require such flat rate
user to install metering devices on the water supply or sewer service to
measure the amount of service supplied. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1245, 9-28-1982;
amd Ord. 2160, 4-26-2016; amd. Ord. 2222, 4-10-2018; amd. Ord. 2247, 4-23-2019;
amd. Ord. 2267, 5-26-2020; Ord. 2289, 4-27-2021; Ord. 2305, 4-26-2022; Ord.
2324, 4-25-2023; Ord. 2348, 4-23-2024)
7-6-6: SURCHARGE RATES:
The rates of surcharge for BOD and SS shall be as follows:
   (A)   For biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), five cents ($0.05) per pound.
   (B)   For suspended solids (SS), four cents ($0.04) per pound. (1977 Code;
amd. Ord. 1245, 9-28-1992)
7-6-7: COMPUTATION OF SURCHARGES:
The surcharge per person shall be computed by the following formula:
S = V (0.00834) (A[BOD5 - 200] + B1/2 [SS - 240])
Where:
S       = Amount of surcharge ($)
V       = Wastewater volume in thousand gallons per billing period
0.00834 = Unit weight of water x 106 per thousand gallons
A       = Unit charge per pound for BOD5 per pound (see section
          7-6-6 of this chapter)
BOD5    = 5 day biochemical oxygen demand, mg/L
200     = Allowable BOD5 strength
B       = Unit charge per pound of SS, mg/L
SS      = Suspended solids, mg/L
240     = Allowable SS, mg/L
 
The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be established
by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed
necessary by the Superintendent and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges.
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1245, 9-28-1982)
7-6-8: COMPUTATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
The wastewater charge per user will be computed by the following formula:
WWC = D + Mww + (V-6,000) (Rww) + S + F
Where:
 
WWC = Amount of wastewater service charge in dollars per billing period.
D   = Wastewater debt service charge in dollars per billing period.
      Minimum wastewater charge for 6,000 gallons or less per billing period
Mww = (section
      7-6-5 of this chapter).
      Wastewater volume in gallons per billing period to the lowest increment
      of 1,000 gallons. This volume is the users average volume when water is
V   = used to prevent freezing (section
      7-6-5 of this chapter, schedule 3). For wastewater volume less that 6,000
      gallons, this part of the formula is zero.
Rww = Wastewater service charge rate in dollars per 1,000 gallons (section
      7-6-5 of this chapter, schedule 1).
      Amount of wastewater surcharge in dollars per billing period as computed
S   = in section
      7-6-7 of this chapter.
      Billing for running water to prevent freezing in dollars, per billing
F   = period as computed in section
      7-6-5 of this chapter, schedule 3.
 
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1245, 9-28-1982)
7-6-9: INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY:
No industrial user may discharge sewage into any public sewer until the city
has adopted an industrial cost recovery system which:
   (A)   Meets the requirements of section 204(b)(1)(B) of the federal water
pollution control act amendments of 1972 and applicable federal regulations;
and
   (B)   Has been approved by the agency in accordance with the conditions of
any grant made to the city by the United States environmental protection agency
or by the state of Illinois for the construction of any part of the sewer
system or sewage treatment works of the city. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1245, 9-28-
1982)
7-6-10: BILLING:
For the purposes of the operation of the wastewater system of the city, the
city will be divided into five (5) wastewater zones, which are identical to
five (5) water zones per section
8-4-19 of this code, and the calendar year will be divided into quarterly
periods, except as noted hereafter, for each wastewater zone:
   (A)   Wastewater (Sewer) Zones:
      1.   Zone 1 shall consist of that portion of the city north of the north
side of Washington Street beginning at the east bank of the Mississippi River,
thence westerly to the Fifth Street intersection and that portion of the city
west of a line extended northerly along the west side of Fifth Street from
Washington Street to the Adams Street and Diagonal Street intersection, thence
northerly along the west side of Diagonal Street to the Summit Street
intersection, thence northerly along a line extended to the North Fifth Street
and Tower Road intersection, thence northerly and easterly along the westerly
and northerly side of North Fifth Street to the city corporate limits on North
Fifth Street.
      2.   Zone 2 shall consist of that portion of the city south and east of
the boundary line of zone 1 hereinabove described and west of a line beginning
at the west end of Longmoor Avenue, thence southeasterly to the east end of Elm
Street (Bench Street), thence southwesterly to the west end of Pike Road,
thence south to the north bank of Plum River.
      3.   Zone 3 shall consist of that portion of the city east of the
easterly boundary line of zone 2 hereinabove described.
      4.   Zone 4 shall consist of all commercial water use accounts.
      5.   Zone 5 shall consist of all industrial water use accounts.
   (B)   Billing Periods: The calendar year is hereby divided into quarterly
and/or monthly periods by wastewater (sewer) zones, said periods to begin on
the first day of the months as follows:
      1.   Zone 1: February 1, May 1, August 1, and November 1.
      2.   Zone 2: March 1, June 1, September 1, and December 1.
      3.   Zone 3: January 1, April 1, July 1, and October 1.
      4.   Zone 4: February 1, May 1, August 1, and November 1.
      5.   Zone 5: Monthly. (Ord. 1245, 9-28-1982)
7-6-11: WASTEWATER STATEMENTS:
Wastewater statements shall be computed on a minimum thirty (30) day basis.
(1977 Code)
7-6-12: BILLS; NONPAYMENT OF BILLS, PENALTY WAIVER, REINSTATEMENT FEE:
   (A)   Bill Payment; Monthly: All residential, commercial and other
establishments, except industrial use accounts, shall pay the charges herein
provided for wastewater service, and such other charges shall be made monthly,
thirty (30) days after the expiration of the monthly period, by zones, for
which service has been supplied, and such charge shall be payable within
fifteen (15) days after rendition thereof, and in the event such bills are not
paid within said fifteen (15) day period, a penalty of ten percent (10%) shall
be added thereto.
      All industrial use accounts shall pay the charges herein provided for
wastewater service, and such charges shall be paid monthly; thirty (30) days
after the expiration of the monthly period for which service has been supplied,
and such charge shall be payable within fifteen (15) days after rendition
thereof, and in the event such bills are not paid within said fifteen (15) day
period, a penalty of ten percent (10%) shall    be added thereto unless such
penalty is waived by the city council for good cause shown such as billing
cycle issues or the timing of the corporation’s approval of the bill. (Ord.
2012, 6-26-2012)
   (B)   Nonpayment Of Bills: A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to
the total net bill of customers failing to pay such wastewater service bill in
full within fifteen (15) days after the first day of the month that such bill
is due and payable.
      If said bill has not been paid within twenty five (25) days after the
first day of the month that such bill is due and payable, the customer shall be
sent a final notice that such service shall be terminated thirty (30) days
after the first day of the month that such bill is due and payable by turning
off the water. Said service shall not be reestablished until the service bill
is paid in full.
      If said service has been terminated for nonpayment and the customer is a
tenant, the owner shall be notified that such service has been terminated and
said bill is due and payable by said owner.
      Failure to receive a wastewater service bill will not relieve a property
owner or customer from payment for wastewater services supplied. Notice must be
given by the owner or authorized agent to forward service bills to any address
other than the premises supplied.
   (C)   Penalty Waiver: Upon request by the customer, the city may waive the
ten percent (10%) penalty charge on the current billing period, but not more
than once each calendar year. (Ord. 1235, 2-9-1982)
   (D)   Reinstatement Charge: Customers whose services are terminated because
of nonpayment of service bills when due and payable shall be required to pay a
reinstatement charge of thirty dollars ($30.00) before service will be
restored. Said charge shall be in addition to any penalty, service or other
charge. (Ord. 1729, 5-13-2003)
   (E)   Exceptions:
      1.   The Savanna township park district shall be provided, without
charge, a single sanitary service fee for one restroom facility, located in the
Marquette Park facility, within the corporate limits of the city of Savanna,
along the shores of the Mississippi River and between Division Street and
Randolph Street.
      2.   The city of Savanna shall reserve unto itself the authority and
right to rescind its action to provide free sewer service fees with or without
cause upon thirty (30) days’ written notice to the Savanna township park
district.
      Effective date of changes is May 1, 2024 billing cycle. (Ord. 1737, 8-12-
2003; amd. Ord. 2354, 5-28-2024)
7-6-13: LIEN; FORECLOSURE:
   (A)   Charges for wastewater service shall be a lien upon the premises as
provided by statute. Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid sixty
(60) days after it has been rendered, the comptroller may file with the
recorder of Carroll County, a statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid
bill, and a notice that the sewer department claims a lien for this amount as
well as for all charges for wastewater service subsequent to the period covered
by the bill.
Whenever a wastewater service bill remains unpaid for a period of sixty (60)
days after it has been rendered, and the consumer whose bill is unpaid is not
the owner of the premises, the comptroller shall cause said notice to be mailed
to the owner of said premises at his last known address, if such owner can be
ascertained.
The failure of the comptroller to record such lien claim or to mail such
notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect
the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid wastewater service bills as
mentioned in the following subsection.
   (B)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid wastewater service charges shall
be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in
the name of the sewer department.
The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings, in the name of the sewer department, in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters, against any property for which a wastewater
service bill has remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered.
(1977 Code)
7-6-14: TERMINATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE:
Whenever a premises is to be vacated, or closed for any period of time,
application shall be made to the water and sewer departments in writing on
forms supplied by the departments to have the water supply shut off or
disconnected. The water department will then shut off the water, read and
remove the meter. The water customer will then be given a bill based on the
meter reading.
No refund or discount on water rentals shall be made in the case of a premises
having been vacated or on water used, unless water has been shut off by the
water department upon written request by the owner of customer. (1977 Code)
7-6-15: WATER LOSS:
Water loss shall be as regulated in the water regulations of this code 1 ,
except where meters are set in pits and the water loss occurred between the
meter pit and the building foundation wall and the water loss did not flow into
the wastewater facilities, then no wastewater service charges beyond the
established average usage for said premises shall be rendered as determined by
the city superintendent. (Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 4, title 8 of this code.
7-6-16: DISPUTES:
Any disputes pertinent to wastewater bills, service fees, sewer fees, penalties
and any other charges or fees may be filed with the sewer department by the
owner in the form of an appeal application. Such appeal application shall be
filed with the sewer department prior to the date due. The appeal application
shall specify the circumstances constituting the dispute. The sewer department
shall transmit to the sewer committee, commission or board as established by
the corporate authorities, the appeal applications and all other papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The
committee, commission or board shall set a hearing date within ten (10) days
from date of application. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or
by agent or attorney. The applicant shall be notified as to time and place of
said hearing. The administrative decision shall be made within thirty (30) days
from date of application and said decision shall be final. (1977 Code)
7-6-17: REVENUE IN SEPARATE ACCOUNTS:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall
be held by the city comptroller separate and apart from other monies that may
come into his hands as city treasurer and shall be deposited in a separate bank
account. (1977 Code)
7-6-18: SEWERAGE FUND:
The city comptroller shall receive all of such revenues from the sewerage
system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system
as the same may be delivered to him, and deposit the same in a separate bank
account and accounted for as a separate fund designated as the "sewerage fund"
of the city, without any deduction whatsoever, and the city comptroller shall
administer said fund in every respect as in manner and form provided by law,
and shall establish a proper system of accounts separate from all other records
and accounts which he may be required to keep as such city comptroller, and
such records and accounts shall show complete and correct entries of all
transactions relating to the sewerage system. (1977 Code)
The city comptroller shall at regular annual intervals cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including replacement cost; to indicate that sewer service charges
under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts under the industrial
cost recovery system do in fact meet these regulations. In this regard, the
financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the
following:
   (A)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for
the current fiscal year.
   (B)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
   (C)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
   (D)   Number of users connected to the system.
   (E)   Number of nonmetered users.
   (F)   A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users) and
volume of waste discharged. (Ord. 1245, 9-28-1982)
7-6-19: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
shall be as set out under section
1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code)
7-6-20: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The Illinois environmental protection agency or its authorized representatives
shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the city which
are applicable to the city system of user charges or industrial cost recovery
for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions
thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general
conditions to any state grant. (Ord. 1245, 9-28-1982)
7-6-21: SEWER INSPECTION FEE:
An owner shall pay a minimum fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for sewer
inspections. Inspections that exceed one hour shall be billed at time and
material thereafter. (Ord. 1726, 5-13-2003)
7-6-22: PLUGGED SEWER CHARGES:
Owners or applicants requesting a city inspection for an alleged plugged sewer
shall pay the city at the sewer inspection rate as set forth in section
7-6-21 of this chapter after their fifth call. (Ord. 1726, 5-13-2003)
CHAPTER 7
ABANDONMENT OF EXISTING STRUCTURES
SECTION:
7-7-1: Abandonment Defined
7-7-2: Notice And Declaration Of Structure As Abandoned
7-7-3: Duty To Abate The Abandonment
7-7-4: Failure To Abate
7-7-5: Public Nuisance Declared
 
7-7-1: ABANDONMENT DEFINED:
An existing structure in excess of 240 square feet at its base, whether it be
primarily designed or intended for residential, commercial or public use is
“abandoned” when:
   (A)   For a period of 180 days its electric, water or sewer utilities are
discontinued for fifty percent or more of the structure’s ground floor measured
at its base; or
   (B)   It is not regularly occupied with permission of the owner and the
property taxes assessed on the property remain unpaid 90 days after the date
upon which they are first due under the Illinois Property Tax Code. (Ord. 2359,
8-13-2024)
7-7-2: NOTICE AND DECLARATION OF STRUCTURE AS ABANDONED:
   (A)   When he becomes aware that a structure within the limits of the City
of Savanna has become abandoned as described in section 7-7-1, above, the
Superintendent of Public Works shall serve upon all owners and claimants of
record notice of his intention to declare the structure abandoned. The notices
shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall state
the date upon which he or she intends to declare the structure abandoned which
date shall not be fewer titan 60 days after the date of mailing.
   (B)   On or after the date stated in the aforesaid notice, unless the
Superintendent of Public Works finds that the structure is no longer abandoned
as set forth under section 7-7-1, the Superintendent of Public Works shall in
writing declare the structure to be abandoned under this Code and shall serve a
copy thereof upon all parties entitled to notice under subparagraph (a) by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall record a copy thereof in
the land records of the Carroll County Recorder. (Ord. 2359, 8-13-2024)
7-7-3: DUTY TO ABATE THE ABANDONMENT:
Every owner of a structure declared to be abandoned as set forth above shall
have the duty to do one of the following within 60 days:
   (A)   Demolish and remove die structure; or
   (B)   Consent to the demolition and removal of the structure by the City of
Savanna at the owner’s expense; or
   (C)   Occupy and use the structure, re-establish electric, water and sewer
utility services to the structure and shall thereafter conduct routine
maintenance and care of the interior and exterior of the structure so that the
condition of the structure complies with this Code. (Ord. 2359, 8-13-2024)
7-7-4: FAILURE TO ABATE:
Any person or organization with a duty to abate under this section but fails to
abate as required shall be assessed a fine of not less than $500 nor more than
$750 for each day the failure to abate continues. (Ord. 2359, 8-13-2024)
7-7-5: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
In addition to the remedies stated above, any structure which has been declared
abandoned as provided herein and for which the abandonment has not been abated
as provided herein is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be subject to
abatement in accordance with the following:
   (A)   The nuisance abatement provisions of this Code; and
   (B)   A public or private suit to abate in accordance with the common law of
Illinois. (Ord. 2359, 8-13-2024)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
SIDEWALKS 1
SECTION:
8-1-1: Definitions
8-1-2: Duty To Repair And Clear Sidewalks
8-1-3: Snow And Ice Removal
8-1-4: Construction Standards And Specifications
8-1-5: Permits
8-1-6: Supervision
8-1-7: Required Sidewalk Repairs
8-1-8: Repairs Made By City
8-1-9: Assessment; Repairs By City
8-1-10: Public Sidewalk Replacement; Proportionate Share Of Cost
8-1-11: Excavation Permit
8-1-12: New Sidewalk Construction
8-1-13: Barricades; Safety Measures
8-1-14: Liability For Accidents
8-1-15: Subsidewalk Space
8-1-16: Deposits On Sidewalks
8-1-17: Driveways
8-1-18: Encroachments
8-1-19: Poles And Wires
8-1-20: Presumption Of Liability
8-1-21: Obstruction Of Sidewalks; Generally
8-1-22: Games
8-1-23: Maintenance Of Parkways; Abutting Property Owner Responsibility
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-84-1.
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following shall mean:
CITY SUPERINTENDENT: The city of Savanna public works superintendent or person
authorized by the public works superintendent.
SIDEWALK: The part of the street right of way between the lateral lines of a
roadway and the adjacent property lines that is intended for the use of
pedestrians. (1977 Code)
8-1-2: DUTY TO REPAIR AND CLEAR SIDEWALKS:
It is the duty of the owners of land adjoining any street to maintain in good
repair and to remove obstructions from the adjacent sidewalk, except that water
box and manhole frame structures and/or any other similar structures shall be
maintained in a safe manner by the city. (Ord. 1250, 4-12-1983)
8-1-3: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL:
No owner or person in charge of property, improved or unimproved, abutting on a
public sidewalk shall permit:
   (A)   Snow to remain on the sidewalk for a period longer than the first two
(2) hours of daylight after the snow has fallen.
   (B)   Ice to remain on the sidewalk for more than two (2) hours after
daylight after the ice has formed unless the ice is covered with sand, ashes or
other suitable material to assure safe travel. (1977 Code)
8-1-4: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
The standards and specifications for construction of sidewalks and
appurtenances thereto shall be those as kept on file in the office of the
superintendent of public works. Said standards and specifications are available
for inspection by the public at all reasonable hours. (1977 Code)
8-1-5: PERMITS:
   (A)   No person shall construct, repair or alter a sidewalk without first
obtaining a permit from the city.
   (B)   An application for a permit shall be filed with the city
superintendent on a form provided by the city, together with such other
information as may be required by the city superintendent. After determining
that the proposed sidewalk construction, repair or alteration conforms to the
applicable standards and specifications, the city superintendent shall issue a
permit to the applicant. If the city is requiring the repair of a sidewalk, the
permit shall state the date within which the work shall be completed. (1977
Code)
8-1-6: SUPERVISION:
The city superintendent may inspect any materials or construction details as in
his judgment may be required to ensure compliance with the permit and with the
applicable standards and specifications. (1977 Code)
8-1-7: REQUIRED SIDEWALK REPAIRS:
   (A)   When the council determines that a sidewalk needs repair, it shall, by
resolution, direct the city superintendent to issue a notice.
   (B)   The notice shall require the owner of the property adjacent to the
defective sidewalk to obtain a permit and complete repair of the sidewalk
within thirty (30) days after the date of service of the notice. The notice
shall also state that if the repair is not made by the owner, the city may
repair the sidewalk and the cost of the repair will be assessed against the
property adjacent to the sidewalk.
   (C)   The city superintendent shall cause a certified copy of the notice to
be served personally upon the owner of the property adjacent to the defective
sidewalk or the notice may be served by certified mail, return receipt
requested. If, after diligent search, the owner is not discovered, the city
superintendent shall cause a certified copy of the notice to be posted in a
conspicuous place on the property and such posting of notice shall have the
same effect as service of notice by certified mail or by personal service upon
the owner of the property.
   (D)   The person serving the notice shall file with the city comptroller an
affidavit stating the time, place and the manner of service of notice. (1977
Code)
8-1-8: REPAIRS MADE BY CITY:
If repair of the sidewalks is not completed within thirty (30) days after the
service of notice to repair, the city superintendent shall repair or complete
the repair of the sidewalk. Upon completion of the repair of the sidewalk, the
city superintendent shall submit a report to the council. The report shall
contain an itemized statement of the cost of the repair and the proportionate
share of the cost on each lot or parcel of land adjacent to the sidewalk upon
which the repair has been made. (1977 Code)
8-1-9: ASSESSMENT; REPAIRS BY CITY:
Upon receipt of the report, the council shall, by ordinance, assess the cost of
repairing the sidewalk against the property adjacent to the repaired sidewalk.
The assessment shall be collected in the same manner as is provided for the
collection of other improvement assessments. (1977 Code)
8-1-10: PUBLIC SIDEWALK REPLACEMENT; PROPORTIONATE SHARE OF COST:
Any owner and/or occupant of real estate, buildings or premises may make
application to the superintendent of public works to repair and/or replace the
defective portions of the public sidewalk. Said application shall set forth the
name of the applicant, the address location, the length and width of the public
sidewalk proposed to be repaired or replaced and such additional information as
may be needed for proper guidance of city officials.
It shall be the responsibility of the superintendent of public works after
receiving such application to conduct an inspection to consider said
application.
Upon approval of an application, the superintendent of public works shall cause
the removal of the portions of defective sidewalk, supply any backfill
materials that may be required and process a purchase order for the cement
materials. The total costs for cement materials shall not exceed budgetary
limitations as approved by the mayor and city council.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to complete the reconstruction
of the sidewalk in accordance with the Illinois department of transportation's
"Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", current edition,
except that the concrete mix shall have a compressive minimum strength of not
less than four thousand (4,000) pounds per square inch. (Ord. 1856, 11-14-2006)
8-1-11: EXCAVATION PERMIT:
Every person proposing to excavate, cut, break, dig up, damage in any manner,
undermine or tunnel under any sidewalk shall make application to the city
superintendent for obtaining a permit therefor as provided by ordinance 1 .
(1977 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 3 of this title.
8-1-12: NEW SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:
New sidewalks shall be constructed only by specified local improvements as
provided by Illinois state statutes. (1977 Code)
8-1-13: BARRICADES; SAFETY MEASURES:
It shall be the duty of the person to whom the permit has been granted to keep
the worksite properly safeguarded by substantial lighted barricades or flares
from dusk until daylight in conformity with such regulations as may be
specified by the city superintendent. (1977 Code)
8-1-14: LIABILITY FOR ACCIDENTS:
The person to whom the permit has been granted shall be responsible to anyone
for any injury caused by the presence of any obstruction in any sidewalk being
repaired or altered, or failure to keep the worksite properly barricaded or
lighted as required under section
8-1-13 of this chapter. (1977 Code)
8-1-15: SUBSIDEWALK SPACE:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to use any vault, space, room or structure under
any sidewalk without having first secured a permit from the city council. Such
permits shall be issued by the city superintendent and shall be signed by the
mayor with the approval of the city council.
   (B)   Applications for a permit to use or maintain a vault, space, room or
structure under the sidewalk shall be made in writing and shall state thereon
specifically the size of the space intended to be used or maintained and the
purpose for which it is to be used. No permit shall be transferred excepting in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Each application shall contain
an agreement by the applicant to abide by the regulations contained in this
chapter.
   (C)   Each applicant shall file with the application a bond in the sum of
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), with surety approved by the mayor and
council to save the city harmless from any liability resulting or caused by
such vault, room or structure.
   (D)   Whenever any premises abutting on any such vault, room or structure
for which a permit has been issued shall be conveyed or whenever the interest
or lease or right of occupancy of the person holding the permit shall be
transferred or conveyed, the grantee or transferee must make application for a
transfer of the permit to him or it and must furnish a bond as is required in
the preceding subsection. A fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall be required for
such transfer, and upon payment of the fee and the full compliance with the
contents thereof, a new permit shall be issued.
   (E)   All openings through the sidewalk into any vault, space, room or
structure shall be kept covered and guarded. If the opening is a manhole or
trap door, an adequate strong metal cover must be provided and must be equipped
with a rough surface so that there will be no danger of any pedestrian slipping
on it. If a stairway is provided, the stairway must be properly guarded with a
railing at least three feet (3') high.
   (F)   The annual fee to be paid for such permits shall be twenty dollars
($20.00).
   (G)   Any person using or maintaining any such vault, space, room or
structure prior to the effective date hereof shall comply with this chapter
within ten (10) days after the effective date hereof. The city council may
direct the city superintendent to close up any vault, space, room or structure
for which no permit has been obtained.
   (H)   No such vault, space, room or structure shall be used for storage of
explosives or flammable liquids nor shall a cesspool be located therein.
   (I)   Such vaults, spaces, rooms or structures shall be firmly constructed
so as to support two hundred fifty (250) pounds per square foot uniformly
distributed and where such sidewalks are subject to trucking, they shall be
capable of safely sustaining a concentrated load of eight thousand (8,000)
pounds placed upon an area two and one-half feet (21/2') square so located as
to produce maximum stress conditions.
   (J)   Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked
by order of the mayor and council for a violation of any of the provisions of
this section. (1977 Code)
8-1-16: DEPOSITS ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk any material which may
be harmful thereto, or any waste material, or any glass or other articles which
might cause injury to persons, animals or property. The person who deposits any
article on the sidewalk shall be responsible to anyone for any injury by reason
of the presence on the sidewalk of any obstruction. (1977 Code)
8-1-17: DRIVEWAYS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any driveway in or across any
sidewalk without first having obtained a permit. (Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977)
8-1-18: ENCROACHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches upon any sidewalk. (1977 Code)
8-1-19: POLES AND WIRES:
It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires
over any sidewalk without having first secured permission from the mayor and
city council. (1977 Code)
8-1-20: PRESUMPTION OF LIABILITY:
The owners of any premises adjacent to any public sidewalk upon which a
violation of this chapter is apparent, or the owner of any object or material
placed or remaining anywhere on a public sidewalk in violation of this chapter,
shall be deemed prima facie responsible for the violation so evidenced and
subject to the penalties provided therefor. (1977 Code)
8-1-21: OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS; GENERALLY:
No person shall obstruct sidewalks in the city in any manner or with any
material, including snow, dirt, sand, rock and gravel, that impedes the flow of
pedestrian traffic thereon or that creates any hazardous conditions endangering
pedestrian traffic thereon. (Ord. 1539, 8-8-1995)
8-1-22: GAMES:
It is unlawful to play any game, including, but not limited to, hacky sack,
skateboarding, and rollerblading, upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public place where such game causes unnecessary noise or interferes with
traffic or pedestrians. Games are specifically prohibited upon Main Street and
its sidewalks between Chicago Avenue and Van Buren Street, excluding any
designated area set by the city council. (Ord. 1539, 8-8-1995)
8-1-23: MAINTENANCE OF PARKWAYS; ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
The maintenance of all grass parkways as to the surface condition, including
mowing, shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of the abutting property.
Abutting property shall be property other than streets, alleys, and easements
owned or utilized by the city. (Ord. 1626, 11-24-1998)
CHAPTER 2
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Enforcing Authority
8-2-2: Planting Permit
8-2-3: Removal Permit
8-2-4: Species To Be Planted; Permission Required For Other Trees
8-2-5: Trees Prohibited
8-2-6: Planting Requirements
8-2-7: Owners Of Trees; Duties
8-2-8: Restriction On Removal, Trimming Or Defacing Of Trees, Shrubs And Plants
8-2-9: Guards For Trees During Construction
8-2-10: Use Of Trees; Electrical Wires
8-2-11: Trimming; Notice Required; Costs
8-2-12: City Right To Plant, Prune, Maintain Or Remove Trees
8-2-13: Spraying Regulations
8-2-14: Shrubs And Plants; Height
8-2-15: Dutch Elm Disease
8-2-16: Penalty
8-2-1: ENFORCING AUTHORITY:
The city superintendent or his duly authorized representative, shall be charged
with the enforcement of this chapter. (1977 Code)
8-2-2: PLANTING PERMIT:
No person shall plant any tree or shrub in any street or parkway or other
public place without first having secured a permit therefor. Application for
such permit shall be made to the city superintendent, and shall be referred by
the city superintendent to the mayor and city council for approval. (1977 Code)
8-2-3: REMOVAL PERMIT:
No person shall remove or cut down any tree or shrub in any street, parkway or
other public place without first having secured a permit therefor. Application
for such permit shall be made to the city superintendent, and shall be referred
by the city superintendent to the mayor and council for approval. (1977 Code)
8-2-4: SPECIES TO BE PLANTED; PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR OTHER TREES:
The following list constitutes the official street tree species for Savanna. No
species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees
without written permission of the city council.
   (A)   Small Trees:
      1.   Flowering crabapple.
      2.   Redbud.
      3.   Hawthorn.
      4.   Bradford pear.
      5.   Purple leaf plum.
      6.   Flowering peach.
      7.   Serviceberry.
      8.   Common apricot.
      9.   Paper mulberry.
      10.   Amur apple.
   (B)   Medium Trees:
      1.   Honey locust (thornless).
      2.   Chinaberry (soapberry).
      3.   Kentucky coffeetree.
      4.   Red mulberry (male).
      5.   Golden raintree.
      6.   Japanese pagoda tree.
      7.   Hard maple.
      8.   Pin oak.
      9.   English oak.
   (C)   Large Trees:
      1.   Bur oak.
      2.   Hackberry.
      3.   London plane tree.
      4.   American sycamore.
      5.   Red oak.
      6.   Black walnut.
      7.   Green ash.
      8.   Silver maple.
      9.   Cottonwood (cottonless).
      10.   Basswood or linden.
      11.   Pecan.
   (D)   Trees shall have a trunk diameter, measured twelve inches (12") above
the ground, of not less than two and one-half inches (21/2"). (1977 Code)
8-2-5: TREES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to plant in any street, parkway or other public place the
following trees:
   (A)   Chinese elm.
   (B)   Box elder.
   (C)   Willow.
   (D)   Poplar.
   (E)   Conifer.
   (F)   Culanthus (tree of heaven).
   (G)   Or any other similar fast growing, brittle wood species. (1977 Code)
8-2-6: PLANTING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Spacing Of Trees And Shrubs: The spacing between trees and shrubs
shall be determined by the city superintendent and his determination shall
depend upon local conditions, the species, cultivars, or varieties employed,
their mature height, spread and form. Generally, all large trees shall be
planted forty (40) to sixty feet (60') on center; all medium sized trees shall
be planted a minimum of thirty feet (30') on center, and all small trees shall
be planted a minimum of twenty five feet (25') on center.
   (B)   Distance Requirements; Street Corners And Fireplugs: No tree or shrub
shall be planted closer than twenty feet (20') of any street corner, measured
from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No tree or
shrub shall be planted closer than ten feet (10') of any fireplug.
   (C)   Distance Requirements; Curbs And Sidewalks: The distance trees may be
planted from curbs and sidewalks will be in accordance with the species size
classes permitted, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk
than the following: Small trees, two feet (2'); medium trees, three feet (3');
and large trees, four feet (4').
   (D)   Distance Requirements; Utility Facilities: No street trees other than
those species listed as small trees in this chapter may be planted under or
within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility or telephone wire or
within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line,
transmission line or other utility. No tree shall be planted closer than ten
feet (10') to a utility pole.
   (E)   Distance Requirements; Driveways And Alleys: No street tree or shrub
shall be planted within ten feet (10') from driveways and alleys.
   (F)   Requirements On Unpaved Streets Without Curbs: No street tree or shrub
shall be planted without special permission of the council who shall determine
the tree's location so that it will not be injured or destroyed when the street
is curbed or paved. (1977 Code)
8-2-7: OWNERS OF TREES; DUTIES:
The owner of every parcel of land in the city upon which any tree or shrub is
now or may hereafter be growing, shall trim or cause to be trimmed the branches
thereof so that the same shall not obstruct the passage of light from any
streetlight in any street, alley or highway in the city to the adjacent street
or sidewalk; and the owner shall trim all branches of any trees or shrubs now
or hereafter growing on his premises which overhang any street, sidewalk, alley
or public way, so that there shall be a clear height of twelve feet (12') above
the surface of the street, sidewalk or public way unobstructed by branches, and
the owner shall remove from such tree or trees all dead decayed or broken limbs
or branches that overhang such street, sidewalk or public way. (1977 Code)
8-2-8: RESTRICTION ON REMOVAL, TRIMMING OR DEFACING OF TREES, SHRUBS AND
PLANTS:
   (A)   No person shall, without first obtaining authorization or written
notice from the city superintendent, remove, destroy, break, cut or in any way
injure or interfere with any tree, shrub or plant which is now or may hereafter
be growing in any public right of way; nor shall any person attach or place any
rope, wire, chain, sign, poster, handbill or other thing of like or similar
nature on any tree or shrub now or hereafter growing in any public right of way
in the city.
   (B)   No person shall remove any tree on private property that may damage
any street, curb, sidewalk or other city property until a cash bond in the
amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) is posted with the city comptroller, upon
authorization of the city superintendent, said cash bond to be held until the
removal of the tree is completed and until any damage caused due to removal of
said tree has been satisfactorily repaired and approved by the city
superintendent. (1977 Code)
8-2-9: GUARDS FOR TREES DURING CONSTRUCTION:
In the erection, alteration or repair of any building or structure, the owner
shall place or cause to be placed such guards as shall effectually prevent
injury to any tree or trees in the vicinity of the building or structure. (1977
Code)
8-2-10: USE OF TREES; ELECTRICAL WIRES:
No person shall, without written permit from the city superintendent, attach
any electric wires, insulator or other electric device for holding an electric
wire to any tree now or hereafter growing in any public right of way in the
city and every person owning or operating any wire charged with electricity
shall, whenever practicable, securely fasten the same so that the wire shall
not come in contact with any tree in any public right of way. (1977 Code)
8-2-11: TRIMMING; NOTICE REQUIRED; COSTS:
Upon failure of any person to trim trees, shrubs or plants as hereinbefore or
hereinafter stated, the city superintendent may give notice of a general nature
in the local newspaper for property owners to trim said trees, and upon failure
to do so, the city may cause the same to be trimmed and the expense thereof
shall be levied, certified and collected in the same manner as special
assessment for repairing and replacing sidewalks. (1977 Code)
8-2-12: CITY RIGHT TO PLANT, PRUNE, MAINTAIN OR REMOVE TREES:
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees,
plants and shrubs within the public right of way as may be necessary to ensure
safety or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The city
council may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof
which is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason of its nature is injurious
to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public
improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
(1977 Code)
8-2-13: SPRAYING REGULATIONS:
Whenever the council deems it necessary and expedient, they may have any or all
trees within the city sprayed, which work shall be done in a careful and
prudent manner, and with such solution as they deem beneficial. The cost
thereof shall be borne by the city at large and payable out of the general
fund; provided that nothing herein shall interfere with the individual property
owners from having their own trees sprayed at their expense. (1977 Code)
8-2-14: SHRUBS AND PLANTS; HEIGHT:
For the purpose of preventing the obstruction of view and in the interest of
the safety of the traveling public, no shrubs or plants will be permitted to
grow or remain more than three feet (3') in height above the level of the
adjacent street or sidewalk in any parkway bordering any street or alley in the
city. (1977 Code)
8-2-15: DUTCH ELM DISEASE:
   (A)   Right Of Entry: The officers, agents, servants and employees of the
city are authorized and directed to enter on and upon private property whereon
there is located any elm tree having the appearance of or suspected of being
diseased with phloem necrosis, commonly Dutch elm disease, for the purpose of
inspecting the suspected tree and removing therefrom samples or portions
thereof to be tested to establish whether the tree is in fact diseased. The
presence of brown streaking beneath the bark of an elm tree shall be deemed to
indicate the presence of Dutch elm disease and shall be conclusive evidence of
the presence of Dutch elm disease. If, after such inspection, the city
superintendent determines that any tree inspected is so diseased, he shall
personally serve a written notice or send same by registered mail to the owner
of record, that said tree, to avoid the spread of the disease, shall be removed
and burned or otherwise destroyed by and at the expense of the owner within
thirty (30) days from the date of delivery or mailing of said notice. This
notice shall also contain the substance of section 11-20-12 of the Illinois
municipal code and shall identify the property by common description, and the
tree or trees affected.
   (B)   Abatement By City: In each case where the owner or occupant of the
parcel of land on which said tree is located cannot be found, or if found and
notified as aforesaid neglects or refuses to abate such a said nuisance, it
shall be lawful for the city to abate the same by the removal, destruction and
burning of said diseased, dead or decayed tree and in that event the said
owner, occupant or agent or any of them shall be charged with those expenses
that may be incurred by the city in the removal or abatement of the aforesaid
tree, which expenses shall be collected by the city by suit, lien or otherwise
in addition to the fine or penalty as herein provided. If ownership of the land
on which any such tree is disputed, the city shall have a survey made and the
expense of same shall be assessed against the person or persons found to be the
owner or owners of the land on which any such tree stands, and shall be
collected in the same manner as the other expenses of removal. (1977 Code)
8-2-16: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
shall be as set out under section
1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 3
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Permit Required
8-3-2: Application; Deposit And Inspection Fee
8-3-3: Disposition Of Deposit
8-3-4: Liability Of Applicant
8-3-5: Blocking Streets
8-3-6: Barricades And Lights
8-3-7: Supervision
8-3-8: Penalty
8-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation or opening in any
public right-of-way within the City without first obtaining a written permit
from the Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her assignee. The approved
permit shall be kept on the job site until all restoration work has been
completed. Work being done without a permit will be issued a stop work order,
and subject to penalties until such time as a permit is issued. The permit
shall be site specific. In the case of a public utility doing work throughout
the City, a separate permit will be required for each individual street and/or
location where work is being performed. (Ord. 2210, 10-24-2017)
8-3-2: APPLICATION; DEPOSIT AND INSPECTION FEE:
   (A)   Applications for permits shall be made in writing on a form provided
by the City and submitted to the Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her
assignee. It shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan detailing the work to
be done and the dimensions and materials of the area to be excavated and such
other information as may be required by the Superintendent of Public Works.
Before any permit shall be issued, the applicant shall pay the applicable
application and inspection fee and make a deposit with the City Comptroller, in
the form of cash or check, together with an inspection fee, based upon the
following:
 
Opening In Public           25 Square                Per Square
Right-Of-Way Composed Of    Feet Or Less             Foot Over 25
The Following Materials
Dirt, loose stone or        $200.00                  $ 8.00
similar material
Brick, asphaltic or similar 450.00                   18.00
materials
Concrete                    550.00                   20.00
Concrete curb and gutter    $500.00 for first linear $25.00 for each additional
based on linear foot        foot                     linear foot
Fee for application and
inspection, 10 percent of
deposit but in no case less
than $50.00
 
   (B)   Any person making or causing to be made any excavation or opening for
any purpose in any public right-of-way within the City shall cause the same to
be repaired in the following manner:
      1.   The width of the trench shall be kept as narrow as the construction
needs require. Proper bracing shall be maintained to prevent any collapse of
adjoining ground; no tunnel shall exceed thirty six inches (36") in diameter
except with proper bracing or shoring as approved by the Superintendent of
Public Works.
      2.   All excavated material taken from the opening shall be removed from
the location and the opening backfilled with sand and/or a fine aggregate
(CA16), as approved by the Superintendent of Public Works. The backfill
material shall be placed in lifts not to exceed twelve inches (12"). Each lift
shall be thoroughly compacted before the next lift is placed.
      3.   Topsoil shall be replaced at a minimum depth of six inches (6"), and
be properly graded, compacted, seeded or sodded. All seeded areas shall have a
layer of straw or other form of germination blanket placed to facilitate
growth. In addition, areas that are on a slope shall have erosion control
blankets, and other erosion control measures (e.g., ditch checks and silt
fencing) installed when deemed necessary by the Superintendent of Public Works.
      4.   Gravel surfaces shall be repaired with a thoroughly compacted
aggregate (CA6) base equal to the thickness of the existing course, but in no
case shall it be less than eight inches (8") in depth.
      5.   Bituminous and seal coat surfaces shall be repaired with a compacted
hotmix asphalt (HMA) surface equal to the thickness of the existing surface,
but in no case shall the compacted HMA be less than three inches (3") thick.
For surfaces thicker than three inches (3"), it should be installed and
compacted in lifts no thicker than three inches (3"). The base under the HMA
shall be a compacted aggregate (CA6) base equal to the thickness of the
existing base, but in no case shall it be less than eight inches (8") in depth.
Unless otherwise directed, temporary repair with bituminous cold-patch will be
allowed and maintained until such time as weather allows for the permanent
patch using HMA.
      6.   Concrete surfaces shall be repaired with a concrete surface equal to
the thickness of the existing slab, but in no case shall it be less than six
inches (6") thick. The concrete surface shall be poured over a compacted
aggregate (CA6) base with a thickness equal to the existing base, but in no
case shall it be less than eight inches (8") in depth. The concrete surfacing
shall be removed one foot (1') outside the perimeter of the trench opening. In
excavating materials from the area to be patched, the perimeter of the patch
must be saw cut as close to parallel and perpendicular to pavement edge and/or
center line. The adjacent concrete pavement or concrete base (if applicable)
shall be doweled to anchor the patch to the surrounding pavement. Unless
otherwise directed, temporary repair with bituminous cold-patch will be allowed
and maintained until such time as weather allows for the permanent patch using
concrete.
      7.   Concrete curb and gutter shall be required with the dimensions
matching the existing curb height and gutter width. The thickness of the flag
shall be equal the depth of the existing flag thickness, but in no case shall
it be less than nine inches (9") thick. The flag shall be poured over a
compacted aggregate (CA6) base, with a minimum thickness of eight inches (8").
The adjacent curb and gutter shall be doweled on both ends with eighteen inch
(18") dowel bars, placed at mid-depth, with one placed no closer than two
inches (2") from the back of curb, and the second placed no closer than two
inches (2") from the front face of the flag. Contraction joints shall be
installed every fifteen feet (15').
   (C)   The application shall also show the date and dig number issued by
JULIE (Illinois one-call system). Work shall not begin until such time as all
public utilities have been marked or cleared.
   (D)   The failure to complete restoration work in a satisfactory manner may
result in subsequent applications being denied, or a fifty percent (50%)
increase in the cost of the required deposit. (Ord. 2210, 10-24-2017)
8-3-3: DISPOSITION OF DEPOSIT:
The deposit shall be held by the City Comptroller for a period of one year
after the notice of restoration. The applicant shall notify the Superintendent
of Public Works upon completion of restoration, the date of which shall be
affixed to the excavation permit application. Failure to notify the
Superintendent of Public Works upon completion of restoration will result in
the application date being used for a completion date. After one year, the
Superintendent of Public Works will conduct an inspection of the work site. If
the restoration of the excavation or opening is in a condition acceptable to
the City, the deposit shall be returned to the applicant. If the Superintendent
of Public Works deems that further work is necessary to restore the public
right-of-way, the applicant will be notified of the corrections needed and
given ten (10) business days to complete the work. If after proper notice, the
applicant refuses or fails to make the required corrections, the City will
cause the necessary work to be completed, with all costs incurred being
deducted from the deposit. The balance of the deposit, if any, shall be
returned to the applicant or, if the costs of proper restoration exceed the
deposit, the applicant shall be billed by the City the amount of the excess.
(Ord. 2210, 10-24-2017)
8-3-4: LIABILITY OF APPLICANT:
   (A)   All applicants permitted hereunder to make any excavation or opening
in any public right-of-way within the City shall maintain all such excavations
or openings in a safe condition from the time the opening is made until the
restoration is completed and approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
The applicant shall be liable and responsible for any and all accidents or
damages of any nature occasioned by any such excavation or opening until the
restoration is completed and approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
   (B)   All repairs shall remain in good repair and condition for a period of
one year after the date of completion. In case any defects occur within such
period, except those that are deemed not to be the fault of the applicant or
his or her agents, the applicant shall be liable for and responsible to repair
such defects. (Ord. 2210, 10-24-2017)
8-3-5: BLOCKING STREETS:
No excavation shall block more than one-half (1/2) of any street driving
surface, except as approved by the Superintendent of Public Works. Nor shall
any portion of any driving surface be blocked for a period to exceed seven (7)
days. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be notified upon the
commencement of the excavation work. Extensions may be granted by the
Superintendent of Public Works if exigent circumstances require. (Ord. 2210,
10-24-2017)
8-3-6: BARRICADES AND LIGHTS:
Any person making or maintaining any excavation in any public right-of-way
shall maintain the same adequately guarded by reflective barricades and lights
to protect persons and property. (Ord. 2210, 10-24-2017)
8-3-7: SUPERVISION:
The excavating, tunneling or other work being done to any public right-of-way
shall be under and subject to the supervision of the Superintendent of Public
Works, or his or her assignee. Notice shall be given to the Superintendent of
Public Works at least twenty four (24) hours before the work of backfilling any
excavation commences. (Ord. 2210, 10-24-2017)
8-3-8: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
shall be as set out under section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 4
WATER REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Turning On; Service Calls
8-4-3: Application For Service; Service Fee
8-4-4: Water Service Accounts
8-4-5: Protection Of Water Department Property
8-4-6: Access To Premises
8-4-7: Interruption Of Service
8-4-8: Notice To Plumbers And Excavators
8-4-9: Fire Hydrants
8-4-10: Termination Of Water Service
8-4-11: Water Shortage
8-4-12: Water Loss
8-4-13: Resale
8-4-14: Disputes
8-4-15: Water Service Lines
8-4-16: Water Main Extensions
8-4-17: Meters
8-4-18: Water Rates, Generally
8-4-19: Billing
8-4-20: Water Statements
8-4-21: Bills; Nonpayment Of Bills, Penalty Waiver, Reinstatement Fee
8-4-22: Lien; Foreclosure
8-4-23: Water Rates And Related Charges
8-4-24: Penalty
8-4-25: Cross Connections
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-20-4 and 5/11-129-1.
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP FEE: The water meter shall be read by the water department,
the necessary administrative work involved to establish the account be
completed, including, but not limited to, completing a service request form and
establishing a billing ledger, meter reading form, alphabetical account/address
index card and a billing plate.
COMMERCIAL USE ACCOUNTS: A single commercial or business establishment and
including any additional number of family and/or commercial units located on
the same premises being served through a single meter, such as apartment
buildings, businesses with a family unit.
CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: Where used herein, shall mean the person responsible for
the payment of water bills.
DWELLING: Defined in section
4-2-1 of this code.
DWELLING UNIT: Defined in section
7-3-1 of this code.
FAMILY UNIT: Defined in section
7-3-1 of this code.
HOME OCCUPATIONS: Defined in section
10-1-4 of this code.
INDUSTRIAL USE ACCOUNTS: Any single metered commercial, business, manufacturing
or industrial establishment that uses or is estimated to use in excess of one
hundred thousand (100,000) gallons of water in a calendar year or the water
meter size is more than one inch (1"), including, but not limited to,
factories, laundromats, car washes, multi-family dwellings, trailer courts,
hospitals, motels, hotels, multi-businesses, restaurants and meat processing
establishments, etc.
MAY: Is permissive.
NONRESIDENT: All persons whose residence or place of business is not within the
corporate limits of the city, but whose residence or place of business is
located within the limits of the Savanna fire district.
NONRESIDENT USERS: Consumers using city water residing outside the city limits.
OWNER: Where used herein, shall mean the actual owner of the property to be
supplied with water service.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
PRIVATE FIRE RATES: The rates charged for the availability of water for fire
protection to users which have a private fire protection system such as
sprinklers or private fire hydrants. Rates shall be based on the size of the
fire protection service as shown in section
8-4-23, "Water Rates And Related Charges", schedule 4, of this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL USE ACCOUNTS: A single residential metered water service for one
family, including churches and other institutional organizations.
SERVICE FEE: The water shall be turned on at the curb stop and a meter
installed at the premises requesting the service. Said fee shall also include
removing the meter and turning off the water at the curb stop, whenever the
account is to be terminated and the necessary administrative work involved to
establish the account including, but not limited to, completing a service
request form and establishing a billing ledger, meter reading form,
alphabetical account address index card and a billing plate.
SHALL: Is mandatory.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person engaged in the division of a lot, tract or parcel of
land into two (2) or more lots, parcels or other divisions of land, for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building
development, including all changes in street or lot lines.
SUPERINTENDENT: Where used herein shall mean the city employee having the
authority to direct and oversee all activities of the city water department and
being responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
TEMPORARY TURN OFF FEE: The water shall be turned off by the city upon a
request by the owner to complete temporary repairs to his water system and upon
completion of said work, the city will turn on the water.
WATER DEPARTMENT: Where used herein, shall mean the water department of the
city. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977; Ord. 1133, 10-11-1977; Ord. 1184,
1-8-1980; Ord. 1252, 4-26-1983; Ord. 1765, 4-27-2004)
8-4-2: TURNING ON; SERVICE CALLS:
No water from the city water supply system shall be turned on for service into
any premises by any person other than the superintendent of the water
department or some person authorized by him to perform this service.
No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the plumbing does
not comply with the provisions of this code and the current state plumbing
code, provided that water may be turned on for construction purposes in
unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this chapter and section
8-4-23, schedule 7(D), of this chapter.
The charge for turn on services and other service calls shall be as listed in
section
8-4-23, schedule 8, of this chapter. Normal shut offs from a service standpoint
shall be charged the indicated rate. Charges for final turn offs shall be
exempt from the above charges.
Any person who shall turn on the supply of water to any premises from which the
supply of water has been turned off by the water department due to nonpayment
of water service charges or for any other reason without receiving written
permission or authority to do so from the water superintendent shall be subject
to a penalty in accordance with section
8-4-24 of this chapter.
Plumbers will be allowed to turn on the water temporarily to test their work,
upon verbal approval from the superintendent. (1977 Code)
8-4-3: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; SERVICE FEE:
Application for water service connections shall be made to the water department
by the owner or his agent, in writing, on forms furnished by the water
department. The application form must be accompanied by a service fee in
accordance with section
8-4-23, schedule 7 of this chapter. (Ord. 1184, 1-8-1980)
8-4-4: WATER SERVICE ACCOUNTS:
Water service accounts shall be in the name of the owner of the property
serviced and only such owner shall be recognized as the consumer, except as
noted hereinafter. The owner of the respective premises serviced shall be held
responsible for the payment of all water rental and all other proper charges in
connection with the water service to said respective premises, but such
payments will be accepted from the tenant or tenants of said respective
premises if rendered by them, but the acceptance of such payments from said
tenant shall not relieve the owner from the responsibility of and for the
payment of water rentals or other service charges not paid when due.
Water service accounts may be established in the name of a customer other than
the owner only after the owner has been advised of his responsibility for
payment and only after the owner has affixed his signature on an affidavit form
supplied by the city. (1977 Code)
8-4-5: PROTECTION OF WATER DEPARTMENT PROPERTY:
All meters, piping, gauges and other appliances and equipment furnished by and
at the expense of the water department which may be in the customer's premises
shall be and remain the property of the water department. The customer shall
protect and be responsible for such property in the case of loss or damage and
only authorized agents of the water department will be permitted to remove or
repair such property. The owner shall maintain or cause to maintain free access
to all water department properties. The owner or tenant shall not store or
construct any obstacles which will interfere with the reading, repairing or
removal of the water meter. The owner shall keep his curb stop and box free
from obstructions so that the water can be turned on or off whenever necessary
without delay.
It is the owner's responsibility to provide a properly functioning curb box
free from obstructions within six (6) months after the effective date hereof.
After this period of time, the owner will be charged for this service on a time
and material basis as outlined under section
8-4-23, schedule 10, "repair fee", of this chapter. (1977 Code)
8-4-6: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
Authorized agents of the water department shall, at all responsible hours, have
access to the premises for the purpose of inspecting the customer's
installation of the water supply system and for the installation, reading,
repairing, testing or the removal of the water meter or other water department
property.
All authorized agents of the water department shall present an identification
card. Upon presentation of the card, the authorized agent shall have free
access, at any reasonable hour, to any premises supplied with city water for
the purpose of making an inspection of the entire supply system upon the
premises or for the installation, reading, repairing, testing, or removal of
the water meter or other water department property. (Ord. 2074, 12-10-2013)
8-4-7: INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE:
When it is necessary for the water department to interrupt the water service
for the purpose of repairing or extending the mains, it will endeavor to give
notice of interruption and to shut off the water at a time when it will cause
the least inconvenience to the customer. In case of a break in the main or
pumping equipment requiring an immediate shutdown or interruption of service,
the water department cannot give notice to its customers and therefore, all
boilers or tanks on customers' premises that are connected directly with the
service pipe should be provided with check valves to prevent any damage in case
the water is suddenly shut off.
The water department shall not in any manner be liable for any damage caused by
any increase or decrease in pressure or by the shutting off of the supply of
water of any customer while the system, or any part thereof, is undergoing
repairs, or caused by the freezing of the main or the breaking of any pipe or
service cock, or by a shortage of water due to accident or circumstances over
which the water department has no control.
Only persons authorized by the water superintendent shall turn off or on any
water main valves or curb stops. (1977 Code)
8-4-8: NOTICE TO PLUMBERS AND EXCAVATORS:
All plumbers and contractors shall contact the superintendent of the water
department prior to performing any excavating work within the street right of
way. The water superintendent or his authorized representatives will mark the
approximate location of any underground water main or service pipe and the
plumber or contractor shall take every precaution to prevent damage to the
water main or service pipe. If any damages do occur, the plumber or person that
caused the damage shall pay the cost of repairing same to the water department.
The person causing the damage to the water main or service shall also be
responsible for any other liability resulting from the broken or damaged
service pipe or water main. No person shall tap, repair, change or otherwise
disturb the mains or service pipes without the permission of the water
superintendent. (1977 Code)
8-4-9: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Fire hydrants are for the use of the fire department for the purpose of
extinguishing fires and persons other than members of the fire department and
persons authorized by the water superintendent shall not open or attempt to
draw water from any fire hydrant. (1977 Code)
8-4-10: TERMINATION OF WATER SERVICE:
Whenever a premises is to be vacated, or closed for any period of time,
application shall be made to the water department in writing on forms supplied
by the department to have the water supply shut off or discontinued. The water
department will then shut off the water, read and remove the meter. The water
customer will then be given a bill based on the meter reading.
Whenever a unit is to be vacated in a residential multi-family account,
application shall be made in writing to the water department, on forms supplied
by the department, and shall be conditioned as follows:
   (A)   The multi-family dwelling is served by only one water meter.
   (B)   The owner of said premises shall on an affidavit supplied by the water
department agree to notify the water department whenever the unit is occupied.
   (C)   The owner shall also agree, on said affidavit, that the water
department shall have the right to retroactively charge said property owner for
said unit for water usage from and after a date as established by the council
committee, if said unit is found as being used for dwelling purposes and not
reported. No refund or discount on water rentals shall be made in the case of a
premises having been vacated or no water used, unless service has been
terminated upon written request by the owner or customer. A minimum charge per
section
8-4-23 of this chapter shall be made where water service was not shut off.
(Ord. 1184, 1-8-1980)
8-4-11: WATER SHORTAGE:
Whenever, in the judgment of the mayor, drought or other public exigency may
require it, he shall have the right and authority by proclamation published in
some newspaper printed or published in the city to limit in respect of time and
also of quantity the use of such water, and to suspend fully such use for
public or private fountains, sprinkling for any other purpose except immediate
domestic care, until such exigency has passed, and it shall be unlawful for any
person or corporation to draw or use any such water or permit the same to run
or be drawn or used in violation of such proclamation from and after the
publication of said proclamation.
During periods of such exigency, water service to users outside of the city
limits may be suspended until the water supply available for city residents has
reached a normal level in the judgment of the mayor. (1977 Code)
8-4-12: WATER LOSS:
Water loss as used herein shall be that portion of water usage as read on the
water meter over and beyond an established average usage. Water loss shall be
subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   No such loss had been accommodated within the previous eighteen (18)
months; and
   (B)   The city meter reader has read the meter within the previous seven (7)
months; and
   (C)   The water user affirms that the water loss was actually unknown to him
and files with the city clerk a notarized document to that effect; and
   (D)   The water loss is at least equal to twice the average usage as
determined by the records of the previous usage; and
   (E)   The rate for water loss shall be as shown in schedule 12, section
8-4-23 of this chapter. This rate does not apply to water used during winter
months to prevent freeze up of water lines. (1977 Code)
8-4-13: RESALE:
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient from the city supply
to any premises other than that for which application has been made and the
meter installed, except in case of emergency and with written consent of the
mayor. (1977 Code)
8-4-14: DISPUTES:
Any disputes pertinent to water bills, service fees, installation fees,
penalties and any other charges or fees may be filed with the water department
by the owner in the form of an appeal application. Such appeal application
shall be filed with the water department prior to the date due. The appeal
application shall specify the circumstances constituting the dispute. The water
department shall transmit to the water committee, commission or board as
established by the corporate authorities, the appeal applications and all other
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
The committee, commission or board shall set a hearing date within ten (10)
days from date of application. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person
or by agent or attorney. The applicant shall be notified as to time and place
of said hearing. The administrative decision shall be made within thirty (30)
days from date of application and said decision shall be final. (1977 Code)
8-4-15: WATER SERVICE LINES:
   (A)   Connection With Water Main; New Service: For the purpose of this
chapter, "service connection" is the opening, including fittings and
appurtenances, at the water main through which water is supplied to the user
and "water main" means any pipe for the purpose of distributing potable water
which serves or is accessible to more than one property, dwelling, or rental
unit and is exterior to buildings.
All water service connections will be connected to a water main.
No water service connection shall be made to another water service connection
in the water distribution system.
Only the water department will make the necessary service connection to the
water main. The property owner or authorized agent shall file with the water
department an application for a water service tap. The owner will be billed for
the services outlined in schedule 9, section
8-4-23 of this chapter. (Ord. 1789, 4-12-2005)
The city public works department may provide the labor, equipment and perform
site restoration costs to install water service from the city water main to the
water curb stop, on the following terms and conditions: 1) prior to the
commencement of work on the installation of such water service, the property
owner submitted to the director of public works a written application to the
city for such labor, equipment and site restoration on a form approved by the
director of public works; 2) prior to the commencement of such work, the
application was approved by the director of public works; and 3) the property
owner has paid the cost of all material used in extending service from the
water main to the curb stop. The application shall include a complete waiver of
claims and hold harmless agreement made by the property owner in favor of the
city for all claims that may arise in the course of the provision of services
hereunder. The property owner will be responsible for all costs to install the
water service from the curb stop to the dwelling. No reimbursement or services
shall be authorized pursuant to this section for any work in connection with a
new subdivision, or the alteration, repair, enlargement, conversion or
replacement of an existing building. (Ord. 1683, 11-27-2001; amd. Ord. 1742, 9-
9-2003)
   (B)   Pipes, Fittings And Valves: The owner shall be responsible for and
bear the entire cost for installing (except as provided in subsection (A) of
this section) the service pipe from the water main into the premises. The owner
shall install a stop and waste valve in an easily accessible place near the
wall where the service pipe enters the building. (Ord. 1789, 4-12-2005)
The owner shall be responsible for and bear the entire cost for installing
(except as provided in subsection (A) of this section) a curb stop valve and a
curb box in the service pipe. The curb stop valve and curb box shall be located
within the street right of way and be easily accessible and protected from any
damage. Whenever possible, the curb stop valve and curb box shall be located
approximately six feet (6') from the property line. The type of curb stop valve
and curb stop box shall be approved by the water superintendent or may be
purchased from the water department. The owner shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the curb stop valve and the curb box as provided in section
8-4-5 of this chapter. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1789, 4-12-2005)
The owner may request the water department to install the service line from the
water main to the curb box by written application on a form supplied by the
water department. The owner shall be billed for the work performed as provided
in schedule 9, section
8-4-23 of this chapter.
All service pipes shall be installed in accordance with the current Illinois
plumbing code.
   (C)   Replacing And Repairing Water Services: When a leak or break occurs on
a water service anywhere between the water main and the curb box, the property
owner is responsible for repair or replacement from the curb box to the
premises at his expense. The water department will repair or replace any faulty
water service line located on city right of way between the water main and curb
stop and box. The charge for this work shall be as outlined in section
8-4-23, schedule 10, of this chapter. The property owner will be given thirty
(30) days to pay or sign an agreement for time payment with the water
department. Any time the party fails to make payment, the water service will be
discontinued until the bill is paid in full, plus a turn on fee per section
8-4-2 of this chapter.
Prior to a street improvement program where the street is to be improved with
either a Portland cement concrete surface or a bituminous concrete surface, all
water services which are not type K copper shall be replaced by the water
department. Water services will also be extended to all vacant lots upon
request by the property owner at a cost as reflected in section
8-4-23 of this chapter for new service. The total cost of this work will be
paid by the owner in accordance with section
8-4-23, schedule 9, of this chapter.
Whenever the water department temporarily repairs a water service line between
the water main and the curb stop valve and curb box, no charges shall be
submitted to the property owner.
The superintendent shall notify the property owner or customer of any water
leak in the water service line between the curb box and the water meter and
shall give the property owner or customer written notice to repair the water
leak within fifteen (15) days. If the water leak is not repaired within the
allotted time, the superintendent shall bill the property owner for water
wasted at the rate of thirty six thousand (36,000) gallons per day (amount of
water that will flow through 1/8 inch hole at 40 pounds of pressure) from the
date of the notice to repair the water leak. The water wasted shall be paid for
at the regular water rates then in effect. (1977 Code)
   (D)   Restricted Use Of System: No person shall connect to the public water
supply without complying with the Illinois state plumbing code, existing laws
and rules, and the provisions of this code of the city of Savanna.
   (E)   Inspection: The water department of the city or any representative
thereof shall have the authority to inspect any premises to determine the
presence of an improper connection and to order the elimination of such cross
connection.
   (F)   Discontinuance Of Water Service: The water department is hereby
authorized to discontinue water service after a reasonable notice to any person
owning any property where an improper water connection exists in violation of
this code.
   (G)   Precautionary Measures: The water department may take such other
precautionary measures as necessary to eliminate any danger of the
contamination of the Savanna water supply system.
   (H)   Council To Make Rules And Regulations: The city council is hereby
authorized to make such rules and regulations consistent with this chapter and
approved by the council for connections to the waterworks, specifying the types
and sizes of pipes and all other appurtenances and extensions thereto and
amending the same from time to time as may be deemed necessary. All service
pipes and connections to the waterworks system shall comply with said
specifications and rules. Any person not complying with the specifications and
rules for connections to the waterworks system shall be subject to the penalty
as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1789, 4-12-2005)
8-4-16: WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
   (A)   General Policy: It is hereby established as the policy of the city
that all water mains proposed to be extended within the corporate limits of the
city shall be constructed in accordance with the following:
      1.   Preliminary Survey: When the owner of one or more building sites
within a lot, block, tract or parcel of land, within the corporate limits of
the city, which is not served by the city water system requests an extension of
the water system to serve the property owned by him, the city superintendent
shall make a preliminary survey of the premises, and report to the city council
on the feasibility of the proposed construction.
      2.   Plans, Specifications, Estimate Of Cost: If it appears from the
report of the city superintendent that the city water system, as it then
exists, is of ample size and design to accommodate the properties which will be
served by such extension and it is determined by the city council to proceed
with the extension as proposed, the city superintendent shall be directed to
cause the preparation of the plans and specifications for the water main
extension in accordance with the environmental protection agency regulations,
including an estimate of cost of the proposed extension, including construction
costs, material costs and engineering fees.
The property owner(s) requesting said water main extension shall deposit with
the city the amount of the estimated engineering fees prior to authorizing the
preparation of the plans and specifications. Except as otherwise provided, said
deposit shall be returned if it is decided to construct the water main
extension.
When the plans and specifications for the proposed construction of the water
main extension together with the estimated costs thereof are completed, the
property owner(s) requesting such extension shall be advised of the estimated
cost of the work; and if he decides not to proceed further, the money he has
deposited will be used to pay the engineers' charges for preparing the plans,
specifications and estimated cost of the work.
Such plans and specifications shall contain a map showing properties to be
benefited by the water main extension together with the legal description of
such properties.
      3.   Bids: If the cost estimate is acceptable to the property owner(s)
requesting the water main extension, the city council shall authorize the city
superintendent to advertise for bids for the materials specified in the plans
and specifications and exhibit such bids to the property owner(s) requesting
the water main extension.
If one of the bids is acceptable to the city council and the property owner(s)
requesting the water main extension; the property owner(s) requesting the water
main extension shall be required to deposit with the city a sum equal to
charges hereinafter established for reimbursement charges. Upon receipt of said
sum(s) of money, the city council shall authorize the purchase of such
materials.
      4.   Reimbursement Charge: The city council hereafter is providing for a
water property reimbursement charge to reimburse the city for funds expended in
the extension of water mains. As closely as possible, such charges are to be
established to be equivalent to the pro rata share of the cost of said
extension benefiting the abutting property owner(s) along the extension.
Water main extensions shall be constructed by the city and the reimbursement
property charges shall include any street replacement costs, engineering fees,
legal fees and material costs required to complete the water main extension.
Such costs and fees shall be apportioned equally among the number of linear
frontage feet abutting the improvement.
The sums herein provided for shall be in addition to and exclusive of all other
charges required and fixed by this code in connection with sewer service
installations.
The property owners requesting the water main extension shall apply for
connecting (during construction) to the water main extended and pay the cost of
labor and materials required to install and connect said water service line
with the water main. All applications, before approval, shall be accompanied by
the requisite water property reimbursement and water connection charge in
certified funds or cash.
Whenever the owner(s) of the remaining unaccessed properties abutting said
water main extension thereafter apply to the city for a water service line
connection with said water main extension, then the city superintendent shall
certify to such applicant the reimbursement charge and all water service line
connection applications before approval shall be accompanied by the requisite
water property reimbursement charge and water service line connection charge.
      5.   Records: The city controller shall record in the files of the city
the location of the water main extended, the total project costs, the
reimbursement charges as established at the time of construction and the
abutting property descriptions of the properties benefited, together with a
current record of the reimbursement charges paid and unpaid.
All water mains extended under this section, except as otherwise provided for,
shall become part of the city's water distribution system upon completion of
the construction of said water main extension.
   (B)   Water Main Extensions Beyond The Corporate Limits: It is the policy of
the city council to exercise discretion in approving water main extensions or
service line connections to owner(s) and user(s) who are outside the corporate
limits of the city. In the event that the city council approves the water main
extensions or a service line connection without the corporate limits of the
city, said extension or connection thereof shall be constructed in accordance
with subsection (A) of this section, except that said charges shall be at the
rate of one and one-half (11/2) times the charge then applicable to those
properties within the corporate limits. (Ord. 1164, 4-24-1979)
8-4-17: METERS:
   (A)   Usage: All water used by the water customer shall be measured with a
water meter furnished and installed by the water department at no cost to the
customer. The water department will own and maintain all meters; provided,
however, that additional or auxiliary meter or meters desired by the owner or
customer being supplied for the purpose of subdividing the total water used,
shall be at the entire expense of such owner or customer, and shall be their
property; in that case the reading of such additional meters, and the
maintenance thereof, shall be by the owner or users.
Each and every water consumer shall be provided a water meter, except a master
water meter may be installed, which shall measure all the water supplied to a
number of trailers, apartments, stores or offices provided they are located in
one building or on one parcel of land and are under one ownership.
The water department reserves the right to determine the size, location and
number of meters required for any service.
   (B)   Installation: The water meter shall be installed in a convenient
location for the personnel of the water department to read and maintain.
Wherever practicable meters shall be located inside the building being serviced
and shall be located as close as possible to the point of entry of the water
service pipe, and the entire length of the service from the point of entry to
the water meter shall always be exposed. At no time shall water meters be
installed in washrooms.
All meters shall be set plumb and level and secured to remain so. They shall be
placed in an accessible location, free from all obstructions, so that they can
be easily serviced, and shall be protected by the consumer from freezing or
damage. Brass couplings or unions shall be installed on the inlet and outlet
side of the meter. A gate valve must be installed within one foot (1') of the
meter on both inlet and outlet. No red lead or white lead shall be used in
making meter connections.
Where a meter is installed on a water service pipe connected to a hot water
boiler, steam boiler or other hot water apparatus, a check and relief valve
shall be provided between such meter and boilers or hot water heaters, to
protect the water meter from damage caused by back pressure from steam or hot
water.
In residential areas where there is no basement and where the design of the
building is such that installing the water meter inside would be impractical,
the water meter shall be placed in a pit not more than eight feet (8') inside
the sidewalk line. The water department will furnish and install a frostproof
meter box. The owner will be billed for this service on a time and material
basis as outlined in section
8-4-23, schedule 7(F) of this chapter.
Where meters are set in pits, the top of said meter shall be located fourteen
inches (14") below the ground line and shall be provided with a yoke with
expansion joint or its equal. For five-eighths inch (5/8") meter, a twenty one
inch (21") diameter tile will be used for the pit section; for a three-fourths
inch (3/4") and one inch (1") meter, a twenty four inch (24") diameter tile
will be provided. Said pit will be covered with a cast iron cover provided with
an auxiliary inner cover to make air space. Soil will be packed tightly around
the tile and cover, clear up to the lid, and care will be taken not to use
crushed rock, gravel or cinders. Clay or loam are the best. Water meters over
one inch (1") shall be set in a concrete vault.
In business or manufacturing districts, the location of the meter and the
construction of a pit for same (if a pit is required) shall be at the
discretion of the superintendent.
   (C)   Sealing: After proper installation of water meters, all meters shall
be sealed by the water meter department, which seal or seals shall not be
broken except by authority of said department. (1977 Code)
   (D)   Repair: Ordinary repairs will be scheduled and made to meters by the
water department at its own expense. In case of damage to a meter by reason of
freezing or hot water or any act or omission of the consumer, the consumer,
property owner or both shall pay the water department a repair fee as outlined
in section
8-4-23, schedule 7(B) of this chapter for the cost of repairs. The fee will be
included with the next water bill, and in case of theft or complete
disconnection of any meter by reason of any act or omission of the consumer,
the owner shall pay the water department the full value of the meter and all
cost associated with replacement and installation in accordance with section
8-4-23, schedule 7(B) of this chapter. (Ord. 2075, 12-10-2013)
   (E)   Failing To Register: Whenever any meter, by reasons of it being out of
repair or for any cause, fails to properly register the water passing through
the same, the consumer shall be charged at the rate shown during the
corresponding period of the previous year. If no record of the previous year
exists, then it shall be the duty of the superintendent to estimate or
determine, so far as he can, the amount of water consumed during the time
estimated by said superintendent to be due. If the estimated water consumed is
judged unfair by the consumer, he may present all facts to the water committee
whose decision will be final.
Notice shall at once be given the water department when a meter is found by
owner, occupant or tenants to be out of order. (1977 Code)
   (F)   Testing: In the event a water customer desires to test the accuracy of
the water meter, the customer shall fill out and submit a meter testing request
form, available from the water department. After receiving the meter testing
request form, the water department will send the meter out to be tested for a
fee as outlined in section
8-4-23, schedule 7(C) of this chapter. A temporary meter will be installed
during the testing period to register water usage. If the meter test indicates
that the meter is over registering (fast) in excess of one and one-half percent
(1.5%), the meter will be repaired or replaced and the customer will not be
charged a testing fee. If the results of the meter test indicate that the meter
is registering within one and one- half percent (1.5%), the customer will be
charged a fee in accordance with section
8-4-23, schedule 7(C) of this chapter. (Ord. 2076, 12-10-2013)
   (G)   Tampering: In accordance with section
8-4-24 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any plumber or other person,
without the consent of the water department, to attach, disconnect, repair,
test or tamper with any water meter connected with the waterworks system. In
case any consumer shall vacate the premises upon which there is a water meter
in service without notice being served on the water department in sufficient
time to permit the removal of said meter without damage to same, the owner of
such property so vacated shall be held liable and responsible for all water
passing through the meter and also all damage done to the said meter.
   (H)   Temporary Metering; Temporary Water Usage: The water department may
permit water to be used temporarily from any fire hydrant for other than
domestic purposes in locations where no other supply can be obtained by
attaching a reducer to one of the hydrant openings and controlling the supply
by means of a small valve. The flow from such water supply shall be registered
through a meter. The cost for these services and water usage shall be as
outlined in section
8-4-23, schedule 7(D) of this chapter, which costs shall include a meter
deposit fee which shall be refunded if the meter is still in good repair upon
discontinuance of said service. If the meter is in any manner damaged, said
water user shall be required to pay for necessary repairs as outlined in
section
8-4-23, schedule 7(B) of this chapter. (1977 Code)
   (I)   Access: If an authorized agent of the water department is unable to
gain access to a premises for any reason to install, repair, replace or inspect
a water meter, or obtain a reading of the water meter after making two (2)
attempts to contact the customer and/or property owner, the water may be shut
off by the water department and an estimated charge made for the amount of
water consumed. In case water is shut off for any such reason, it will not be
turned on until such time as an authorized agent of the water department has
been given access to the premises to install, repair, replace, or inspect a
water meter or obtain a reading of the water meter and payment for the
estimated bill has been made in full plus a turn on fee per section
8-4-23, schedule 8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2078, 12-10-2013)
8-4-18: WATER RATES, GENERALLY:
The rates for the sale of water and the use and services of the municipal water
supply system by consumers of the city water department shall be as shown in
section
8-4-23, schedules 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this chapter. (1977 Code)
8-4-19: BILLING:
For the purpose of the operation of the water system of the city, the city will
be divided into five (5) water zones and the calendar year will be divided into
monthly periods, except as noted hereafter, for each water zone.
   (A)   Water Zones:
      1.   Zone 1 shall consist of that portion of the city north of the north
side of Washington Street beginning at the east bank of the Mississippi River,
thence westerly to the Fifth Street intersection and that portion of the city
west of a line extended northerly along the west side of Fifth Street from
Washington Street to the Adams Street and Diagonal Street intersection, thence
northerly along the west side of Diagonal Street to the Summit Street
intersection, thence northerly along a line extended to the North Fifth Street
and Tower Road intersection, thence northerly and easterly along the westerly
and northerly side of North Fifth Street to the city corporate limits on North
Fifth Street.
      2.   Zone 2 shall consist of that portion of the city south and east of
the boundary line of zone 1 hereinabove described and west of a line beginning
at the west end of Longmoor Avenue, thence southeasterly to the east end of Elm
Street (Bench Street), thence southwesterly to the west end of Pike Road,
thence south to the north bank of the Plum River.
      3.   Zone 3 shall consist of that portion of the city east of the
easterly boundary line of zone 2 hereinabove described.
      4.   Zone 4 shall consist of all commercial use accounts.
      5.   Zone 5 shall consist of all industrial use accounts.
      6.   Zone 7 shall consist of Big Elm Mobile Home Park and two addresses
on Portland Avenue.
      Accounts: The comptroller shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts, and at regular intervals he
shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books
to show the receipts and disbursements of the water system. (Ord. 1212, 1-13-
1981)
   (B)   Billing Periods: The calendar year is hereby divided into monthly
periods by water zones, said periods to begin on the first days of the months
as follows:
      1.   Zone 1: Monthly.
      2.   Zone 2: Monthly.
      3.   Zone 3: Monthly.
      4.   Zone 4: Monthly.
      5.   Zone 5: Monthly.
      6.   Zone 6: Monthly. (Ord. 1184, 1-8-1980; amd. Ord. 1235, 2-9-1982;
Ord. 2353, 5-28-2024)
8-4-20: WATER STATEMENTS:
Water statements shall be computed on a minimum thirty (30) day basis. (1977
Code)
8-4-21: BILLS; NONPAYMENT OF BILLS, PENALTY WAIVER, REINSTATEMENT FEE:
   (A)   Bills; Residential, Commercial: Bills for all water service charges
for all residential, commercial and other establishments, excepting industrial
use accounts shall be made quarterly one month after the expiration of the
quarterly period by zones established for water zones 1, 2, 3 and 4 for which
service has been supplied and the charges shall be payable within fifteen (15)
days after the first day of the month that such bill is due and payable.
   (B)   Bills, Industrial: Bills for all water service charges for all
industrial customers shall be made monthly one month after the expiration of
the monthly period by zone established for water zone 5 for which service has
been supplied and the charges shall be payable within fifteen (15) days after
the first day of the month that such bill is due and payable.
   (C)   Nonpayment Of Bills: A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to
the total net bill of customers failing to pay such water service bill in full
within fifteen (15) days after the first day of the month that such bill is due
and payable.
If said bill has not been paid within twenty five (25) days after the first day
of the month that such bill is due and payable, the customer shall be sent a
final notice that such service shall be terminated thirty (30) days after the
first day of the month that such bill is due and payable by turning off the
water service. Said service shall not be reestablished until the service bill
is paid in full.
If said service has been terminated for nonpayment and the customer is a
tenant, the owner shall be notified that such service has been terminated and
said bill is due and payable by said owner.
Failure to receive a water service bill will not relieve a property owner or
customer from payment for water services supplied. Written notice must be given
by the owner or authorized agent to forward service bills to any other address
than the premises supplied.
   (D)   Penalty Waiver: Upon request by the customer, the city may waive the
ten percent (10%) penalty charge on the current billing period, but not more
than once each calendar year. (Ord. 1235, 2-9-1982)
   (E)   Reinstatement Charges: Customers whose services are terminated because
of nonpayment of service bills when due and payable shall be required to pay a
reinstatement charge of thirty dollars ($30.00) before service will be
restored. Said charge shall be in addition to any penalty, service or other
charge. (Ord. 1723, 3-13-2003)
8-4-22: LIEN; FORECLOSURE:
   (A)   Charges for water shall be a lien upon the premises as provided by
statute. Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid sixty (60) days after
it has been rendered, the clerk may file with the recorder of Carroll County, a
statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of
the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the water
department claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges for water
served subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
Whenever a water bill remains unpaid for a period of sixty (60) days after it
has been rendered, and the consumer of water whose bill is unpaid is not the
owner of the premises, the clerk shall cause said notice to be mailed to the
owner of said premises at his last known address, if such owner can be
ascertained.
The failure of the clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such notice, or
the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid water bills as mentioned in the following
subsection.
   (B)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid water charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay
the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the
water department.
The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings, in the name of the water department, in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which a water bill has
remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered. (1977 Code)
8-4-23: WATER RATES AND RELATED CHARGES:
There shall be and there is hereby established a minimum charge and a basic
user rate for the use of and for service supplied by the water facilities of
the city. In February of each year the Water, Sewer, Refuse, Street and Alley
Committee as well as Finance Committee, shall review user rates and after
taking into account inflation, costs incurred the previous year in providing
the service and anticipated capital improvements needed to maintain the
combined waterworks and sewer works system will make recommendations to the
Council on increases in rates.
Schedule 1: All accounts of users consuming within city limits other than
Schedule 2 Below:
   Rate $6.18 per 1,000 gallons.
   Monthly minimum: 2,000 gallons with charge of $12.36.
Schedule 2: All Governmental Accounts deriving their principal revenues from
property taxes raised within city limits:
   Rate $4.00 per 1,000 gallons.
   Monthly minimum: 2,000 gallons with charge of $8.00.
Schedule 3: (Rep. by Ord. 2366, 1-28-2025)
Schedule 4: Nonresident Users:
   Nonresident users shall pay double the rates for water consumed by
residential users within the city limits as set forth above.
Schedule 5: Water System Improvement Fund:
   A service charge of thirteen dollars ($13.00) per month per service account,
payable on monthly or quarterly billing periods, is hereby established to each
user of the water facilities to be applied to the Water System Improvement Fund
to be used for maintenance and improvements to the City waterworks system, this
rate increase is effective May 1, 2023.
Schedule 6: Public Fire Protection: (Rep. by Ord. 1765, 4-27-2004)
Schedule 7: Miscellaneous Charges And Fees:
   (A)   Service Fees: Applicant shall pay a thirty dollar ($30.00) fee when
service is applied for.
   (B)   Meter Repair Fee: Applicant shall pay for the actual cost of
equipment, material, labor and compensations and a twenty percent (20%)
overhead on cost of material and equipment for other than ordinary repairs
outlined in subsection
8-4-17(D) of this chapter.
   (C)   Meter Testing Fee: The fee for testing a water meter will be
calculated by the Water Department and presented to the applicant for their
approval before the meter will be removed for testing. The fee shall include
charges for labor, shipping cost, and testing. By signing the meter testing
request form, the applicant is agreeing to pay all fees in accordance with
subsection
8-4-17(F) of this chapter.
   (D)   Temporary Metering Fee: Applicant shall pay a ten dollar ($10.00)
connection fee (nonreturnable) and a forty dollar ($40.00) deposit for
temporary metering and water usage. Water usage shall be based on the rate
established in schedule 2 of this section for a two inch (2") to four inch (4")
meter. The deposit fee established shall be applied to the cost of the water
usage.
   (E)   Name Change Only: Applicant shall pay a twenty dollar ($20.00) service
fee whenever the name is changed from one applicant to another.
   (F)   Frostproof Meter Box: Owner shall pay the actual cost of equipment,
material, labor and compensations and a twenty percent (20%) overhead on cost
of material and equipment for frostproof meter box construction in accordance
with subsection
8-4-17(B) of this chapter.
   (G)   Temporary Shutoff Fee: Service fees shall be thirty dollars ($30.00)
for a temporary shutoff and shall be paid when applied for.
   (H)   Water Line Location Fee: Applicant shall pay a fifteen dollar ($15.00)
per hour fee for services in connection with the location of a water service
line from the curb stop valve to the premises.
Schedule 8: Service Fees, After Regular Working Hours:
      Service work performed after the regular working hours of the service
personnel shall be billed at two (2) times the regular rate for service work,
as established herein.
Schedule 9: Service Connection To The Water Main:
   The property owner shall pay the actual cost of equipment, material, labor
and compensations and a twenty percent (20%) overhead on equipment and
materials for the connection to the water main, as outlined in subsection
8-4-15(A) of this chapter. The property owner shall be given thirty (30) days
to pay or sign an agreement for time payments with the water department.
Failure to make payment will result in discontinuing the service without
further notice, until the charges are paid in full. A service fee in the amount
of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be required thereafter to restore the
service.
Schedule 10: Replacing Or Repairing Water Service:
   (A)   Charges for replacing or repairing water services from the water main
to the curb stop valve shall be at the expense of the water department.
   (B)   The property owner shall pay the actual costs of equipment, materials,
labor and compensations and a twenty percent (20%) overhead on equipment and
materials for replacing or repairing the water service from the curb stop valve
to the premises, whenever the water department performs the work. All costs
relating to maintaining the water service from the curb stop valve to the
premises shall be at the expense of the property owner.
Schedule 11: Water Main Extensions:
      Water main extensions shall be in accordance with section
8-4-16 of this chapter.
Schedule 12: Water Loss Rates:
      Owner shall pay rates as set forth hereinabove for one hundred fifty
percent (150%) of the applicant’s average usage (based on the last 3 billing
cycles if available) and shall be charged at a rate equal to 50% of the current
rate established by Schedule 1 for each one thousand (1,000) gallons of water
used exceeding said average usage under the provisions of section
8-4-12 of this chapter.
Schedule 13: Frozen Water Policy:
      The following represents basic regulations related to frozen water
services. It is emphasized that only freezing water problems located
underground shall be considered. Freezing water problems within the basement or
dwelling shall not be considered.
   (A)   The customer shall protect the water meter from freezing when located
in the basement and in the event of accidental or wilful damage to the meter
caused by freezing, the customer shall notify the water department, which will
make the necessary repairs to the meter and charge the customer for the labor
and material costs. Water meters located in yard pits shall be protected by the
water department.
   (B)   To qualify, the customer must notify the water department in writing
prior to running water to prevent freezing. A meter reading shall also be
presented at this time. Prior authority must be obtained from the city before
any water is left running to prevent freezing. Normally the frost penetration
is not of sufficient depth to warrant running water to prevent freezing until
after December 1.
   (C)   Qualified customers shall be billed for fifty percent (50%) of the
water used in excess of the customer’s average water usage, in addition to the
regular rates established. Averages shall be computed based on the two (2)
previous years. If a history does not exist, the city superintendent shall
determine the average.
   (D)   In the event the water service freezes, the customer shall pay all
costs relating to thawing frozen water services or lines. When the water
service cannot be thawed, the customer shall notify the water department and
the bill shall be prorated. The customer shall also notify the water department
whenever the water thaws.
   (E)   When the water service cannot be thawed, the customer may, with
written approval of the water department, connect to an adjacent customer with
a garden hose and the water department shall perform the necessary paperwork
and the connecting customer shall be billed in accordance with subsection (C)
of this schedule 13. The customer may perform the necessary work or the water
department may be asked to perform this work and the charges relating to said
work shall be borne by the customer.
Schedule 14: Exceptions
      The Savanna township park district shall be provided, without charge, a
single water service fee for one restroom facility and one remote water spigot
for watering flowers, all located in the Marquette park facility within the
corporate limits of the city of Savanna, along the shores of the Mississippi
River and between Division Street and Randolph Street.
   (A)   The city of Savanna shall reserve unto itself the authority and right
to rescind its action to provide free water service fees with or without cause
upon thirty (30) days written notice to the Savanna township park district.
(Ord. 1184, 1-8-1980; amd. Ord. 1212, 1-13-1981; amd. Ord. 1356, 6-13-1989;
amd. Ord. 1725, 5-13-2003; amd. Ord. 1737, 8-12-2003; amd. Ord. 1742, 9-9-2003;
amd. Ord. 1895, 4-8-2008; amd. Ord. 2020, 11-27-2012; amd. Ord. 2033, 4-23-
2013; amd. Ord. 2079, 12-10-2013; amd. Ord. 2221, 4-10-2018; amd. Ord. 2246, 4-
23-2019; amd. Ord. 2266, 5-26-2020; amd. Ord. 2268, 5-26-2020; Ord. 2288, 4-27-
2021; Ord. 2304, 4-26-2022; Ord. 2315, 1-10-2023; Ord. 2323, 4-25-2023; Ord.
2347, 4-23-2024; Ord. 2366, 1-28-2025)
8-4-24: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
or for any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be as set out in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code)
8-4-25: CROSS CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   All plumbing installed within the city shall be installed in
accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code
890. If, in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code or in the judgment of
the superintendent of water, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the superintendent
of water will give notice to the water customer to install such an approved
device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense, install such
an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the
Illinois plumbing code, Illinois environmental protection agency and all
applicable local regulations and shall have inspections and tests made of such
approved devices upon installation and annually thereafter, at a minimum. The
owner of the premises shall maintain records to document that testing,
servicing and repairs are conducted as required.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the city enters the supply or distribution system of said
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the
method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
superintendent of water and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the superintendent of water to cause surveys
and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or
as often as the superintendent of water shall deem necessary. Records of such
surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least
five (5) years.
   (D)   The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the city for the purpose of
verifying the presence or absence of cross connections, and the water
superintendent or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distribution system of the city for the purpose of verifying information
submitted by the customer regarding the required cross connection control
inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so
served shall furnish to the superintendent of water any information which he
may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such
property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the
discretion of the superintendent of water, be deemed evidence of the presence
of improper connections as provided in this section.
   (E)   The superintendent of water of the city is hereby authorized and
directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the
provisions of this section is known to exist and to take such other
precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to
such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated
or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this section, and until a
reconnection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) is paid to the city. Immediate
disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the superintendent of
water is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public
water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written
notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without
notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated
contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the
reasonable opinion of the superintendent of water or the Illinois environmental
protection agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential
contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the
environmental protection agency, the superintendent of water or their agents or
assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost
revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in
accordance with the terms of this section, whether or not said termination was
with or without notice.
   (F)   The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 1389, 8-28-1990)
CHAPTER 5
DRIVEWAYS AND CULVERTS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definitions
8-5-2: Permit Required
8-5-3: Residential Driveway; Application For Permit, Fee, Specifications,
Deposit
8-5-4: Nonresidential Driveway; Application For Permit, Fee, Specifications,
Deposit
8-5-5: Permit To Increase Width Of Approaches And Cuts
8-5-6: Certain Restrictions; Ramps, Driveway Approaches, Drainage Water
8-5-7: Nonconformance To Curb Cut Provisions
8-5-8: Curb Cuts
8-5-9: Regulations Where Curb And Gutter Does Not Exist
8-5-10: Driving Over Drainage Ditch Unlawful; Exception
8-5-11: Culvert Pipe Requirements
8-5-12: Permit Required
8-5-13: Other Driveways; Special Permit Required
8-5-14: Supervision
8-5-15: Penalty
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
DRIVEWAY APPROACH: Any place improved for vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
street rights of way which connect the traveled portion of the street with a
driveway or pedestrian walkway.
DRIVEWAY; NONRESIDENTIAL: The term "nonresidential driveway" means any
passageway for vehicle ingress or egress to private property, used in whole or
in part for other than residence or dwelling house purposes.
DRIVEWAY; RESIDENTIAL: The term "residential driveway" means any passageway for
vehicle ingress or egress to private property, used exclusively for residence
or dwelling house purposes.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street right of way between the curb lines or the
lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use
of pedestrians and generally separated from the curb or roadway surface by a
utility strip or grassplot. (1977 Code)
8-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, build, erect, establish or
maintain any driveway over, across or upon any public curbing, sidewalk or
parkway within the city without having first obtained a permit therefor
authorized by the city superintendent. (1977 Code)
8-5-3: RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY; APPLICATION FOR PERMIT, FEE, SPECIFICATIONS,
DEPOSIT:
   (A)   Any person desiring to construct, build, establish or maintain a
residential driveway in the city shall make application to the city
superintendent for a permit. Such application shall contain the name and
address of the applicant, the location and dimensions of the proposed driveway,
and whether, in the building thereof, it will be necessary to cut down or alter
a street or curb or elevate or depress the existing grade of the walk or
parkway.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued hereunder until the applicant therefor shall
have paid to the city comptroller the fee required for an excavation permit,
and in addition such deposit as may be required for an excavation permit.
   (C)   No permit shall be authorized by the city superintendent unless the
proposed driveway is to be constructed in conformance with the following
limitations and all other applicable requirements of this chapter:
      1.   Driveway widths measured at any point on the property line shall not
exceed twelve feet (12') for a single driveway, or twenty feet (20') for a
double or joint driveway. In the event the sidewalk is not separated from the
curb by a utility strip or grassplot, then the point at which the above
measurement is made will be determined by the city superintendent in accord
with good engineering practices.
      2.   A circular return connecting the driveway approach and the street
may be used, except where the driveway crosses a curb line sidewalk. The
minimum radius of return, when used, shall be three feet (3') and the maximum
shall be seven feet (7'). No portion of the approach shall be constructed
within six feet (6') of the property line extended. The city superintendent may
waive this requirement but such waiver shall not permit the removal of curbing
in front of adjoining property.
      3.   The sidewalk portion of the driveway shall be of Portland cement
concrete with a minimum thickness of six inches (6").
      4.   The approach shall be either six inches (6") of rock base with a one
and one-half inch (11/2") bituminous surface, or a six inch (6") thickness of
Portland cement concrete. (1977 Code)
8-5-4: NONRESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY; APPLICATION FOR PERMIT, FEE, SPECIFICATIONS,
DEPOSIT:
   (A)   Any person desiring to construct, build, establish or maintain a
nonresidential driveway in the city shall make application to the city
superintendent for a permit. Such application shall contain the name and
address of the applicant, the location and dimensions of the proposed driveway,
and whether, in the building thereof, it will be necessary to cut down or alter
a street or curb or elevate or depress the existing grade of the walk or
parkway.
No permit shall be issued for any work to be done in or about the construction
of driveways until plans and specifications therefor have been submitted to and
approved by the superintendent, who shall at all times keep on file in his
office a copy of such plans and specifications.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued hereunder until the applicant therefor shall
have paid to the city clerk the fee required for an excavation permit and in
addition such deposit as may be required for an excavation permit.
   (C)   No permit shall be authorized by the city superintendent unless the
proposed driveway is constructed in conformance with the following limitations
and all other applicable requirements of this chapter:
      1.   Driveway widths measured at any point on the property line shall not
exceed thirty feet (30'), with the following exceptions:
         (a)   Where the distance from curb lines to property line is less than
seven feet (7'), the driveway width may be thirty five feet (35') at the
property line and no return will be required.
         (b)   Driveways designed for one-way operation to or from parking
areas shall not exceed thirteen feet (13') in width at the property line.
      2.   A circular return connecting the driveway approach and the street
may be used for all driveways, except those across curb line sidewalks. The
maximum radius of return, when used, shall be seven feet (7'). When
constructing a depressed curb, the amount of curb opening allowed shall be
computed, using the allowable return radius.
      3.   No portion of a driveway approach shall be constructed within five
feet (5') of the property line extended. The superintendent may, upon due
consideration for pedestrian safety and where unusual conditions prevail, waive
or alter this requirement; provided, however, this shall not permit the removal
of curbing in front of adjoining property.
      4.   Where more than one driveway approach is to serve a single parcel of
land, there shall be an island between the driveway approaches of at least ten
feet (10') along the sidewalk.
      5.   Where more than one driveway approach serves a single parcel of
land, there may be no more than one such approach for every sixty five feet
(65') or any fraction thereof, of frontage along the right of way line.
      6.   The approach shall be of Portland cement concrete of a minimum depth
of six inches (6") and where it adjoins the gutter line, shall be faced with a
raised vertical lip of not less than one and five-eighths inches (15/8"), which
shall be rounded off in finishing.
      7.   The sidewalk portion of the driveway shall be of Portland cement
concrete with a minimum thickness of six inches (6").
      8.   The right of way area adjacent to and between the driveway
approaches shall not be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, bituminous cement
binder pavement or gravel, unless the permittee shall construct a sidewalk in
accordance with the provisions of this code.
      9.   To prevent any part of any vehicle using any parking area from
projecting over or crossing the public sidewalk, except at points designated,
there shall be installed on the property inside the property line a curb or
other suitable barrier to be approved by the superintendent. (1977 Code)
8-5-5: PERMIT TO INCREASE WIDTH OF APPROACHES AND CUTS:
Any person desiring a driveway approach or curb cut or a greater width than
provided for in this division, may apply for permission from the city council.
(1977 Code)
8-5-6: CERTAIN RESTRICTIONS; RAMPS, DRIVEWAY APPROACHES, DRAINAGE WATER:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any property to
erect, or permit to be erected, any wooden or metal ramp from the gutter line
to the top of the curb.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place dirt, ashes, drainpipes
or other material in the gutter for the purposes of building up an approach for
a driveway.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful, in the case of nonresidential driveways, to
permit surface or roof drainage water to flow over that portion of the driveway
that is on the public right of way. (1977 Code)
8-5-7: NONCONFORMANCE TO CURB CUT PROVISIONS:
In any case of nonconformance with the curb cut provisions of this chapter,
where construction work such as widening, resurfacing or other substantial
alterations or extensions are to be made, the improvements shall be designed so
as to comply with these limitations. (1977 Code)
8-5-8: CURB CUTS:
Where the curb is contemplated to be cut, as permitted by the city
superintendent, the existing curb only shall be removed for a distance of three
feet (3') beyond the edge of the driveway, provided that the cut shall be made
so as to secure a straight and clean joint. (1977 Code)
8-5-9: REGULATIONS WHERE CURB AND GUTTER DOES NOT EXIST:
Where curb and gutter along the edges of the pavement does not exist, provision
shall be made to carry the drainage in roadside ditches through the driveway by
means of a culvert. A drawing showing the proposed driveway construction and
location shall be submitted for approval with each application for a driveway
permit. (1977 Code)
8-5-10: DRIVING OVER DRAINAGE DITCH UNLAWFUL; EXCEPTION:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or propel any motor or other vehicle or
conveyance of any kind over, across or upon any open drainage ditch running
along or adjacent to any paved public street or highway within the corporate
limits of the city, except over such part of such drainage ditch as may have
been improved with concrete culvert pipe or corrugated iron pipe, such pipe to
be laid by direction and under the supervision of the city superintendent.
(1977 Code)
8-5-11: CULVERT PIPE REQUIREMENTS:
The culvert pipe shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in length or not less
than twelve feet (12') in length if protected with a concrete header or curb at
each end, and shall be of such size in diameter as required by the city
superintendent and in no case have an opening of less than ten inches (10") in
diameter; after being laid it shall be covered with sufficient material to
bring driveway to established grade. (1977 Code)
8-5-12: PERMIT REQUIRED:
In all cases except where culverts are to be laid in accordance with the
provisions of special taxes or special taxation ordinances, it shall be
unlawful for any person to construct, lay or build any culvert in any open
drainage ditch otherwise than in compliance with the specifications set forth
in this chapter without first securing a written permit therefor from the city
superintendent. The fee for such permit shall be three dollars ($3.00). (1977
Code)
8-5-13: OTHER DRIVEWAYS; SPECIAL PERMIT REQUIRED:
The construction of all driveways not provided for in detail by this chapter
shall require special permit from the council. (1977 Code)
8-5-14: SUPERVISION:
The city superintendent shall supervise the construction work to determine that
it conforms to the specifications provided by this chapter. (1977 Code)
8-5-15: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be as set out under section
1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 6
DEPOSITS ON STREETS; SNOW REMOVAL
SECTION:
8-6-1: Deposits Of Snow Prohibited
8-6-2: Height Limitation, Intersections
8-6-3: Fire Hydrants
8-6-4: Compliance
8-6-5: Removal By City
8-6-6: Penalty
8-6-1: DEPOSITS OF SNOW PROHIBITED:
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice upon any
street, alley or sidewalk from parking lots, driveways or adjacent property
within the city, except that snow may be deposited or piled upon any street in
any business district from the adjacent sidewalk where no parkway exists. (Ord.
1291, 10-22-1985)
8-6-2: HEIGHT LIMITATION, INTERSECTIONS:
No person shall pile or deposit snow in excess of three feet (3') in height
within twenty feet (20') in any direction of the apex of any corner of an
intersection within the city. (Ord. 1291, 10-22-1985)
8-6-3: FIRE HYDRANTS:
No person shall pile or deposit snow within three feet (3') in any direction of
any fire hydrant within the city. (Ord. 1291, 10-22-1985)
8-6-4: COMPLIANCE:
Whenever any person shall neglect to comply with these provisions, the owner,
occupant or agent of the adjacent premises shall be notified in writing by the
chief of police or any policeman to cause all such snow and/or ice to be
removed; and every such owner or his agent or occupant shall cause all such
snow and/or ice to be immediately removed. (Ord. 1291, 10-22-1985)
8-6-5: REMOVAL BY CITY:
Whenever any person shall fail to remove all such snow and/or ice, such snow
and/or ice shall be removed by the city. In any case where snow and/or ice
removal is by the city, the officials in charge of such snow and/or ice removal
shall keep an account of all costs and expenses attending such snow and/or ice
removal and shall forthwith report same to the city comptroller who shall
thereupon demand payment from the person creating such deposit of snow and/or
ice.
If such expense is not paid within twenty (20) days after notice of such
expense has been given to such person, the city will proceed to perfect and
enforce its statutory lien on said premises for such expenses, as required by
law. (Ord. 1291, 10-22-1985)
8-6-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any section or provision of this chapter shall be fined a
sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any one offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day during which
a violation continues or exists. (Ord. 1291, 10-22-1985)
CHAPTER 7
STANDARDS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF CABLE FACILITIES ON THE RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
8-7-1: Purpose And Scope
8-7-2: Definitions
8-7-3: Annual Registration Required
8-7-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
8-7-5: Action On Permit Applications
8-7-6: Effect Of Permit
8-7-7: Revised Permit Drawings
8-7-8: Insurance
8-7-9: Indemnification
8-7-10: Security
8-7-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
8-7-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
8-7-13: General Construction Standards
8-7-14: Traffic Control
8-7-15: Location Of Facilities
8-7-16: Construction Methods And Materials
8-7-17: Vegetation Control
8-7-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
8-7-19: Cleanup And Restoration
8-7-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
8-7-21: Variances
8-7-22: Penalties
8-7-23: Enforcement
8-7-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the city's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city
rights of way and the city as a whole.
   (B)   Intent: In enacting this chapter, the city intends to exercise its
authority over the rights of way in the city and, in particular, the use of the
public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
city's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that
characterize the city's residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights of way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of
way within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established prior
to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired
and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may
be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar
agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The city, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the city
rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the city enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this
chapter.
   (E)   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license or similar agreement
shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful
renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (H)   Sound Engineering Judgment: The city shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the city so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city
to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare. (Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CITY: The city of Savanna, Illinois.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside
Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the city of Savanna, Illinois.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a
right of way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The city director of public works or his or her
designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The city engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the city.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
city director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the
life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of
the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive
materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology
(biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be
hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility
notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections
8-7-4 and
8-7-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If no
time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the city has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the city. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any
real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the
previous two (2) sentences and shall not include city buildings, fixtures and
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
8-7-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications"
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end
to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications
act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or
cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable
to the city through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or
hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined
in this chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable
and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-201(v).
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 1928, 10-
13-2009)
8-7-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the city shall register on
January 1 of each year with the director of public works, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of
way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in section
8-7-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 1928,
10-13-2009)
8-7-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this
chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any city right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a
new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first
filing an application with the city director of public works and obtaining a
permit from the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No
permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the
right of way.
   (B)   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
section unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
8-7-8 of this chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section
8-7-10 of this chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
8-7-21 of this chapter); and
      10.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
city.
   (D)   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control and the metropolitan water reclamation
district (other local or state entities with jurisdiction), have been
satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the city within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee. No application fee is required to be paid by any
electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act.
(Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the city director
of public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does
not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the city director of public works shall reject such
application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the city director of
public works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements
of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
the city director of public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as
practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city director of public works, that the
construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the city not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The city director
of public works shall specify the portion of the right of way upon which the
facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the city director of public works fails to provide
such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within
either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the city by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a permit
is required for work pursuant to section
8-7-4 of this chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city
an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable
and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided
the holder has complied with applicable city codes, ordinances, and
regulations. (Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on city rights of way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
   (B)   Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant
to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the
permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held
at a date, time and place designated by the city with such city representatives
in attendance as the city deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose
of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations
necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation,
presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their
locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights of
way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent
property owners.
   (D)   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within ninety (90) days
after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with section
8-7-21 of this chapter. If the city denies the request for a variance, then the
permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify the
facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor. (Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-8: INSURANCE:
   (A)   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents,
and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections (A)1
and (A)2 of this section:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products- completed operations coverage
with limits not less than:
         (a)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and
subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors
shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the city within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the city.
   (D)   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the City Mayor of such intent to cancel or not to
renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event
later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (A) of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection (A) of this section, or the requirements of
subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section. A utility that elects to self-
insure shall provide to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its
financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements
required under subsection (A) of this section, such as evidence that the
utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
   (F)   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois.
All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. (Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-10: SECURITY:
   (A)   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The security fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by
the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the city must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city in the
form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection
shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
city and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the city of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the state
of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the city director of public works, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are likely
to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the city director of
public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this subsection (C) for any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals: The city, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided
that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the city
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   (E)   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund,
the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection (C) of this section.
   (F)   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the city,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the city with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect
any other right the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its
rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   (A)   City Right To Revoke Permit: The city may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The city shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the city, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for
the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the city within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way
to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal to the
city within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods
provided in this subsection.
   (D)   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (A) of this
section.
   (E)   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection (C) of this section, the city or
its designee may, at the option of the city: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events
to the city for all costs of removal. (Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   (A)   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the city no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right of way.
   (B)   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right of
way.
   (C)   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 1928, 10-
13-2009)
8-7-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (A)   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      1.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm.
code section 545);
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
   (B)   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the city director of public works shall determine, in the exercise of
sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be
final. If requested, the city director of public works shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation
of a facility in the future. (Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   (A)   Minimum Requirements: The city's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
   (B)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights of way.
   (C)   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior
to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such
work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
8-7-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the city. (Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   (A)   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference With City Facilities: No utility facilities shall be
placed in any location if the city director of public works determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
city's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the city's utility facilities.
      2.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right of
way.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
      5.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way
line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face
of the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right of way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right of way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right of way line or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83
Ill. adm. code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The city may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
(1989)).
   (D)   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The city may
require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right of way.
      2.   The city may require any freestanding facility located within a
right of way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 1928,
10-13-2009)
8-7-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   (A)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         (a)   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the city
director of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or
jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after
boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         (b)   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction".
         (a)   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the city director of public works.
         (b)   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         (c)   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the director of public works, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility,
place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the
director of public works.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection (A)4
is permitted under section
8-7-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the director of public works.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
city.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated
only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                          Minimum Cover
Electric lines                            30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service     18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as
lines                                     determined by city)
Gas or petroleum products                 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                                Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                          protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage  Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                      protection
 
   (B)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         (a)   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within city rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the
national electrical safety code.
         (b)   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national
electrical safety code.
         (d)   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a city approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline
safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR
section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the director of public works. With the approval of
the director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be
used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the
right of way without the prior written approval of the city director of public
works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross
arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an
obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be
obtained from the city.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the city
shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of
the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction
are those as established by the city.
   (E)   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the city shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights
of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act 1 . (Ord. 1928,
10-13-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
8-7-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   (A)   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the city as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The city may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the city for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the director of public works that such spraying is the only practicable
method of vegetation control. (Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   (A)   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
city, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon,
the rights of way.
   (B)   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The city retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior
to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights of way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within ninety (90)
days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the city director of public works
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the utility that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the
city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
(Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way
are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the
utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the city director of public works. Such
cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be
extended by the city director of public works for good cause shown. (Ord. 1928,
10-13-2009)
8-7-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the city and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
city director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection
of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary
repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free
movement of traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the city a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-21: VARIANCES:
   (A)   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the city director of
public works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority To Grant Variances: The city director of public works shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The city director of public works
may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the city director of public works may require the
utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
   (E)   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the city
director of public works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the
right to appeal to the city council, or such other board or commission as it
may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the
city clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement,
decision or determination. The city council shall commence its consideration of
the appeal at the council's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least
seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The city council shall timely
decide the appeal. (Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the city will
incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility
will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless
the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the city's costs of
damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 1928, 10-13-2009)
8-7-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
1928, 10-13-2009)
CHAPTER 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY IMPROVEMENT FEE
SECTION:
8-8-1: Fee Established
8-8-1: FEE ESTABLISHED:
There shall be and there is hereby established a public ways and property
improvement fee of six dollars ($6.00) per month assessed to all users of the
City's combined sewer and water system. Funds derived by this fee shall be used
for repair, maintenance, replacement and improvement of City sidewalks, curbs,
gutters, streets and stormwater detention. (Ord. 2186, 12-13-2016)
TITLE 9
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE
SECTION:
9-1-1: Traffic Code Adopted
9-1-2: Amendments
9-1-3: Definitions
9-1-4: Traffic Enforcement
9-1-5: Signs Regulating Turning Movements
9-1-6: Marking Zones Of Quiet
9-1-7: Marking Loading Zones
9-1-8: Marking Public Carrier Stands
9-1-9: Erecting Signs Indicating Parking Limitations
9-1-10: Erecting Stop Signs
9-1-11: Snow Emergencies
9-1-12: Additional Signs
9-1-13: Emergency And Experimental Regulations
9-1-14: Police Officers To Enforce Regulations
9-1-15: Arrest Tickets
9-1-16: Through Streets
9-1-17: One-Way Stop Streets
9-1-18: Yield Right Of Way Streets
9-1-19: Two-Way Stop Streets
9-1-20: Pedestrian Crosswalks
9-1-21: U-Turns Prohibited
9-1-22: Zone Of Quiet
9-1-23: Enforcement When Signs Are In Place
9-1-24: One-Way Streets
9-1-25: Weight Limits
9-1-26: Stopping, Standing And Parking
9-1-27: All Night Parking
9-1-28: Time Limit Parking
9-1-29: Standing Or Loading Only
9-1-30: Engine Braking And Compression Braking
9-1-31: Standing Or Parking Close To Curb
9-1-32: Unlawful Parking (Rep. by Ord. 1122, 6-14-1977)
9-1-33: Using Vehicle For Advertising Prohibited
9-1-34: Parking In Front Of Public Buildings
9-1-35: Parking Prohibited Under Viaducts
9-1-36: Blocking Driveways Or Garages
9-1-37: Unattended Animals
9-1-38: Speed Restriction
9-1-39: Removal Of Vehicles In Violation Of Ordinances
9-1-40: Exceptions
9-1-41: Handicapped Parking Zone
9-1-42: Angle Parking
9-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., the same being a public record of the state
of Illinois, as the traffic code of the city. (1977 Code)
9-1-2: AMENDMENTS:
Excluded from adoption by reference by this chapter are the following sections
of the Illinois vehicle code:
   (A)   Article VI thereof in the entirety;
   (B)   Chapter 13, inspection of vehicles, including sections 13-101 through
13-114;
   (C)   Sections 15-101 through 15-113, section 1-125, section 1-114, sections
15-204 through 15-211, and sections 15-301 through 15-315;
   (D)   Sections 16-102 through 16-105. (1977 Code)
9-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall, for the purpose
of this title, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
LOADING ZONE: The space in the roadway adjacent to the curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this
city.
PARKWAY: That portion of public property between the curb lines of an improved
roadway and the adjacent sidewalk or the property line, in absence of
sidewalks.
PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots
abutting thereon.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS: Buildings used by the municipality, any legally constituted
park district, school district or other municipal corporation, the state or the
United States government.
U-TURN: The turning of any vehicle within the boundaries of any street or
intersection thereof for the purpose of proceeding in the opposite direction to
which said vehicle was faced before turning; also the turning of any vehicle to
the left within the boundaries of any street or intersection thereof, for the
purpose of parking said vehicles to any curb. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1561, 4-9-
1996)
9-1-4: TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   All official traffic control devices installed or maintained on the
streets of this city shall conform to the department of transportation manual
and specifications and be subject to the provisions of the Illinois vehicle
code.
   (B)   The superintendent of public works shall place and maintain traffic
control devices as directed by the council and as required by this title to
make effective the provisions hereof, and may place and maintain such
additional traffic control devices to regulate, guide or warn traffic as
directed by the council.
All traffic control devices designated for a particular purpose shall be
uniform and shall conform to the standards adopted by the state of Illinois,
department of transportation. All traffic control devices so erected shall be
official traffic control devices.
   (C)   The superintendent of public works, as directed by the council, is
hereby authorized:
      1.   To place appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of
the roadway to designate crosswalks at intersections or other places where, in
the opinion of the city council, there is particular danger to pedestrians
crossing the roadway.
      2.   Mark or construct safety zones of such kind and character at such
places as the council may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
      3.   To mark the lanes of traffic on street pavements at such places as
the council may deem advisable, consistent with this title. (1977 Code)
9-1-5: SIGNS REGULATING TURNING MOVEMENTS:
The superintendent of public works is hereby authorized to place proper signs
as directed by the council at such intersections or other places at which
drivers of vehicles shall not make a left, right or U-turn. (1977 Code)
9-1-6: MARKING ZONES OF QUIET:
The superintendent of public works, as directed by the council, is hereby
authorized to mark a temporary zone of quiet upon any street where a person is
seriously ill if requested so to do by the written statement of at least one
registered physician certifying to its necessity, by placing at a conspicuous
place in the street, an official sign or marking bearing the words "Quiet
Zone". Said temporary zone of quiet shall embrace all territory within a radius
of two hundred feet (200') of the building occupied by the person named in the
request of the physician. (1977 Code)
9-1-7: MARKING LOADING ZONES:
The superintendent of public works is hereby authorized to place and maintain
appropriate official signs, as directed by the council, indicating the location
of passenger and freight loading zones and stating the hours during which the
provisions of this section are applicable. (1977 Code)
9-1-8: MARKING PUBLIC CARRIER STANDS:
The superintendent of public works is hereby authorized to place and maintain
appropriate official signs, as directed by the council, at all bus stops and
taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles on
such public streets and at such places as may be designated by the council.
(1977 Code)
9-1-9: ERECTING SIGNS INDICATING PARKING LIMITATIONS:
The superintendent of public works, as directed by the council, is hereby
authorized:
   (A)   To erect signs indicating "no parking" upon that side of any street
adjacent to any school property where, in the opinion of the council, such
parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous condition.
   (B)   To appropriately mark or sign such streets upon which angle parking
shall be permitted.
   (C)   To erect signs indicating no parking zones upon any street when the
width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet (20') or upon one side of a
street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed
thirty feet (30').
   (D)   To designate by proper signs placed where the stopping or parking of
vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual
delay in traffic. (1977 Code)
9-1-10: ERECTING STOP SIGNS:
Whenever any provision of this title designates and describes a through street,
it shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works to place and
maintain an official stop sign on each and every street intersecting such
through street or that portion thereof described as such by any provision of
this title. (1977 Code)
9-1-11: SNOW EMERGENCIES:
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall publicly declare a snow emergency after
consultation with the Superintendent of Public Works in the event that a major
snowstorm or ice storm is imminent as predicted by the National Weather
Service. Such snow emergency declaration shall remain in effect until the Chief
of Police publicly announces the emergency has ended.
   (B)   To facilitate the snowplowing of and snow removal from public
thoroughfares within the City, it shall be unlawful during a declared snow
emergency for any person to stand, park, or leave unattended a motor vehicle,
trailer or other obstruction upon any “Designated Emergency Snow Route” as set
forth below effective six hours after the declaration of a snow emergency and
until the snow emergency is declared to no longer to exist.
      1.   Each “Designated Snow Route” shall be so marked by signage
designating the route and warning that violators are subject to towing. Such
signage shall be placed at each affected city block in the direction of travel.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall designate such routes in consultation
with the Chairman of the Public Works Committee.
      2.   As to each such “Designated Snow Route,” on snow emergency days, on
odd-numbered dates, no motor vehicle, trailer or other obstruction shall be
parked, left standing, or left unattended on the side of streets with odd-
numbered addresses.
      3.   As to each such “Designated Snow Route,” on snow emergency days, on
even-numbered dates, no motor vehicle, trailer or other obstruction shall be
parked, left standing, or left unattended on the side of streets with even-
numbered addresses.
   (C)   Every motor vehicle, trailer or other obstruction has been stopped,
parked or left unattended in violation of subsection (b) of this section is
hereby declared to be a traffic hazard and the Chief of Police shall order it
towed to some suitable facility at the owner’s expense. Said motor vehicle,
trailer or other obstacle shall be restored to the owner or operator thereof
only after payment of a snow emergency relocation fee of $200 and the usual and
customary charges of the towing agency.
   (D)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable
under the general penalty provisions of this Code. (Ord. 2362, 10-22-2024)
9-1-12: ADDITIONAL SIGNS:
The superintendent of public works is hereby authorized to erect additional
official signs as directed by the council indicating the direction of traffic
movement on one-way streets, the duration of parking time and the hours and
days during which such regulations shall be in effect. (1977 Code)
9-1-13: EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS:
The police chief is hereby authorized to make and enforce temporary regulations
to cover emergencies or special conditions. Such temporary regulations shall
remain in effect only during the period of emergency or special condition.
The police chief is hereby authorized to make temporary rules as directed by
the council to regulate traffic or test traffic control devices under actual
conditions of traffic. No such experimental regulation of traffic shall remain
in effect for more than ninety (90) days. (1977 Code)
9-1-14: POLICE OFFICERS TO ENFORCE REGULATIONS:
Police officers of the city are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in
accordance with the provisions of this title or in emergencies as public safety
or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or
refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal, or direction of a police
officer. Except in case of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person not
authorized by law to direct or to attempt to direct traffic. (1977 Code)
9-1-15: ARREST TICKETS:
Any police officer of the city shall be authorized to affix to any vehicle
parked contrary to the provisions of this title, a notification tag notifying
the driver or owner of the vehicle of such violation and notifying such owner
or operator to appear before a judge as may be named upon the notification tag
at the hour and date mentioned upon the notification tag, to answer the charge
of parking contrary to this title, or to pay a fine as prescribed by ordinance.
Upon failure of the owner or operator of the vehicle to appear before the judge
at the hour and day mentioned upon the tag, or to pay the fine prescribed by
ordinance, a complaint may be signed, causing the arrest of such owner or
operator, or both. (1977 Code)
9-1-16: THROUGH STREETS:
Those streets and parts of streets described in the following schedule shall be
through streets:
   Schedule Through Streets
Chicago Avenue from Main Street to easterly city limits.
Jackson Street from Iris Street to Maple Street.
Main Street from north city limits to Chicago Avenue.
Viaduct Road from Chicago Avenue to southerly city limits.
Wacker Road from Viaduct Road to easterly city limits.
(Ord. 2148, 10-27-2015)
9-1-17: ONE-WAY STOP STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle upon any of the streets
listed in column A to enter the intersection of same with those streets listed
in column B below without first coming to a complete stop and yielding the
right of way to traffic moving upon the streets listed in column B, so that the
intersections of all streets listed in columns A and B shall be one-way stop
intersections:
Column A Column B
         
Column A             Column B
                     
Adams Street         Diagonal Street
Adams Street         Third Street
Beech Street         Pike Road
Beech Street         Wacker Road
Burlington Street    Pike Road
Cedar Street         Jackson Street
Cedar Street         Wacker Road
Chauncy Street       Bowen Street
Chestnut Street      Pike Road
Cook Street          Diagonal Street
Diagonal Street      Adams Street
East Fifth Street    Oak Street
Elm Street           Gilbert Street
Grant Street         Park Street
Hickory Street       Wacker Road
Jefferson Street     Fourth Street
Madison Street       Diagonal Street
Madison Street       Fourth Street
Maple Street         Wacker Road
Milwaukee Street     Fifth Street
Milwaukee Street     Sixth Street
Murray Street        Fourth Street
Oak Street           South Fourth Street
Oak Street           South Sixth Street
Olive Street         Elm Street
Pennsylvania Avenue  Wacker Road
Pierce Street        Gilbert Street
Pierce Street        Park Street
Pike Street          Bowen Street
Poplar Street        Wacker Road
Portland Avenue      Wacker Road
Quincy Street        Diagonal Street
South Gilbert Street Bowen Street
South Park Street    Bowen Street
Spring Street        Diagonal Street
Spruce Street        Jackson Street
Spruce Street        Wacker Road
Van Street           Diagonal Street
Walnut Street        Fifth Street
Washington Street    Fifth Street
Webster Street       Third Street
Willow Street        Jackson Street
Willow Street        Wacker Road
Third Street         Clay Street
Fourth Street        Webster Street
 
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1140, 2-14-1978; Ord. 1754, 12-9-2003)
9-1-18: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY STREETS:
The following intersections are designated as yield right of way intersections
and traffic shall yield as indicated. Yield right of way signs shall be
maintained at the appropriate approaches to said intersection and thereupon the
driver of every vehicle approaching said sign shall reduce the speed of his
vehicle to not more than twenty (20) miles per hour and shall yield the right
of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersecting highway or street
either from the right or left or which are approaching so closely on said
intersecting highway or street as to constitute an immediate hazard; but said
driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs. If
a driver is involved in a collision at such intersection or interferes with the
movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield right of way sign, such a
collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver's
failure to yield right of way. (1977 Code)
Traffic On   Shall Yield Right Of
The Street   Way For Street
Listed Below Listed Below
Traffic On         Shall Yield Right Of
The Street         Way For Street
Listed Below       Listed Below
Arnold Street      Beech Street
Belmont Avenue     Rosedale Avenue
California Avenue  Michigan Avenue
Calumet Street     Lincoln Avenue
Calumet Street     Superior Avenue
Cherry Street      Van Street
Chestnut Street    Poplar Street
Cook Street        Hill Street
Cragmoor Avenue    Glenmoor Avenue
Cragmoor Avenue    Longmoor Avenue
Davidson Street    Clay Street
Frey Street        Rosedale Avenue
Iris Street        Portland Avenue
Jackson Street     Poplar Street
Kenmoor Avenue     Glenmoor Avenue
Kenmoor Avenue     Longmoor Avenue
Lincoln Avenue     Sixteenth Street
Murray Street      Fifth Street
Nevada Street      Michigan Avenue
Nevada Street      Superior Avenue
Poplar Street      Portland Avenue
Quincy Street      Fifth Street
Summitt Street     Hill Street
Wellmoor Avenue    Glenmoor Avenue
Wellmoor Avenue    Longmoor Avenue
Willow Street      Arnold Street
Sixteenth Street   Ontario Avenue
Sixteenth Street   Superior Avenue
Seventeenth Street Ontario Avenue
Seventeenth Street Superior Avenue
Eighteenth Street  Ontario Avenue
Eighteenth Street  Superior Avenue
Nineteenth Street  Ontario Avenue
Nineteenth Street  Superior Avenue
 
 
Traffic On                Shall Yield Right
The Alley                 Of Way For Street
Listed Below              Listed Below
Alley west of Main Street Adams Street
Alley west of Main Street Chicago Avenue
Alley west of Main Street Jefferson Street
Alley west of Main Street Madison Street
Alley west of Main Street Quincy Street
 
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1221, 5-12-1981; Ord. 1305, 12-9-1986; Ord. 1329, 10-27-
1987; Ord. 1488, 5-10-1994; Ord. 1518, 12-13-1994; Ord. 1568, 5-28-1996)
9-1-19: TWO-WAY STOP STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle upon any of the streets
listed in column A to enter the intersection of same with those streets listed
in column B below without first coming to a complete stop and yielding the
right of way to traffic moving upon the streets listed in column B: (Ord. 1475,
5-10-1994)
Column A Column B
Column A          Column B
Beech Street      Jackson Street
Bowen Street      Fourth Street
Bowen Street      Pike Street
Bowen Street      South Sixth Street
Division Street   Third Street
East Fifth Street Bowen Street
Eaton Street      Pike Road
Eaton Street      Wacker Road
Hickory Street    Jackson Street
Hill Street       Van Street
Iris Street       Pike Road
Iris Street       Wacker Road
Jackson Street    Eaton Street
Jackson Street    Iris Street
Jefferson Street  Third Street
Murray Street     Third Street
Pike Road         Iris Street
Pike Road         Willow Street
Poplar Street     Pike Road
Quincy Street     Third Street
Van Buren Street  Third Street
Washington Street Third Street
Washington Street Fourth Street
Third Street      Washington Street
Fourth Street     Washington Street
Sixth Street      Bowen Street
 
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1475, 2-8-1994; Ord. 1508, 9-27-1994; Ord. 1518, 12-13-
1994; Ord. 1747, 10-14-2003; Ord. 1950, 7-27-2010; Ord. 2147, 10-27-2015)
9-1-20: PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle upon any of the streets
listed in column A to enter the pedestrian crosswalks listed in column B
without first coming to a complete stop and yielding the right of way to
pedestrian traffic moving upon the pedestrian crosswalks listed in column B and
those pedestrian crosswalks listed in column B shall be stop crosswalks as far
as traffic upon the streets listed in column A is concerned, so that the
intersections of streets listed in columns A and B shall be two-way stops for
the traffic upon the streets listed in column B. (1977 Code)
 
Column A         Column B
Chicago Avenue   Third Street/South
                 Third Street
Jefferson Street Main Street
Madison Street   Main Street
 
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1305, 12-9-1986)
9-1-21: U-TURNS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person driving a motor vehicle upon Main Street
from the southmost portion of the intersection of Main Street and Quincy Street
through the northmost portion of the intersection of Main Street and Division
Street to conduct a U-turn of the motor vehicle. (Ord. 1702, 10-8-2002)
9-1-22: ZONE OF QUIET:
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of the vehicle except in an emergency. (1977 Code)
9-1-23: ENFORCEMENT WHEN SIGNS ARE IN PLACE:
No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation
an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being
erected to give notice thereof. (1977 Code)
9-1-24: ONE-WAY STREETS:
Those streets and parts of streets described in the schedule below are hereby
declared to be one-way streets for the purpose of this section:
Streets                                                     Direction
                                                            Of Traffic
Adams Street between Third Street and Main Street           Westerly
Adams Street between Fourth Street and Fifth Street         Easterly
Broderick Drive between Division Street and Chicago Avenue  Northerly
Cooley Avenue between Murray Street and Van Buren Street    Northerly
Dewhurst Street between Charles Street and Grant            Southerly
Street
Grant Street between Dewhurst Street and Park Street        Easterly
Hill Street between Cook Street and Van Street              Northerly
Madison Street between Third Street and Main Street         Westerly
Municipal parking lot and drive as described in
subsection                                                  Westerly
9-2-1(A)6 of this title
Murray Street between Third Street and Main Street          Easterly
Wayne King Drive between Randolph Street                    Southerly
and Division Street
Third Street between Chicago and Bowen Street               Southerly
Sixth Street between Chicago Avenue and Bowen Street        Southerly
 
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977; Ord. 1305, 12-9-1986; Ord. 1309, 4-24-
1987; Ord. 1503, 8-9-1994; Ord. 1510, 10-11-1994; Ord. 1579, 10-8-1996; Ord.
1934, 11-10-2009)
9-1-25: WEIGHT LIMITS:
The maximum gross weight to be permitted on the road surface through any two
(2) wheels on the same axle of any vehicle shall not exceed sixteen thousand
(16,000) pounds nor shall it exceed eight hundred (800) pounds per one inch
(1") in width of tire upon such wheels; provided further, that the gross
weight, including the weight of the vehicle and maximum load of any motor
vehicle, shall not exceed twenty four thousand (24,000) pounds; and the gross
weight, including the weight of the vehicle and maximum load of any trailer or
semitrailer vehicle pulled or towed by a motor vehicle, shall not exceed thirty
two thousand (32,000) pounds.
Maximum weight of vehicles on certain streets:
   (A)   No vehicle exceeding twelve thousand (12,000) pounds' gross weight
shall be driven upon the following streets or parts thereof:
Fourth Street from Washington Street to Webster Street. (1977 Code)
9-1-26: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any place
where official signs prohibit parking.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under any such conditions as to leave
available less than eighteen feet (18') of the width of the roadway for free
movement of vehicular traffic on a street thirty two feet (32') or more in
width, or less than twelve feet (12') on a street less than thirty two feet
(32') in width, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual
loading or unloading of passengers, merchandise or materials or when necessary
in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals of a police
officer.
   (C)   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. It shall be
unlawful for any person to park any vehicle of any kind or character in and
upon any public alley within the city, except for the purposes of loading and
unloading. (1977 Code)
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle of any kind or
character, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device,
within twenty five feet (25') of a crosswalk or an intersection within the
city, unless the vehicle is parked within a designated and marked parking
space. (Ord. 1318, 7-28-1987)
   (E)   No person shall park a semitrailer, truck/tractor or school bus,
including any vehicle originally designed as a school bus whether or not it is
actually used for that purpose, on either public property or private property
in residential zoning districts and B-4 general business zoning districts
except as otherwise herein allowed for specific uses or specific locations, as
follows:
      1.   Specific Uses: Parking of semitrailer, truck/trailer type vehicles
shall be allowed on private property in B-4 general business zoning districts
at hotels, motels and restaurants only.
      2.   Specific Locations:
         (a)   Parking of semitrailer, truck/tractor type vehicles shall only
be allowed on public property in B-4 general business zoning districts after
establishing by ordinance "truck parking zones". Said zones shall be
specifically described and properly signed to clearly identify the portion of
public property designated for a truck parking zone.
         (b)   Parking of a semitrailer, truck/tractor or school bus shall only
be allowed on private property in residential and B-4 zoning districts whenever
said vehicles are actually delivering, unloading or loading persons or personal
property to and from premises in such residential and B-4 zoning districts.
(Ord. 1364, 11-14-1989)
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any
vehicle, or to otherwise occupy or block any space designated by an official
sign as a fire lane. Any owner or occupant of premises adjoining a fire lane
who allows such stopping, standing or parking shall also be guilty of a
violation of this subsection.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any
vehicle upon a public street for the purpose of conducting repair, modification
or maintenance upon such vehicle. It shall be unlawful to perform repair,
modification or maintenance upon any vehicle while it is stopped, standing, or
parked upon a public street. It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator,
lessor, or other person having control over any vehicle to knowingly permit
repair, modification or maintenance to be performed upon a vehicle while it is
stopped, standing, or parked upon a public street. This subsection shall not
prohibit emergency repair, modification or maintenance necessary to enable the
vehicle to operate under its own power, or be pushed or towed in compliance
with this or any other applicable traffic regulation. (Ord. 1318, 7-28-1987)
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon the
public parkways within the city. (Ord. 1561, 4-9-1996)
   (I)   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or portions thereof described in
the following schedules: (1977 Code)
   Schedule I
Parking shall be prohibited at all times upon the following streets or portions
thereof:
Clay Street from Third Street to Fourth Street.
Cook Street from Hill Street to Diagonal Street.
Cragmoor Avenue from Longmoor Avenue to the end of Cragmoor Avenue north of
Glenmoor Avenue.
Keller Street from Milwaukee Street to the end of paved portion north.
Main Street from Division Street to north city limits.
Main Street from Washington Street to Chicago Avenue.
Milwaukee Street from Oakwood Heights to Mulberry Street.
Mulberry Street from Milwaukee Street to Walnut Street.
Olive Street from Elm Street to Towanda Street.
Pike Road from Viaduct Road to the alley east.
Viaduct Road from Chicago Avenue to the south city limits and relocated
Illinois Route 84 between Chicago Avenue and Pike Road.
Wayne King Drive from the south line of Randolph Street to the river north.
Third Street from Chicago Avenue to the southerly end of Third Street.
Fourth Street, commencing one hundred twenty five feet (125') south of the
south extended curb line of Adams Street thence northerly to Division Street.
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1162, 4-10-1979; Ord. 1305, 12-9-1986; Ord. 1314, 7-14-
1987; Ord. 1344, 11-22-1988; Ord. 1439, 8-11-1992; Ord. 1473, 1-18-1994; Ord.
1510, 10-11-1994; Ord. 1588, 12-10-1996)
   Schedule II
Parking shall be prohibited in any of the following places:
Adams Street, on the south side, from Third Street to Fourth Street.
Bench Street, on the south side.
Bowen Street, on the south side, from Third Street to the alley east.
Charles Street, on the north side, from Dewhurst Street to Park Street.
Chicago Avenue, on the east side, from the southerly line of Michigan Avenue
for a distance of seventy five feet (75').
Chicago Avenue, on the west side, from Arlington Street to Belmont Avenue.
Clay, North Fourth and Webster Streets as follows:
On the south side of Clay and Webster Streets and the west side of North Fourth
Street, the portion of which lies between Clay and Webster Streets, from the
eastern curb line of Third Street to the eastern curb line of North Fifth
Street.
Cooley Avenue, on the west side, from Murray Street to Van Buren Street.
Dewhurst and Grant Streets, northeast corner, as follows:
Dewhurst Street, on the east side, from the extended north curb line of Grant
Street, northerly thirty feet (30'), measured from the back of curb.
Grant Street, on the north side, from the extended east curb line of Dewhurst
Street, easterly thirty feet (30'), measured from the back of curb.
Diagonal Street, on the east side, from Fifth Street to Summitt Street.
Glenmoor Avenue, on the north side, from the extended western curb line of
Chicago Avenue, westward a distance of two hundred thirty seven feet (237'),
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
Grant Street, on the south side, from Dewhurst Street to Park Street.
Hill Street, on the west side, from Spring Street to Summitt Avenue.
Keller Street, on the east side, between Milwaukee Street and Chicago Avenue.
Longmoor Avenue, on the north side, from the extended western curb line of
Chicago Avenue, westward to the eastern extended curb line of Cragmoor Street.
Madison Street, on the south side, from Third Street to the alley west.
Marquette Park parking lot, on the east side, from Randolph Street to one
hundred fifty feet (150') north of the north line of Division Street.
Milwaukee Street, on the south side, from twenty five feet (25') east of the
east curb line of Keller Street.
Pierce Street, on the north side, from Park Street to Gilbert Street.
Pike Road, on the north side, from Viaduct Road west.
Spring Street, on the south side, from Diagonal Street to Hill Street.
Summitt Street, on the south side, from Diagonal Street to Hill Street.
U.S. Route 52 and Illinois Routes 64 and 84 within the corporate limits between
the north corporate limits of Main Street and the east corporate limits on
Chicago Avenue, with the exception of the following designated parking lanes:
1. Along both east and west sides of Main Street between Division Street and
Washington Street.
2. Along the south side of Chicago Avenue between Fifth Street and Pike Street.
3. Along both the east and west sides of Chicago Avenue between Superior Avenue
and Lawrence Street, except that no person shall park a vehicle at any time
upon the west side of Chicago Avenue from the northerly line of Arlington
Avenue to one hundred sixty nine and sixty nine one-hundredths feet (169.69')
northerly from said line of Arlington Avenue; and along the westerly side of
Chicago Avenue from the northerly curb line of Ohio Street to three hundred
eighty five feet (385') northerly from said line of Ohio Street.
Van Street, on the north side, from Diagonal Street to Cherry Street.
Viaduct Road, on the east side, from the southerly line of Chicago Avenue south
for a distance of approximately one hundred fifty one feet (151').
Viaduct Road, on the west side, between the southerly line of Chicago Avenue to
the northerly line of Lincoln Avenue extended westerly.
Wacker Road, on the south side, between the easterly line of Iris Street to the
westerly line of Beech Street extended southerly.
Walnut Street, on the northerly side, from Fifth Street to Keller Street.
Third Street, on the east side, between Madison and Murray Streets during the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M., when school is
in session.
Fourth Street, on the west side, from Division Street to Webster Street.
Fifth Street, on the east side, from approximately one hundred feet (100')
south of Diagonal Street.
Sixth Street, on the east side, from Chicago Avenue to Milwaukee Street.
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977; Ord. 1140, 2-14-1978; Ord. 1146, 2-28-
1978; Ord. 1238, 4-27-1982; Ord. 1239, 6-22-1982; Ord. 1274, 1-22-1985; Ord.
1275, 2-12-1985; Ord. 1305, 12-9-1986; Ord. 1395, 10-23-1990; Ord. 1448, 3-23-
1993; Ord. 1473, 1-18-1994; Ord. 1492, 6-28-1994; Ord. 1508, 9-27-1994; Ord.
1510, 10-11-1994; Ord. 1530, 5-9-1995; Ord. 1531, 6-13-1995; Ord. 1543, 11-14-
1995; Ord. 1588, 12-10-1996; Ord. 1907, 2-24-2009; Ord. 1924, 10-13-2009; Ord.
1932, 10-27-2009; Ord. 1933, 10-27-2009; Ord. 2146, 10-27-2015)
   Schedule III
Designation of municipal parking lots:
      1.   Parking Lot No. 1: The following described real estate owned by the
city and maintained by the city as and for an off street parking facility be
and it is hereby designated as parking lot no. 1:
The east 70 feet of lots 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 in Block 9, Original Town, a
subdivision in Savanna, Carroll County, Illinois, commonly described as lying
west of the alley west of Main Street between Madison Street and Murray Street.
      2.   Parking Lot No. 2: The following described real estate owned by the
city and maintained by the city as and for an off street parking facility be
and it is hereby designated as parking lot no. 2:
The east 60 feet of lots 7, 8, 9, 10 in Block 8, Original Town, a subdivision
in Savanna, Carroll County, Illinois, commonly described as lying west of the
alley west of Main Street between Jefferson Street and Madison Street.
      3.   Parking Lot No. 3: The following described real estate owned by the
city and maintained by the city as and for an off street parking facility be
and it is hereby designated as parking lot no. 3, commonly described as lying
south of the fire station.
      4.   Limited Unmetered Time Parking: Except as hereinafter set forth, no
owner or operator of any vehicle shall park a vehicle in the limited parking
areas hereinabove set forth of parking lot nos. 1, 2 and 3 for a period of time
longer than twenty four (24) consecutive hours.
      5.   Marking Spaces: The superintendent of public works shall have
painted or placed upon parking lot nos. 1, 2 and 3 for the purpose of
designating the parking space and the angle at which vehicles are to be parked.
Each vehicle parking within the lots shall park within the lines of parking so
established. No owner or operator shall park any vehicle across any such line
or marking or park a vehicle in such a position that the same shall not be
entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings.
      6.   Signs To Be Posted: The superintendent of public works shall erect
appropriate signs on the unmetered time parking lots, hereinabove set forth,
informing the public that parking thereon is limited as hereinabove provided.
(1977 Code)
9-1-27: ALL NIGHT PARKING:
   (A)   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle on Main Street from Chicago Avenue to Division Street for a period
longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) A.M.
and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. of any day, except physicians on emergency call.
   (B)   Notwithstanding Paragraph (A), to enable the city crew to remove snow
unimpeded, no person shall park a vehicle on Main Street from Chicago Ave to
Division Street between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) A.M. and six o’clock
(6:00) A.M. of any day from November 1 through April 1. (1977 Code; amd. Ord.
2261, 12-10-2019)
9-1-28: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
   (A)   Except on Sundays and holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle for a longer consecutive period of time than that designated between
the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. in any area
designated as a limited parking area and so marked. When signs are erected
giving notice thereof, no vehicle shall be parked for more than fifteen (15)
minutes on either side of Third Street for a distance of approximately seventy
five feet (75') south of Madison Street measured from the south curb line of
Madison Street. When signs are erected and giving notice thereof, no vehicle
shall be parked for more than two (2) hours on the west side of Third Street
between Washington Street and Chicago Avenue between the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. except on Sundays and holidays.
   (B)   No vehicle, trailer, boats or flatbeds shall be parked or stored on
any street for more than seventy two (72) hours. The movement of any parked or
stored vehicle shall be interpreted that such vehicle must be operated and
driven from the parking or storage location for a minimum distance of five
hundred feet (500').
   (C)   When signs are erected and giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful
to park any vehicle for more than two (2) hours on either side of Fourth Street
between Chicago Avenue and Bowen Street between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day.
   (D)   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no vehicle, except
school buses, shall be parked during times when school is in session on the
westerly side of the Cragmoor Avenue school parking area from Glenmoor Avenue
to Longmoor Avenue. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1318, 7-28-1987; Ord. 1479, 3-8-1994;
Ord. 1745, 9-23-2003; Ord. 1808, 8-9-2005)
9-1-29: STANDING OR LOADING ONLY:
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any
place marked as a passenger loading zone during hours when the regulations
applicable to such passenger loading zones are effective and then only for a
period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivering or pick up and
loading of materials in any place marked as a merchandise loading zone during
the hours when the provisions applicable to such loading zones are in effect.
In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading materials exceed thirty
(30) minutes.
   Schedule Loading Zone
   (A)   The following described portions of Main Street and certain other
streets hereinafter designated, which portions shall in each case have a width
of ten feet (10') measured from the curb line toward the center of the street,
are designated as loading zones:
      1.   Main Street East Side: That portion of Main Street measured from the
south curb line of Jefferson Street extending along the east curb line of Main
Street in a southerly direction a distance of eighty three feet (83') to the
beginning of the loading zone. Loading zones in each case shall have a total
length of twenty five feet (25'). (1977 Code)
      2.   Third Street West Side: That portion of the west side of Third
Street measured from the back of the extended curb line of Murray Street,
thence northerly a distance of one hundred twenty four feet (124') to the
beginning of the loading zone. Said loading zone shall have a total length of
eighty feet (80'). (Ord. 1436, 4-28-1992)
      3.   Washington Street North Side: (Rep. by Ord. 2144, 10-13-2015)
      4.   130 Third Street: That portion of the east side of Third Street
measured twenty four feet (24') south of the back of the extended southern curb
line of Adams Street and extending along the east curb line of Third Street in
a southerly direction a distance of one hundred feet (100'). Said loading zone
shall have a total length of one hundred feet (100') and be enforced between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (Ord. 1955,
10-12-2010)
9-1-30: ENGINE BRAKING AND COMPRESSION BRAKING:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to use or permit
the use within the city of any engine brake, compression brake or mechanical
exhaust designed to aid in the braking of the vehicle which creates any noise
audible by a person of normal hearing capability at a distance of three hundred
feet (300').
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the use of such techniques or devices
when necessary to avoid a collision between the vehicle and any other vehicle,
person or property.
   (C)   A violation of this section shall be a petty offense for which a fine
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be imposed. (Ord. 1696, 6-
11-2002)
9-1-31: STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway or curb, headed in the direction of traffic, and with
the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the edge
of the roadway or curb, except upon those streets which have been marked or
indicated by signs for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to
the curb indicated by such mark or signs.
It shall be illegal to park a vehicle on hills within the city, except as
follows:
   (A)   Vehicles descending shall park with the front wheels turned toward the
curb.
   (B)   Vehicles ascending shall park with the front wheels turned toward the
traffic and resting firmly against the curb.
   (C)   Transmissions must be set in gear or "park".
   (D)   Brakes must be set and remain locked while the vehicle is parked.
(1977 Code)
9-1-32: UNLAWFUL PARKING:
(Rep. by Ord. 1122, 6-14-1977)
9-1-33: USING VEHICLE FOR ADVERTISING PROHIBITED:
No person shall operate or park on any street any vehicle for the primary
purpose of advertising. (1977 Code)
9-1-34: PARKING IN FRONT OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
When official signs are erected or placed giving notice thereof, no person
shall stand or park any vehicle longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers within a space designated by official signs along the adjacent curb
immediately in front of the entrance to any public building, hospital, hotel,
theater or church.
If the owner or driver of a vehicle discovers that the vehicle is parked
immediately in front of or close to a building to which the fire department has
been summoned, he shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area unless
otherwise directed by police or fire officers. (1977 Code)
9-1-35: PARKING PROHIBITED UNDER VIADUCTS:
No person shall stand or park any vehicle longer than necessary to load or
unload passengers under any viaduct or on the approaches thereof. (1977 Code)
9-1-36: BLOCKING DRIVEWAYS OR GARAGES:
No person shall stand or park any vehicle in such a manner as to block ingress
or egress from any public or private driveway or garage. It shall be unlawful
to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the consent of the
owner of the property. However, nothing in this section shall prevent the owner
or other person having control over private property from blocking or granting
permission to block his own private driveway. (1977 Code)
9-1-37: UNATTENDED ANIMALS:
No person shall leave any horse or other draft animal unattended in any street
without having securely fastened such animal. No horse or other draft animals
will be allowed on city parkways or sidewalks. (1977 Code)
9-1-38: SPEED RESTRICTION:
   (A)   When an official sign is erected at an intersection or upon the
approach thereto or along a street or highway or along a portion of such street
or highway giving notice of a lesser or greater speed respectively than
provided for in the Illinois vehicle code, no person shall drive a vehicle
through such intersection or along such street or highway or portion of such
street or highway at a speed greater than is indicated on the signs.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on Longmoor Avenue from
Chicago Avenue to the end of Longmoor Avenue at a speed in excess of twenty
(20) miles per hour. (Ord. 1680, 7-24-2001)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on Diagonal Street from
Summitt Avenue to Fifth Street at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per
hour.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on Fourth Street from
Washington Street to Webster Street at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles
per hour.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on Glenmoor Avenue from
Chicago Avenue to Cragmoor Street at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per
hour.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on Third Street from
Chicago Avenue to Clay Street at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per
hour.
   (G)   Every driver operating a vehicle upon any street, highway or alley
shall at all times drive in a careful and prudent manner and shall have the
vehicle under control and at a rate of speed that will not endanger the
property of another or the life or limb of any person. (1977 Code)
   (H)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on Webster Street and
North Fifth Street from Fourth Street to the Savanna city hospital access drive
entrance at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour. (Ord. 1305, 12-9-
1986)
   (I)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on Bowen Street and East
Bowen Street from Fourth Street east to the end of East Bowen Street at a speed
in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour. (Ord. 1178, 10-23-1979)
   (J)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on East Bowen Street from
Pike Street east to the end of East Bowen Street at a speed in excess of twenty
(20) miles per hour. (Ord. 1153, 10-24-1978)
   (K)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on Wayne King Drive in
excess of ten (10) miles per hour. (Ord. 1510, 10-11-1994)
   (L)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on Pike Street from
Viaduct Road to Willow Street in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour. (Ord.
1520, 1-24-1995)
   (M)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on Pike Road in excess of
twenty (20) miles per hour. (Ord. 1522, 3-28-1995)
   (N)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on Portland Avenue from
Viaduct Road to Wacker Road at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour.
(Ord. 1680, 7-24-2001)
   (O)   When an official speed sign is erected upon the street or highway
approaching a city park or along a portion of such a street or highway
adjoining a city park it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on said
streets or highways at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour. (Ord.
1861, 1-9-2007)
9-1-39: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES IN VIOLATION OF ORDINANCES:
Any vehicle which is parked or left standing in violation of any of the
provisions of this title shall, upon order of the chief of police, be towed
away at the expense of the owner of said vehicle. The owner or operator of such
towed vehicle shall pay the towing expenses and such reasonable fee for
handling, as is determined by the city comptroller, and may reclaim the vehicle
at the police office in the city hall. (1977 Code)
9-1-40: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles
shall not apply to a vehicle of a city department, a contractor with city
permit, public utilities necessarily in use for construction service work or
repair work, or to a vehicle owned by any governmental agency. (1977 Code)
9-1-41: HANDICAPPED PARKING ZONE:
   (A)   Established: A handicapped parking zone is hereby established in the
following designated places:
      1.   On the west side of Park Street commencing one hundred thirty five
feet (135') southerly from the south extended curb line of Charles Street and
ending one hundred sixty feet (160') south of said curb line.
      2.   On the west side of Fourth Street commencing ten feet (10') from the
south extended curb line of Bowen Street and ending thirty five feet (35')
south of said curb line.
      3.   On the east side of Main Street commencing twenty three feet (23')
from the north extended curb line of Jefferson Street and ending forty eight
feet (48') north of said curb line. (Ord. 1437, 4-28-1992)
      4.   On the west side of Fifth Street:
         (a)   Commencing one hundred twenty feet (120') north from the north
extended curb line of Chicago Avenue and ending one hundred forty feet (140')
north of said curb line.
         (b)   Commencing one hundred fifty three feet (153') north from the
north extended curb line of Chicago Avenue and ending one hundred seventy three
feet (173') north of said curb line. (Ord. 1992, 1-10-2012)
      5.   On the south side of Adams Street commencing sixteen feet (16') west
of the west extended curb line of Main Street and ending thirty one feet (31')
west of said curb line. (Ord. 1437, 4-28-1992)
      6.   On the west side of Third Street commencing one hundred forty two
feet (142') southerly from the south extended curb line of Murray Street and
ending one hundred sixty seven feet (167') south of said curb line. (Ord. 1635,
3-9-1999)
      7.   On the west side of Main Street commencing twenty three feet (23')
from the north extended curb line of Madison Street and ending forty six feet
(46') north of said curb line. (Ord. 1645, 9-28-1999)
      8.   On the south side of Murray Street commencing ten feet (10') west of
the west line of the alley between Third Street and Main Street and ending
forty feet (40') west of the west line of the alley between Third Street and
Main Street. The depth of said zone shall be twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 1660, 10-
24-2000)
      9.   (Rep. by Ord. 1901, 11-25-2008)
      10.   On the north side of Madison Street commencing fifteen feet (15')
westerly from the west extended curb line of Main Street and ending thirty one
feet (31') from said curb line. (Ord. 1854, 9-26-2006; amd. Ord. 1889, 2-12-
2008)
   (B)   When Parking Permitted: It shall be unlawful for any person without a
mobility handicap or not using a wheelchair to park in this space reserved for
such handicapped persons; provided, however, that a driver of a vehicle being
used to transport such handicapped person may park in such place.
   (C)   Signs: The superintendent of public works shall cause international
wheelchair symbol signs to be posted indicating this prohibition and lines
painted designating the parking zone and the angle at which the vehicles are to
be parked. Each vehicle parking within the zone shall park within the lines of
parking so established. No owner or operator shall park any vehicle across any
such line or marking or park a vehicle in such a position that the same shall
not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. (Ord.
1437, 4-28-1992)
   (D)   Violation; Payment: Any person who violates the provisions of this
section shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), if such fine is
paid within seventy two (72) hours, and if said fine is not paid within seventy
two (72) hours, then the fine shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00)
and shall remain so until ten (10) days after the mailing of a notice by the
city to the violator. If the fine has not been paid within the aforesaid ten
(10) day period, the fine shall be determined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and a criminal complaint shall be filed in the circuit
court for the county, and a notice to appear shall be issued to the person in
whose name the vehicle is registered, notifying that person to appear before
the circuit court of the county to answer the charge of violating restricted
parking. Proceedings shall follow as in other ordinance violation cases. (Ord.
1855, 11-14-2006)
9-1-42: ANGLE PARKING:
   (A)   When official signs are erected or placed giving notice thereof, the
following described portions of streets are designated as angle parking zones:
      1.   Longmoor Avenue, North Side: That portion of Longmoor Avenue
measured from the west curb line extended south from the designated Cragmoor
Avenue School parking area west curb line, to the north curb line of Longmoor
Avenue, thence along the north curb line of Longmoor Avenue in a westerly
direction a distance of three hundred five feet (305') to the end of the
designated angle parking zone. Said angle parking zone having a total length of
three hundred five feet (305').
      2.   Longmoor Avenue, South Side: That portion of Longmoor Avenue
measured from the west curb line extended south from the designated Cragmoor
Avenue School parking area west curb line, to the south pavement edge along
Longmoor Avenue, thence west along said south pavement edge of Longmoor Avenue
a distance of three hundred twenty feet (320') to the end of said designated
angle parking zone. Said angle parking zone having a total length of three
hundred twenty feet (320'). (Ord. 1807, 8-9-2005)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING TIME LIMITS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Time Limits
9-2-2: Tire Markings
9-2-3: Violation; Payment
9-2-4: Removal Of Illegally Parked Vehicles
9-2-5: Presumption Of Liability
9-2-1: TIME LIMITS:
A parking time limit of two (2) hours is hereby established for the areas
hereinafter designated between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. daily, except Sundays and holidays. The following days
shall be designated as holidays:
   January 1, New Year's Day
   February 12, Lincoln's Birthday
   February 22, Washington's Birthday
   Memorial Day
   July 4, Independence Day
   Labor Day
   November 11, Veterans Day
   Thanksgiving Day
   December 25, Christmas Day
   (A)   The following are established as two (2) hour parking zones: (Ord.
1181, 11-13-1979)
      1.   Main Street: Main Street from Washington Street to Quincy Street,
except as to such portions thereof as are reserved for bus stops, cabstands,
driveways or spaces for public building entrances and exits. This parking
limitation on Main Street applies every day including weekends and holidays.
(Ord. 1540, 8-8-1995)
      2.   Adams Street: Adams Street, to the alley which lies approximately
one hundred twenty feet (120') west of Main Street.
      3.   Jefferson Street: Jefferson Street from the alley which lies
approximately one hundred twenty feet (120') east of Main Street, to the alley
which lies approximately one hundred twenty feet (120') west of Main Street.
      4.   Madison Street: Madison Street from the alley which lies
approximately one hundred twenty feet (120') east of Main Street, to the alley
which lies approximately one hundred twenty feet (120') west of Main Street.
      5.   Murray Street: Murray Street from the alley which lies approximately
one hundred twenty feet (120') east of Main Street, to the alley which lies
approximately one hundred twenty feet (120') west of Main Street. (Ord. 1181,
11-13-1979)
      6.   Parking Lot No. 4: The following described real estate owned by the
city and maintained by the city as and for an off street parking facility be
and is hereby designated as parking lot no. 4: The portions of lots 1 and 2,
block 6, original town, a subdivision in Savanna, Carroll County, Illinois,
improved for off street parking purposes.
No owner or operator of any vehicle shall park a vehicle in the limited parking
time areas set forth in parking lot no. 4 for a period of time specified in
this section, except that parking spaces posted "Parking Reserved for City
Employees – 8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. except Sundays and Holidays" shall not be so
limited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle not a designated
city employee to park any vehicle in the reserved spaces in parking lot no. 4.
(Ord. 1264, 4-10-1984)
   (B)   The chief of police or any other person authorized by the mayor and
council shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is limited or
prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions.
Every driver of a vehicle, except emergency vehicles, shall adhere to the
parking lines or markings as are established for vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand, or to park any vehicle in
any of the areas designated in this section for a period longer than two (2)
hours on the days and during the hours specified in this section. (Ord. 1181,
11-13-1979)
9-2-2: TIRE MARKINGS:
Officers of the police department or any other person authorized by the mayor
and council may mark a tire of a vehicle in a specific spot with relation to
the curb or street surface, noting the time said vehicle is so marked.
If, after the permitted parking time has elapsed, the vehicle is still parked
in the same parking space, it shall be prima facie evidence that a violation
has occurred and a citation may be issued. Police officers, after making note
of a license number of the vehicle and the name of the offender, where
possible, may issue a ticket covering any parking offense under this section
notifying the offender to pay the sum therefor at the city hall. Such officer
may sign a complaint for the issuance of a warrant if the offender does not
appear and pay said sum within the time specified.
No person shall obliterate or conceal any marking by a police officer on the
tire of a vehicle for the purpose of preventing the police officer from
determining the length of time said vehicle has been parked.
The moving of a vehicle for fifty feet (50') or less shall not be construed as
an interruption of continuous parking. (Ord. 1181, 11-13-1979)
9-2-3: VIOLATION; PAYMENT:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be fined ten
dollars ($10.00) if such fine is paid within seventy two (72) hours, and if
said fine is not paid within seventy two (72) hours, then the fine shall be
twenty dollars ($20.00) and shall remain so until ten (10) days after the
mailing of a notice by the city to the violator. If the fine has not been paid
within the aforesaid ten (10) day period, the fine shall be determined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and a criminal complaint shall be filed in the circuit
court for the county, and a notice to appear shall be issued to the person in
whose name the vehicle is registered, notifying that person to appear before
the circuit court of the county to answer the charge of overtime parking.
Proceedings shall follow as in other ordinance violation cases. (Ord. 1521, 2-
28-1995; amd. Ord. 1701, 8-27-2002)
9-2-4: REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
Any car or other vehicle parked on the above listed streets under this chapter,
during the hours when parking thereon is prohibited, may be removed and towed
away. The police department and all members thereof are hereby authorized to
remove and tow away or have removed and towed away by commercial towing
service, any such car or other vehicle parked in violation of said chapter.
Cars so towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe place and
shall be restored to the owner or operator of such car upon payment of a fee as
determined by the mayor and council. (Ord. 1181, 11-13-1979)
9-2-5: PRESUMPTION OF LIABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that it is the duty of any
person in whose name a vehicle is registered with the secretary of state to be
responsible for compliance by that vehicle with all parking ordinances of the
city. Proof of registration of a motor vehicle and proof of a violation of this
title shall be construed a prima facie proof that the registered owner of such
motor vehicle was the user or operator thereof at the time of the violation
charged. (Ord. 1521, 2-28-1995)
CHAPTER 3
BICYCLES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Definitions
9-3-2: Riding Abreast
9-3-3: Clinging To Vehicles
9-3-4: Extra Passenger
9-3-5: Intoxication; Drugs; Physical Inability
9-3-6: Emerging From Alley, Driveways And Garages
9-3-7: Crossing Sidewalk
9-3-8: Operating On Sidewalks
9-3-9: Keep To Right
9-3-10: Speed
9-3-11: Traffic Regulations
9-3-12: Turns; Starting; Stopping
9-3-13: Yield Right Of Way
9-3-14: Crossing Centerline Of Highway
9-3-15: Overtaking Vehicle
9-3-16: Marked Lanes
9-3-17: Following Too Closely
9-3-18: Riding Through Safety Zones
9-3-19: Approach Of Emergency Vehicles
9-3-20: Following Or Parking Near Fire Apparatus
9-3-21: Backing Or Turning On Street
9-3-22: Crossing Railroad Tracks
9-3-23: Approaching Stopped School Bus
9-3-24: Trick Riding
9-3-25: Racing On Highway
9-3-26: Obstructing View Of Rider
9-3-27: Blocking Road Or Intersection
9-3-28: Riding On Vehicle
9-3-29: Spilling Loads
9-3-30: Parking Bicycles
9-3-31: Prohibited Parking Areas
9-3-32: Mechanical Condition
9-3-33: Lights
9-3-34: Brakes
9-3-35: Warning Devices
9-3-36: Responsibility
9-3-37: Inspection
9-3-38: Serial Number
9-3-39: Use Of Bicycle Without Consent Of Owner
9-3-40: Bicycle Paths
9-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
BICYCLE: Shall mean and include every device propelled by human power, which
any person may ride, with two (2) tandem wheels, either of which are more than
sixteen inches (16") in diameter.
OPERATE: The word "operate" or any form thereof shall mean and refer to the
use, putting into action, or causing to function of a bicycle by a person
mounted thereon.
In addition to the above definitions, any applicable definition of section
9-1-3 of this title shall be deemed to be included herein. (1977 Code)
9-3-2: RIDING ABREAST:
When more than two (2) persons in a group are operating bicycles on a roadway,
they shall ride single file. (1977 Code)
9-3-3: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
No person operating a bicycle shall cling or attach himself or the bicycle, to
any other moving vehicle. (1977 Code)
9-3-4: EXTRA PASSENGER:
No person operating a bicycle shall carry another person on the handlebars of
said bicycle. (1977 Code)
9-3-5: INTOXICATION; DRUGS; PHYSICAL INABILITY:
No person shall operate a bicycle while under the influence of liquor or drugs,
or while physically or mentally unfit to safely operate the same. (1977 Code)
9-3-6: EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAYS AND GARAGES:
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, garage or private
sidewalk shall stop the bicycle immediately prior to driving onto or across a
public sidewalk, or onto or across a public sidewalk line projected across an
alley, and shall exercise extreme care in making such movements. (1977 Code)
9-3-7: CROSSING SIDEWALK:
Any person riding a bicycle shall stop before crossing a sidewalk, crosswalk or
intersection, or when emerging from an alley, garage or driveway. (1977 Code)
9-3-8: OPERATING ON SIDEWALKS:
Bicycles may be operated on sidewalks in public parks and in residence
districts, but in single file only. Under all circumstances, the rider shall
yield the right of way to pedestrians using the sidewalk, and due and proper
care shall, at all times, be exercised by the rider for the pedestrians. When
approaching a pedestrian on the sidewalk, the speed of a bicycle shall be
reduced to a speed which is no greater than necessary to continue the operation
of the bicycle without the rider dismounting, and shall not be increased until
the pedestrian has passed. No bicycle shall be operated upon any sidewalk on
Main Street, between Chicago Avenue and Quincy Street. (1977 Code)
9-3-9: KEEP TO RIGHT:
All bicycles, when operated on roadways, shall be kept to the right and shall
be operated as near as practical to the right hand edge of the roadway. (1977
Code)
9-3-10: SPEED:
No bicycle shall be operated at any time faster than is reasonable or proper,
and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the
rider and of other persons and property. (1977 Code)
9-3-11: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
Every person operating a bicycle shall strictly observe all traffic signs and
signals and all other traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto and
shall obey the orders and directions of every officer of the city authorized to
direct or regulate traffic. (1977 Code)
9-3-12: TURNS; STARTING; STOPPING:
The operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a right turn, shall follow
the right hand edge of the roadway, and the operator of a bicycle making a left
turn shall approach the point of turning in the traffic lane nearest the center
of the roadway. No operator of a bicycle shall start, slow down, stop or
attempt to turn without first indicating such movement as provided by law.
(1977 Code)
9-3-13: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY:
Any person riding a bicycle shall yield the right of way in the following
circumstances:
   (A)   When a pedestrian is crossing or about to cross a roadway.
   (B)   When a pedestrian is in a crosswalk or in an intersection when the
signal light changes.
   (C)   When a vehicle is stopped to yield right of way to pedestrians.
   (D)   When a blind person using a cane or guide dog is crossing any highway
or intersection.
   (E)   When traffic is so close as to be hazardous. (1977 Code)
9-3-14: CROSSING CENTERLINE OF HIGHWAY:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle to cross the centerline of
a roadway on the left in order to pass any other vehicle, unless the way ahead
is clear and no traffic is approaching.
It shall be unlawful for any such operator to cross the centerline on a hill or
curve if such operator cannot see ahead for at least five hundred feet (500'),
or to pass in a "no passing zone". (1977 Code)
9-3-15: OVERTAKING VEHICLE:
The operator of a bicycle being overtaken and passed by another vehicle shall
give way on hearing the signal of the overtaking vehicle. (1977 Code)
9-3-16: MARKED LANES:
If a roadway is divided into marked lanes, the operator of a bicycle shall:
   (A)   Ride in the right lane unless overtaking another vehicle or when about
to make a left turn.
   (B)   Ride within a single lane, and change only when safe to do so.
   (C)   If there are three (3) lanes, the middle lane should be used only for
passing or overtaking another vehicle or for making a left turn. (1977 Code)
9-3-17: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
The operator of a bicycle shall remain at a safe distance behind any other
vehicle and shall not follow too closely. (1977 Code)
9-3-18: RIDING THROUGH SAFETY ZONES:
No rider of a bicycle shall ride through any safety zone unless directed by
traffic signals, a police officer or an official posted sign. (1977 Code)
9-3-19: APPROACH OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
When an ambulance, fire engine or other emergency vehicle gives warning of its
approach, the operator of a bicycle shall pull to the right and stop until such
emergency vehicle has passed. (1977 Code)
9-3-20: FOLLOWING OR PARKING NEAR FIRE APPARATUS:
It shall be unlawful for an operator of a bicycle to follow any fire apparatus
closer than three hundred feet (300'), nor to park closer than two hundred feet
(200') to such apparatus. (1977 Code)
9-3-21: BACKING OR TURNING ON STREET:
No operator of a bicycle shall back or turn on any street if this action
interferes with other traffic. (1977 Code)
9-3-22: CROSSING RAILROAD TRACKS:
No operator of a bicycle shall cross any railroad tracks unless he can do so
safely, and shall stop within fifty feet (50'), but not less than fifty feet
(50'), from the nearest rail of the track, when:
   (A)   Any mechanical signaling device gives warning of an approaching train.
   (B)   A crossing gate is lowered or a flagman gives, or continues to give,
warning of an approaching train.
   (C)   A train is approaching from one thousand five hundred feet (1,500'),
more or less, to the crossing, and is giving an audible signal of its approach.
   (D)   Whenever the operator can see any train approaching such crossing.
(1977 Code)
9-3-23: APPROACHING STOPPED SCHOOL BUS:
On any undivided highway or street, the operator of a bicycle approaching a
school bus which has stopped to pick up or discharge passengers shall stop
within ten feet (10') from such bus, and shall not start up again until the
passenger has entered the school bus or reached the side of the highway or
street.
On any divided highway, the operator of a bicycle approaching a school bus on
the opposite side of the divided highway, which has stopped to pick up or
discharge passengers, shall reduce speed to ten (10) miles per hour until the
bus or any passengers have passed. (1977 Code)
9-3-24: TRICK RIDING:
No person shall, while operating a bicycle, indulge or engage in any kind of
trick or unsafe riding. (1977 Code)
9-3-25: RACING ON HIGHWAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person riding or operating a bicycle to race any
other bicycle, person or vehicle along any highway or roadway, or to try to set
a speed record along any highway, roadway or street. (1977 Code)
9-3-26: OBSTRUCTING VIEW OF RIDER:
No person shall ride a bicycle which is so loaded as to obstruct the view of
the rider. (1977 Code)
9-3-27: BLOCKING ROAD OR INTERSECTION:
No person riding or operating any bicycle shall block any road or intersection
so as to interfere with other vehicles or with pedestrians. (1977 Code)
9-3-28: RIDING ON VEHICLE:
No person shall ride upon any part thereof not intended for passengers or
operators. (1977 Code)
9-3-29: SPILLING LOADS:
No person shall operate any bicycle so loaded so as to spill such load. (1977
Code)
9-3-30: PARKING BICYCLES:
Bicycles, when parked in the business district, shall be parked in zones or
places designated and marked for that purpose. It shall be unlawful to park any
bicycle along buildings in such a manner so as to interfere with pedestrians,
or along roadways where they may interfere with traffic, or with persons
getting into or out of motor vehicles. No person other than the owner or
operator shall move, or in any manner interfere with, any bicycle properly
parked, nor shall any person interfere, or in any manner hinder, any person
from properly parking a bicycle, except that members of the police department
and fire department may move, or, in the proper cases, prevent the parking of
the bicycle, when, in the judgment of the policeman or fireman, his action is
necessary in order to properly safeguard persons or property. (1977 Code)
9-3-31: PROHIBITED PARKING AREAS:
It shall be unlawful for an operator of a bicycle to park a bicycle in any of
the following places:
   (A)   Within any intersection.
   (B)   On a crosswalk.
   (C)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within twenty feet
(20') of a point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
   (D)   In front of a public or private driveway.
   (E)   Within twenty five feet (25') of the nearest crosswalk or side line of
a street or intersecting highway, except at alleys.
   (F)   On a sidewalk.
   (G)   In any place where "No Parking" signs are posted.
   (H)   Within fifty feet (50') of a stop sign.
   (I)   Within fifty feet (50') of a fire hydrant.
   (J)   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
   (K)   Within fifty feet (50') of the driveway entrance to any fire station
or on the opposite side of the street within seventy five feet (75') of such
entrance.
   (L)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
   (M)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of
the street.
   (N)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway, or on the
immediate approach thereto, except where space for such parking is provided for
and so posted. (1977 Code)
9-3-32: MECHANICAL CONDITION:
No person shall operate a bicycle which is not in such a mechanical condition
so that it can be safely operated. (1977 Code)
9-3-33: LIGHTS:
No bicycle shall be operated within the period from sunset to sunrise without
having a properly lighted headlight attached to the front of the bicycle,
emitting a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet
(500') to the front and with a clear reflex reflector on the front visible to
the front, conforming to specifications prescribed by the Illinois department
of motor vehicles, and on the rear and visible to the rear with a red reflex
reflector, conforming to specifications prescribed by the Illinois department
of motor vehicles. A lamp emitting a red light to the rear may also be used.
(1977 Code)
9-3-34: BRAKES:
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to
make the braked wheels skid on dry, level and clean pavement. (1977 Code)
9-3-35: WARNING DEVICES:
No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other
device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one
hundred feet (100'), except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor
shall any person use, any siren or whistle upon a bicycle. (1977 Code)
9-3-36: RESPONSIBILITY:
The parents of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not allow or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any provisions of sections
9-3-33,
9-3-34 and
9-3-35 of this chapter. (1977 Code)
9-3-37: INSPECTION:
Any member of the police department is authorized to inspect any bicycle at any
reasonable time for the purpose of determining the mechanical condition of the
bicycle. (1977 Code)
9-3-38: SERIAL NUMBER:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, wilfully or maliciously, to
remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the serial number of any bicycle. The chief
of police is hereby authorized to stamp numbers on the frame of a bicycle in a
legible manner for identification purposes, upon which no serial number can be
found, or upon which the serial number is illegible or insufficient for
identification purposes.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the city, or any
dealer in bicycles within the city, to purchase, receive in trade, or otherwise
acquire any bicycle from which the serial number on the frame has been removed,
destroyed, mutilated or altered without first reporting the same to the chief
of police. (1977 Code)
9-3-39: USE OF BICYCLE WITHOUT CONSENT OF OWNER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any bicycle within the
city without the consent of the owner. (1977 Code)
9-3-40: BICYCLE PATHS:
   (A)   General Prohibitions: No person shall ride any bicycle or use a bike
path without complying with the terms of this section.
      1.   All persons using the bike path shall stay to the right except when
passing and proceed in single file when approaching others using the trail.
      2.   All persons using the bike path shall signal clearly or give a clear
warning before passing.
      3.   All persons using the bike path shall keep pets on a short leash and
clean up after their pet.
      4.   Alcoholic beverages and illegal drugs are not permitted on the
trail.
      5.   Firearms, fireworks and fires are not permitted on the trail.
      6.   All trail users should use a light and reflectors after dusk and
before dawn.
      7.   All trail users should move off the trail when stopped to allow
others to pass.
      8.   All trail users should yield to other users when entering and
crossing the trail.
   (B)   Due Care For Safety:
      1.   All operation of bicycles on bike paths shall be consistent with the
rules of the road established for bicycles and otherwise consistent with this
chapter.
      2.   No person shall ride a bicycle in a reckless manner on a bike path.
      3.   No person shall ride a bicycle without exercising due care for the
safety of other persons and property.
   (C)   Prohibited Uses On Bicycle Paths:
      1.   Prohibition Of Operation Of Motor Driven Vehicles On Bike Paths: It
shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a motor driven vehicle
including snowmobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters, all-terrain vehicles, golf
carts or any other motor driven vehicles on bike paths.
      2.   Exceptions: Said prohibition on motor driven vehicles shall not
apply to:
         (a)   Official municipal maintenance, tour and emergency vehicles;
         (b)   Persons with a bona fide disability operating a motorized
wheelchair or similar device.
   (D)   Penalties: Any person convicted of violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and no more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 1744, 9-23-2003)
CHAPTER 4
OPERATION OF NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES ON CITY STREETS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Authorization
9-4-2: Definitions
9-4-3: Required Vehicle Inspection And Permit
9-4-4: Requirements Of Operator
9-4-5: Operating Requirements
9-4-6: Violations
9-4-7: Severability
9-4-1: AUTHORIZATION:
The operation of non-highway vehicles as defined herein shall be allowed on
City streets as permitted but not intended users in accordance with Section 11-
1426.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code under the further conditions stated herein.
(Ord. 2232, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord. 2327, 5-9-2023)
9-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
CITY     Any of the streets maintained by and within the boundaries of the City of
STREETS: Savanna, Carroll County, Illinois.
         Any of the following:
NON-     (A)   An all-terrain vehicle, as defined by Section 1-101.8 of the Illinois
HIGHWAY  Vehicle Code;
VEHICLE: (B)   A golfcart, as defined by Section 1-123.9 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; or
         (C)   A recreational off-highway vehicle, as defined by Section 1-168.(Ord.
         2232, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord. 2327, 5-9-2023; Ord. 2358, 7-9-2024)
 
9-4-3: REQUIRED VEHICLE INSPECTION AND PERMIT:
   (A)   Before a non-highway vehicle may be operated on a City street:
      1.   The owner of the vehicle must submit to the Chief of Police a
written and verified application for a non-highway vehicle permit on a form
approved by the Chief of Police. The application must provide the following:
         a.   The name and address of the owner of the vehicle.
         b.   Proof of compliance with the insurance requirements of Section
11-1426.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
         c.   The serial number, make, model and description of the vehicle.
         d.   A release and waiver of liability signed by applicant releasing
the City of Savanna and its employees, and agreeing to indemnify and hold the
City harmless from any and all future claims resulting from the operation of
the vehicle under this Code.
      2.   The cost of the annual permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
Permits for additional vehicles owned by persons residing at the same residence
shall be forty dollars ($40.00). Permits shall be valid from May 1 until April
30.
      3.   The vehicle must pass an inspection by the Chief of Police or his
designee for compliance with the minimum requirements of Section 11-1426.l(e)
of the Illinois Vehicle Code in addition to the following:
         a.   An approved "Slow-Moving Vehicle" emblem on the rear of the
vehicle or an orange flag mounted on the rear of the vehicle standing six feet
from the ground and measuring not less than twelve inches square on both sides
         b.   A rearview mirror, whether fixed to the1center or side of the
vehicle.
         c.   In the case of a "recreational off-highway vehicle," seatbelts
for the operator and each passenger.
   (B)   If the Chief of Police or his designee finds after inspecting the
vehicle that it meets every requirement of Subsection (A), above, he shall
issue a decal or sticker certifying the same. The decal or sticker shall be
attached to the vehicle and prominently displayed at all times when the vehicle
is in operation on any City street. (Ord. 2327, 5-9-2023)
9-4-4: REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR:
The operator of a non-highway vehicle upon a City street must be of the age of
twenty-one (21) years or older and must have a valid Illinois Drivers License
on his or her person at all times when operating the vehicle on a City street.
(Ord. 2327, 5-9-2023)
9-4-5: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   The person operating a non-highway vehicle on a City street must
produce a valid Illinois Drivers License and proof of compliance with the
insurance required under this Code upon the request of a law enforcement
officer.
   (B)   The person operating a non-highway vehicle on a City street must obey
all applicable provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code; shall not operate on
any State highway, and may cross a State highway only at the intersections of
4th Street and Chicago Avenue, Division Street and Main Street, and Michigan
Avenue and Chicago A venue.
   (C)   The operator of a non-highway vehicle on a City street shall not
exceed the speed of twenty-five (25) miles per hour, or the posted speed limit,
whichever is less.
   (D)   The operator and all passengers of a recreational off-highway vehicle
must wear properly adjusted seatbelts while the vehicle is in motion upon a
City street. (Ord. 2327, 5-9-2023)
9-4-6: VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by
payment of a fine of not less than one Hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the City's enforcement costs incurred,
including its attorney fees, for each offense. In addition, any person found to
have violated any provision of this Code relating to the movement of a non-
highway vehicle upon a City street shall be banned from operating any non-
highway vehicle on a City street for the following term:
      1st Offense: three (3) months.
      2nd Offense: one (1) year.
      3rd Offense: permanently banned.
   (B)   A person who is found to have violated or pleads guilty to having
violated Section 11-501 of the Vehicle Code in any proceeding before the
Circuit Court of Carroll County where the offense is alleged to have occurred
while the person drove or was in actual physical control of a non-highway
vehicle upon a City street shall be permanently benned from operating any non-
highway vehicle on any city street. (Ord. 2232, 8-14-2018; amd. Ord. 2327, 5-9-
2023)
9-4-7: SEVERABILITY:
   (A)   In the event that a court of a competent jurisdiction declares any
particular provision of this chapter to be invalid or unenforceable, the
remaining provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be valid and
enforceable.
   (B)   Any ordinance, or portion thereof, of the City of Savanna that may be
contrary to this chapter shall be deemed to be repealed. (Ord. 2232, 8-14-2018;
amd. Ord. 2327, 5-9-2023)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT, RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Purpose And Intent
10-1-3: Rules
10-1-4: Definitions
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as THE SAVANNA
ZONING ORDINANCE 1 . (1977 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1.
10-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   (A)   This title is adopted for the purpose of:
      1.   Promoting and protecting the public health, safety, comfort, morals,
convenience and general welfare.
      2.   Securing adequate natural light, pure air and safety from fire and
other dangers.
      3.   Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings.
      4.   Enhancing aesthetic values generally throughout the city.
   (B)   To these ends this title is intended to accomplish certain standards
and objectives by:
      1.   Dividing the entire city into districts and restricting and
regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and
use of buildings, structures and land, whether for residential, business,
manufacturing or other special uses;
      2.   Avoiding or lessening congestion in the public streets;
      3.   Preventing the overcrowding of land through regulating and limiting
the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected as related to land area;
      4.   Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback lines
on or along streets, alleys or property lines;
      5.   Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of lot areas, and
regulating and determining the area of open spaces within and surrounding such
buildings;
      6.   Establishing standards to which buildings or structures therein
shall conform;
      7.   Promoting uses, buildings or structures compatible with the
character of the residence, business or manufacturing districts;
      8.   Preventing additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations hereunder imposed;
      9.   Providing for the gradual elimination of those uses, buildings and
structures which are incompatible with the character of the districts in which
they are located, including, without being limited thereto;
         (a)   Elimination of such uses of unimproved lands or lots when the
existing rights of the persons in possession thereof are terminated, or when
the uses to which they are devoted are discontinued;
         (b)   Elimination of uses to which such buildings and structures are
devoted, if they are adaptable for permitted uses; and
         (c)   Elimination of such buildings and structures when they are
destroyed or damaged in major part as hereinafter provided, or when they have
reached the age fixed herein as the normal useful life of such buildings or
structures;
      10.   Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as hereinafter provided; and
      11.   Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
title, or of any amendment thereto. (1977 Code)
10-1-3: RULES:
   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future;
   (B)   The singular number shall include the plural and the plural the
singular;
   (C)   The word "building" shall include the word "structure";
   (D)   The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, and
   (E)   The word "may" is permissive. (1977 Code)
10-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
ABUTS, ABUTTING: Having a common property line or district line.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A detached subordinate building or a portion of a principal
building, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of the
principal building.
ACCESSORY USE: See definition of Use, Accessory.
ADJACENT: To lie near or close to; in the neighborhood or vicinity of.
ADJOINING: Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near or
adjacent.
AIRPORT: Any area of land which is used, or intended for use, for the landing
and takeoff of aircraft; and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended
for use as airport buildings or other airport structures or rights of way,
together with all airport buildings and structures located thereon.
ALLEY: Any right of way, with a width of not less than sixteen feet (16') nor
more than twenty four feet (24'), which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting properties. A street shall not be considered an alley.
ALTERATION: Any change in size, shape, occupancy or use of a building or
structure.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A building or portion thereof designed or used for the care,
observation, or treatment of domestic animals.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A building or portion thereof containing facilities for
washing more than two (2) motor vehicles, using production line methods.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any building or portion thereof, structure and
premises used for dispensing or offering for sale at retail to the public or
motor vehicle fuels stored on the premises; and where lubricating oil and
grease, tires, batteries and similar accessories and parts also may be offered
for sale. When such dispensing, sale, or offering for sale is incidental to the
conduct of a public garage, the premises are classified as a public garage.
Automobile service stations do not include open sales lots.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: See definition of Junkyard.
AWNING: A roof like mechanism, retractable in operation, and covered with
flexible, textured materials, which projects from the wall of a building.
BASEMENT: A story having part, but not more than one-half (1/2), of its floor
to clear ceiling height below grade. When a basement is used for storage,
garages for use of occupants of the building, or other utilities common for the
rest of the building, it shall not be counted as a story.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and
public parks, railroad rights of way, or other similar natural boundaries. A
block may be located in part beyond the boundary lines of the corporate limits
of the city.
BOARDING HOUSE: See definition of Lodging House.
BUILDABLE AREA, FOR THE PURPOSE OF MEASURING LOT WIDTH: The narrowest width
within the thirty feet (30') of lot depth immediately in back of the front yard
line.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, designed
or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons,
animals, chattels, or property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to
the land. When such building is divided by a part wall or walls, each portion
of the building shall be considered a separate building.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: See definition of Accessory Building.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: The words "completely enclosed building" mean a
building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space, or from other
buildings or structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party
walls.
BUILDING, DETACHED: The words "detached building" mean a building surrounded by
open space.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The words "height of building" mean the vertical distance
from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck
line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip or gambrel roofs; chimneys, towers, spires, elevator penthouses,
cooling towers, and similar projections other than signs shall not be included
in calculating building height.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The official of the city of Savanna who has been duly
appointed by the city council.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: The words "principal building" mean a nonaccessory
building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: The words "temporary building" mean any building not
designed to be permanently located at the place where it is, or where it is
intended to be temporarily placed or affixed.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setback of buildings or
structures, and the location of same with respect to one another, and includes
the following:
(A) Size and height of buildings,
(B) Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets,
or to other buildings,
(C) Floor area ratio,
(D) All open space allocated to buildings; and
(E) Amount of lot area and lot width provided per dwelling unit.
BUSINESS: Any gainful occupation, employment, or enterprise which occupies
time, attention, labor and materials; and where merchandise is exhibited and
sold or offered for sale, or where services are offered.
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: A cultivation center, craft grower, processing
organization, dispensing organization, or transporting organization as defined
and regulated by Public Act 101-0027, Cannabis Use and Tax Act.
CAPACITY IN PERSONS: The maximum number of persons that can avail themselves of
the services (or goods) of an establishment or use at any time, with reasonable
comfort and safety.
CARPORT: A roofed automobile shelter, with one or more open sides.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its floor to clear ceiling
height below grade. A cellar is not included in computing the number of stories
for the purpose of height measurement.
CITY COUNCIL: The mayor and city council of the city of Savanna.
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL: The words "medical or dental clinic" mean a building
or portion thereof, the principal use of which is for offices of an
organization or group practice of specializing physicians or dentists, or both,
and contains facilities for examination and treatment of patients but without
facilities for overnight lodging.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: The words "private club or lodge" mean a nonprofit
association of persons who are bona fide members and whose facilities and
guests are restricted.
CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which:
(A) Complies with all the regulations of this title or of any amendment thereto
governing bulk of the district in which said building or structure is located;
or
(B) Is designed or intended for a permitted or special use as applicable in the
district in which it is located.
CONTIGUOUS: In actual contract.
COURT: An open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings and which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by
such building or buildings.
CRAFT GROWER: A facility operated by an organization or business that is
licensed by the Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry, cure, and package
cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make cannabis available for
sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing organization. A craft
grower may contain up to five thousand (5,000) square feet of canopy space on
its premises for plants in the flowering state. The Department of Agriculture
may authorize an increase or decrease of flowering stage cultivation space in
increments of three thousand (3,000) square feet by rule based on market need,
craft grower capacity, and the licensee's history of compliance or
noncompliance, with a maximum space of fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet
for cultivating plants in the flowering stage, which must be cultivated in all
stages of growth in an enclosed and secure area. A craft grower may share
premises with a processing organization or a dispensing organization, or both,
provided each licensee stores currency and cannabis or cannabis-infused
products in a separate secured vault to which the other licensee does not have
access or all licensees sharing a vault share more than fifty percent (50%) of
the same ownership.
CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization or business that is
licensed by the Department of Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport
(unless otherwise limited by this Act), and perform other necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to cannabis business
establishments.
DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an organization or business
that is licensed by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to
acquire cannabis from a cultivation center, craft grower, processing
organization, or another dispensary for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia, or related
supplies under this Act to purchasers or to qualified registered medical
cannabis patients and caregivers. As used in this Act, "dispensary
organization" shall include a registered medical cannabis organization as
defined in the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act or its
successor Act that has obtained an Early Approval Adult Use Dispensing
Organization License.
DISTRICT: A portion of the corporate area of the city of Savanna, as designated
on the zoning district map, within which certain uniform regulations and
requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of
this title.
DOMESTIC PET SERVICE: An establishment where clipping, bathing, and other
services except that of a veterinary nature are rendered to dogs, cats and
domestic pets. No boarding shall be permitted.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment or part thereof in which are provided
facilities where serving or consuming commodities, or both, are intended to
occur primarily in patrons' automobiles on the premises.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for
residential purposes, including single-family, two-family, and multiple-family
dwellings, but not including lodging rooms in hotels, motels or lodging houses.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: The words "attached dwelling" mean a dwelling joined to two
(2) other dwellings, by party walls, or cavity walls, and aboveground,
physically unifying, horizontal, structural elements.
DWELLING, DETACHED: The words "detached dwelling" mean a dwelling which is
surrounded on all sides by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: The words "multiple-family dwelling" mean a building
containing three (3) or more units.
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED: The words "semidetached dwelling" mean a dwelling
joined to one other dwelling by a party wall, or cavity wall, and other
aboveground, physically unifying, horizontal, structural element.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: The words "single-family dwelling" mean a building
containing one dwelling unit only.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: The words "two-family dwelling" mean a building
containing two (2) dwelling units only, one above the other.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as
living quarters for one family only. Individual bathroom and complete single
kitchen facilities, permanently installed to serve the entire family, shall
always be included within each "dwelling unit".
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, exclusive of
bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining room, exclusive of bathroom,
kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove directly off the principal room
providing that such dining alcove does not exceed ninety (90) square feet in
area.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A terminal at which electric energy is received
from the transmission system and is delivered to the distribution system only.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the
transmission system and is delivered to other elements of the transmission
system and, generally, to the local distribution system.
ENGINEER, CITY: The words "city engineer" mean the official of the city of
Savanna, duly appointed and designated as the city engineer.
ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS: The words "business establishment" mean a place of
business carrying on an operation, the ownership or management of which is
separate and distinct from those of any other place of business located on the
same or other lot.
FALLOUT SHELTER: An accessory building and use which incorporates the
fundamentals for fallout protection, shielding mass, ventilation, and space to
live, and which is constructed of such materials, in such a manner, as to
afford to the occupants substantial protection from radioactive fallout.
FAMILY: One person or two (2) or more persons each related to the other by
blood, marriage, or legal adoption, or a group of not more than three (3)
persons not all so related, together with his or their domestic servants,
maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit. A family may include, in
addition thereto, not more than two (2) roomers, boarders, or permanent guests,
whether or not gratuitous.
FENCE: A structure, or tree or shrub hedge which is a barrier and used as a
boundary or means of protection or confinement.
FENCE, OPEN: The words "open fence" mean a fence including gates which is
designed in a manner that allows the flow of air through the fence, extending
over the entire length and height of the fence.
FENCE, SOLID: The words "solid fence" mean a fence, including gates, which
conceals from view from adjoining properties, streets, or alleys, activities
conducted behind it.
FLOOD CREST ELEVATION: The elevation of the established flood level as
designated by the city engineer of Savanna.
FLOODPLAIN AREA: That continuous area of land adjacent to a stream or
streambed, or any stormwater retention area and its tributaries, having an
elevation equal to or lower than flood crest elevation, including also land
less than ten (10) acres in area having an elevation higher than flood crest
elevation and which is completely surrounded by land in a "floodplain area".
FLOOR AREA, FOR DETERMINING FLOOR AREA RATIO: The sum of the gross horizontal
areas of the several floors including also the basement floor of a building,
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the centerlines
of walls separating two (2) buildings. The floor area shall also include the
horizontal areas on each floor devoted to:
(A) Elevator shafts and stairwells;
(B) Mechanical equipment, except if located on the roof, when either open or
enclosed, i.e., bulkheads, water tanks, and cooling towers;
(C) Habitable attic space as permitted by the building codes of the city of
Savanna;
(D) Interior balconies and mezzanines;
(E) Enclosed porches; and
(F) Accessory uses.
The "floor area" of structures used for bulk storage of materials, i.e., grain
elevators, petroleum tanks, shall also be included in the "floor area" and such
"floor area" shall be determined on the basis of the height of such structures
with one floor for each ten feet (10') of structure height and if such
structure measures less than ten feet (10') but not less than five feet (5')
over such floor height intervals, it shall be construed to have an additional
floor.
The horizontal area in each floor of a building devoted to off street parking
and off street loading facilities and the horizontal area of a cellar floor
shall not be included in the "floor area".
FLOOR AREA, FOR DETERMINING OFF STREET PARKING AND OFF STREET LOADING
REQUIREMENTS: "Floor area", when prescribed as the basis of measurement for off
street parking spaces and off street loading spaces for any use, shall be the
sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of the building,
excluding areas used for accessory off street parking facilities and the
horizontal areas of the basement and cellar floors that are devoted exclusively
to uses accessory to the operation of the building. All horizontal dimensions
shall be taken from the exterior faces of the walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area
within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such lot. The floor area
ratio requirement as designated for each district when multiplied by the lot
area in square feet shall determine the maximum permissible floor area for the
building or buildings on the lot.
FLOOR AREA, USABLE: The words "usable floor area" mean any floor area within
outside walls of a residential building exclusive of area in cellars,
basements, unfinished attics, garages, open porches, and accessory buildings,
but including any area "roughed in" but not completed which is designed and
intended for human occupancy.
FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck or
railroad freight cars is assembled or stored for routing in intrastate or
interstate shipment by motor trucks or railroad freight cars.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: The words "private garage" mean an accessory building designed
and used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by the occupants of
the building to which it is accessory and in which no occupation or business
for profit is carried on. In residence districts, not more than one of the
motor vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more than two (2) ton
capacity.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: The words "public garage" mean a building or portion thereof
other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping,
servicing, or repairing motor vehicles; hiring, selling, or storing of motor
vehicles may be included.
GARAGE, SALE: As regulated in section
3-5-7 of this code.
GARAGE, STORAGE: The words "storage garage" mean a building or portion thereof
other than a private or public garage, designed or used exclusively for the
storage of motor vehicles, nonmotorized vehicles, boats, and furniture and in
which these stored items are not equipped, repaired, hired, or sold, and in
which motor fuels and oils are not sold.
GRADE: The elevation of the top of the roadway curb or, if no curb exists, the
centerline of the roadway pavement, in either case, measured at a point
opposite the centerline of the building wall facing the front lot line, or when
there are unusual topographic conditions on the lot, and the building is set
back more than twenty five feet (25'), "grade" shall be the average elevation
of the finished ground grade elevation at the building walls.
GROUND FLOOR AREA: The lot area covered by a principal building, measured at
grade, from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, but excluding open
porches, or terraces, garages or carports; except the floor area of a garage
may be included in the "ground floor area" when it is a part of the ground
floor of a building over one story in height and the floor above the garage is
used or intended for use as a part of the principal use.
GUEST, PERMANENT: The words "permanent guest" mean a person who occupies or has
the right to occupy a lodging house, rooming house, boarding house, motel,
apartment hotel or motel accommodations as his domicile and place of permanent
residence.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession for gain or support conducted
entirely within the dwelling by a member of the family residing in the dwelling
and when such occupation or profession is incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and in connection with which:
(A) A sign may be displayed in accordance with title 4, chapter 3, "Signs And
Billboards, Awnings And Marquees", of this code, and there is no other display
or activity that will indicate from the exterior of the dwelling that it is
being utilized in whole or in part for any purpose other than a residential
use;
(B) There is only one member of the family residing in the dwelling, plus one
additional person, engaged in the pursuit of a home occupation;
(C) Teaching of musical instruments, singing or dancing shall be limited to not
more than two (2) pupils at one time, and academic or religious instructions
shall be limited to not more than six (6) pupils at one time; and
(D) An accessory building is not used in whole or in part.
HOTEL: An establishment which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction
to a lodging house, boarding house, or a rooming house, and is commonly known
as a hotel in the city, and which provides customary hotel services such as:
maid service, furnishings and laundry of linens, telephone and secretarial or
desk service; the use and upkeep of furniture; and bellboy service.
HOTEL, APARTMENT: The words "apartment hotel" mean a hotel in which at least
eighty percent (80%) of the hotel accommodations are occupied by permanent
guests, securing such accommodations by prearrangement for a continuous period
of thirty (30) days or more.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation wholly for public
or semipublic use.
JUNKYARD: An open area of land and any accessory building or structure thereon
which are used primarily for buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling,
packing, assembling, or handling waste or scrap materials, including vehicles,
machinery, and equipment not in operable condition, or parts thereof, and other
metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles.
KENNEL: Any premises or portion thereof on which more than three (3) dogs,
cats, or other household domestic animals over four (4) months of age are kept,
or on which more than two (2) such animals are maintained, boarded, bred, or
cared for, in return for remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale.
LAUNDERETTE: A business that provides coin operated, self-service type washing,
drying, dry cleaning, and ironing facilities, providing that:
(A) Not more than four (4) persons, including owners, are employed on the
premises; and
(B) No pick up or delivery service is maintained.
LOADING SPACE: A space within the principal building or on the same lot,
providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and with access to a
street or alley.
LODGING HOUSE: A building originally designed for and used as a single- or two-
family dwelling, all or a portion of which contains rooms which accommodate
persons who are not members of the keeper's family. Lodging, or meals, or both
are provided for compensation for three (3) or more but no more than ten (10)
persons.
LODGING ROOM: A room or suite of rooms rented as sleeping and living quarters,
but without cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a
suite of rooms, each room which provides sleeping accommodations shall be
counted as one "lodging room" for the purpose of this title.
LOT: A single parcel of land which is legally described and recorded as a part
of a recorded subdivision plat, and in any case is located within a single
block and occupied by or intended for occupancy by, one or more principal
buildings for one principal use, together with accessory buildings, structures
and uses, yards and other open spaces as required by this title and having its
principal frontage on a street. A "lot" is one or two (2) or more lots or parts
of lots of record comprising the tract of land which is designated by the owner
at the time of application for a building permit as the site to be used,
developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control. Therefore,
a lot may or may not coincide with a "lot of record".
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear
lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: The words "corner lot" mean a lot located at the intersection of
two (2) streets or a lot bounded on two (2) sides by a curving street and any
two (2) chords of which form an angle of one hundred twenty degrees (120°) or
less measured on the lot side.
LOT, COVERAGE: The words "coverage lot" mean the part or percent of the lot
occupied by buildings or structures including accessory buildings or
structures.
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot
line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT, INTERIOR: The words "interior lot" mean a lot that is not a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The words "front lot line" mean that boundary of a lot which
abuts a street line. On a corner lot in a residence district the lot line
having the shortest length abutting a street line shall be the front lot line.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: The words "interior lot line" mean a lot line which does
not abut a street.
LOT LINE, REAR: The words "rear lot line" mean that boundary of a lot which is
most distant from and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line and
in the case of an irregular, triangular or gore shaped lot, a line ten feet
(10') in length within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the
front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: The words "side lot line" mean any boundary of a lot which is
not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been
recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds of Carroll County,
Illinois, or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of
the recorder of deeds of Carroll County prior to the Savanna zoning ordinance
adopted in 1977.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: The words "reversed corner lot" mean a corner lot, where
the side lot line abutting a street is substantially a continuation of the
front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
LOT, THROUGH: The words "through lot" mean a lot having a pair of opposite lot
lines along the two (2) more or less parallel streets, and which is not a
corner lot. Both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The minimum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot
measured at the narrowest width within the buildable area.
MANUFACTURING: An establishment, the principal use of which is manufacturing,
fabricating, processing, assembling, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing,
or testing of materials, goods, or products.
MARQUEE: A roof like structure of a permanent nature which projects from the
wall of a building.
MOBILE HOME: A structure which has or ever had a certificate of title issued by
the secretary of state and is designed for permanent habitation and so
constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently
attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the location, or
subsequent locations, at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and
designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more
persons. The term "mobile home" shall include a structure that is served by
individual utilities and that rests on a permanent foundation with its wheels,
tongue, and hitch permanently removed.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A lot developed with facilities for locating three (3) or
more "mobile homes"; provided, each mobile home contains a kitchen, flush
toilet, and shower or bath, and that such "mobile home park" shall be for use
only by nontransient dwellers remaining continuously for more than one month,
whether or not a charge is made. It shall not include a sales lot in which
motor vehicles or unoccupied trailers are parked for the purpose of inspection
or sale.
MOTEL: An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached lodging
rooms with bathrooms, located on a single lot and designed for use primarily by
transient automobile tourists. A "motel" furnishes customary hotel services
such as maid service and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk
service, and the use and upkeep of furniture. In a "motel" less than fifty
percent (50%) of the living and sleeping accommodations are occupied or
designed for occupancy by persons other than transient automobile tourists. A
"motel" shall not include cooking facilities in any of its lodging rooms.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor
truck is assembled or stored for routing in intrastate shipment by motor truck.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of
an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: The words "nonconforming building" or
"nonconforming structure" mean any building or structure lawfully established
which:
(A) Does not comply with all the regulations of this title or of any amendment
hereto governing bulk of the district in which such building or structure is
located;
(B) Is designed or intended for a nonconforming use.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any building or structure and the use thereof or the use of
land that does not conform with the regulations of this title or any amendments
thereto governing use of the district in which it is located, but conformed
with all of the codes, ordinances, and other legal requirements applicable at
the time such building, or structure was erected, enlarged, or altered, and the
use thereof or the use of land was established.
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIAL: The words "noxious matter" or "noxious material"
mean a material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by
chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical
or economic well being of individuals.
NURSERY, CHILDCARE: The words "childcare nursery" mean an establishment for the
part time care of five (5) or more children of preelementary school age in
addition to the members of the family residing therein.
NURSING HOME: A home for aged, chronically ill, care of children, infirm, or
incurable persons, or a place of rest for those persons suffering bodily
disorders, in which three (3) or more persons not members of the family
residing on the premises are received, and provided with food, shelter and
care, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted
primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury, maternity cases,
or mental illness.
ODOR: The minimum concentration of odorous matter in the air that can be
detected as an odor.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling, or
renting merchandise stored or displayed out of doors prior to sale. Such
merchandise includes automobiles, trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats,
or similar commodities.
PARKING SPACE: An area, enclosed in a building or unenclosed, reserved for the
parking of one motor vehicle with ingress and egress to a street or alley.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Finely divided solid or liquid matter, other than water,
which is released into the atmosphere.
PARTY WALL: A common wall which extends from its footing below grade to the
underside of the roof and divides buildings.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A parcel or tract of land, initially under single
ownership or control, which contains two (2) or more principal buildings and
one or more principal use, planned and constructed as a unified development
where specific regulations of a given zoning district are modified through the
issuance of a special use permit.
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD: The planning and zoning board of the city of
Savanna.
PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Department of Agriculture to either extract
constituent chemicals or compounds to produce cannabis concentrate or
incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to
produce a cannabis product.
RADIATION HAZARDS: The deleterious and harmful effects of all ionizing
radiation, which shall include all radiation capable of producing ions in their
passage through matter. Such radiations shall include, but are not limited to,
electromagnetic radiations such as X-rays and gamma rays and particulate
radiations such as electrons or beta particles, protons, neutrons, and alpha
particles.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for
track operations, but not including freight depots or stations, loading
platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located
facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation,
but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as
incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESERVOIR STANDING SPACES: Those off street parking spaces allocated for
temporary standing of automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular
establishment.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street which is used or intended to be used for the
travel of motor vehicles.
ROOMING HOUSE: See definition of Lodging House.
SCHOOL, NURSERY: See definition of Nursery, Childcare.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a street line and the nearest
wall of a building, structure, or operation of a use facing such street line.
SETBACK, ESTABLISHED: The words "established setback" mean when forty percent
(40%) or more of the lots fronting on one side of a street within a block are
improved, the average of the existing setbacks of such improved lots shall be
the "established setback" for determining the depth of required front yards for
the lots along such street frontage, as regulated in this comprehensive
amendment. However, in no case shall the established setback be greater than
the required setback for the district, nor shall the required setback be
decreased by more than ten feet (10').
SIGN: A name, identification, description, illustration, display or device
which is affixed to, painted or represented upon a building, structure or land
and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution
or business. For the purpose of definition, a sign structure may be single face
or double face. However, a sign shall not include any display of any court,
public, or official notice, nor shall it include the flag, emblem, insignia of
a nation, political unit, school, religious or charitable institution, or
organization. A sign shall also include a permanent sign located completely
within an enclosed building provided such a sign is intended to be viewed
primarily from the exterior of the building.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: The words "advertising sign" mean a structure including a
billboard on which is portrayed information which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or entertainment not necessarily related to the
other uses permitted on the premises upon which the sign structure is located.
SIGN, BUSINESS: The words "business sign" mean a sign which directs attention
to a business, commodity, service, or other activity conducted upon the
premises upon which such sign is located.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF: The words "gross surface area of sign" mean the
entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits
of the actual surface of a single face sign. It does not include any structural
elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part
of the display. A double face or V-type sign, erected on a single supporting
structure where the interior angle does not exceed one hundred thirty five
degrees (135°) shall, for the purpose of computing square foot area, be
considered and measured as a single face sign.
SIGN, GROUND: The words "ground sign" mean a sign which is supported by one or
more uprights or braces in or upon the ground.
SIGN, PROJECTING: The words "projecting sign" mean a sign which is affixed to
any building wall or structure and extends beyond the building wall or parts
thereof or structure more than fifteen inches (15").
SIGN, ROOF: The words "roof sign" mean a sign erected, constructed, and
maintained above the roof of any building.
SIGN, WALL: The words "wall sign" mean a sign which is affixed to an exterior
wall of any building, when such sign shall project not more than fifteen inches
(15") from the building wall or parts thereof.
SINGLE OWNERSHIP: That a lot in single ownership is one where the owner does
not own adjoining vacant property.
SMOKE: The visible discharge from a chimney, stack, vent, exhaust, or
combustion process which is made up of particulate matter.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be
no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it. The floor of a story may have split levels provided that there is not more
than a four foot (4') difference in elevation between the different levels of
the floor. A basement shall be counted as a story and a mezzanine floor shall
be counted as a story when it covers over one-third (1/3) the area of the floor
next below it, or if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the
floor next above it is twenty four feet (24') or more.
STORY, HALF: The words "half story" mean a partial story under a gable, hip or
gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior
walls are not more than three feet (3') above the floor of such story, except
that any partial story used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or
caretaker or his family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below
it, shall be deemed a full story.
STREET: Any right of way containing a roadway which affords the primary means
of vehicular access to abutting properties. When such right of way is not an
existing or dedicated public "street", it shall be not less than forty feet
(40') in width, unless herein otherwise regulated. An alley shall not be
considered a street.
STREET FRONTAGE: All of the property fronting on one side of a street between
two (2) intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead end street, all of the
property along one side of the street between an intersecting street and the
end of such dead end street.
STREET LINE: The street right of way line abutting a property line of a lot.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or
less permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground, including, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, signs, backstops for tennis courts, and pergolas.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such
as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the
roof or in the exterior walls, excepting such repair or replacement as may be
required for the safety of the building.
TAVERN: An establishment where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises
but not including restaurants where the principal business is the serving of
food.
TOXIC MATTER OR MATERIAL: Those materials which are capable of causing injury
to living organisms by chemical means.
TRAILER: Any vehicle or portable structure constructed so as to permit
occupancy thereof for lodging or dwelling purposes or for the use as an
accessory building or structure in the conduct of a business, trade, or
occupation, and which may be used as a conveyance on streets and highways, but
by its own or other motive power.
TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER: An organization or business that is
licensed by the Department of Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a
cannabis business establishment or a community college licensed under the
Community College Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land, or buildings thereon, is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and
shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the
performance standards of this title.
USE, ACCESSORY: Any "accessory use" is one which is incidental to the dominant
use of the premises.
USE, CONDITIONAL: The words "conditional use" mean a use that has unique
characteristics and is deemed desirable or necessary in a district or districts
for public convenience and welfare, but due to its unique characteristics its
location and development in a district are conditioned upon conformance with
special standards herein set forth for each conditional use. The issuance of a
permit and zoning certificate for a conditional use is predicated on the
approval in each case by the city council after receiving the recommendation
from the planning and zoning board.
USE, LAWFUL: The words "lawful use" mean the use of any building, structure, or
land that conforms with all of the regulations of this title or any amendment
hereto and which conforms with all of the codes, ordinances, and other legal
requirements, as existing at the time of the enactment of this title or any
amendment thereto, for the structure or land that is being examined.
USE, NONCONFORMING: See definition of Nonconforming Use.
USE, PERMITTED: The words "permitted use" mean any use which may be lawfully
established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with
all requirements, regulations, and performances, if any, of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The words "principal use" mean the dominant use of land or
buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
VEHICLE, MOTOR: The words "motor vehicle" mean any passenger vehicle, truck,
truck trailer, trailer, or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
VENDING MACHINE: A machine for dispensing merchandise or services designed to
be operated by the customer.
VIBRATION: The periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth at
designated frequency, cycles per second.
YARD: An open area, on a lot which is unobstructed from its lowest level to the
sky, except as otherwise provided in this title.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: The words "corner side yard" mean a side yard which adjoins
a street line.
YARD, FRONT: The words "front yard" mean a yard which is bounded by the side
lot lines, front lot line, and the front yard line.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: The words "interior side yard" mean a side yard which
adjoins another lot or alley separating such side yard from another lot.
YARD LINE: A line in a lot that is parallel to the lot line along which the
applicable yard extends and which is not nearer to such lot line at any point
than the required depth or width of the applicable yard. A building, structure
or other obstruction shall not encroach into the area between the "yard line"
and such adjacent lot line, except for such permitted obstruction in yards as
are set forth in this title.
YARD, REAR: The words "rear yard" mean a yard which is bounded by side lot
lines, and the rear yard line.
YARD, SIDE: The words "side yard" mean a yard which is bounded by the rear yard
line, front yard line, side yard line and side lot line.
ZONING DISTRICTS: The districts into which the city of Savanna has been divided
for zoning regulations and requirements as set forth on the zoning district
map. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1150, 8-8-1978; amd. Ord. 1270, 8-28-1984; amd. Ord.
1283, 7-9-1985; amd. Ord. 1620, 9-22-1998; amd. Ord. 1849, 8-22-2006; amd. Ord.
1916, 6-9-2009; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016; amd. Ord. 2251, 9-24-2019)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Interpretation
10-2-2: Separability
10-2-3: Allowable Use Of Land, Buildings Or Structures
10-2-4: Prohibited Uses Of Land, Buildings Or Structures
10-2-5: Control Over Use
10-2-6: Control Over Bulk
10-2-7: Building On Lot
10-2-8: Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses
10-2-9: Yards, General
10-2-10: Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards
10-2-11: Trailers And Mobile Homes As Regulated By Mobile Home Park Section
10-2-12: Floor Area Ratio Application In Particular Cases
10-2-13: Bed And Breakfast
10-2-1: INTERPRETATION:
   (A)   In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this title
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection
of the public health, safety, morals, welfare, comfort, and convenience.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this title upon the:
      1.   Use of land or buildings;
      2.   Bulk of buildings;
      3.   Floor area requirements;
      4.   Lot area and lot width requirements; and
      5.   Yard requirements;
are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other provision of this comprehensive amendment or of any other
law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements
shall govern.
   (C)   This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or
other private agreement; provided, that where the regulations of this title are
more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such
easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this
title shall govern.
   (D)   No building, structure, or use not lawfully existing at the time of
the adoption of this title, shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of
the adoption of this title; and to the extent that, and in any manner that said
unlawful building, structure, or use is in conflict with the requirements of
this title, said building, structure, or use remains unlawful hereunder. (1977
Code)
10-2-2: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the several
provisions of this title are separable, in accordance with the following:
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of
this title not specifically included in said judgment; and
   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this title to a particular property, building,
or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision
to any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in said
judgment. (1977 Code)
10-2-3: ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND, BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
The following uses of land, buildings, or structures are allowed in the
districts indicated hereinafter in chapters 3, 6 and 7 of this title under the
conditions specified in this title:
   (A)   Uses lawfully established and existing on the effective date of this
title.
   (B)   Uses lawfully established and existing on the effective date of this
title, rendered nonconforming by the provisions herein shall be subject to the
regulations of chapter 9 of this title.
   (C)   Permitted uses as designated in chapters 4, 6 and 7 of this title.
   (D)   Conditional uses as designated in chapters 4, 6 and 7 of this title.
(1977 Code)
A classification of conditional permitted uses is hereby established to provide
for certain uses hereinafter specified that are unique in physical and
operational characteristics, but are deemed desirable or necessary for public
convenience and welfare within a given district or districts. But to the unique
characteristics of conditional permitted uses, special standards and other
conditions for their location and development are herein set forth for each
conditional permitted use in district regulations. Additions or alterations to
existing buildings or land improvements for expansion of a use herein
designated as a conditional permitted use shall conform with standards and
other conditions governing the conditional permitted use as herein set forth
for the district in which it is located. Conditional uses shall only be
approved by the council after receiving the recommendations of the planning and
zoning board. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
10-2-4: PROHIBITED USES OF LAND, BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
No building or lot shall be devoted to any use other than one which is
specified, or a conditional use, by the district regulations applicable to the
district in which such building or land is located, as herein set forth in
chapters 4, 6 and 7 of this title. However, where a building permit for a
building or structure has been issued in accordance with law, prior to the
effective date of this title, and where construction has been begun within six
(6) months of such effective date and is being prosecuted to completion, said
building or structure may be completed in accordance with approved plans on the
basis of which the building permit was issued; and further, may, upon
completion, be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use originally
designated subject to the provisions herein set forth in chapter 10 of this
title. (1977 Code)
10-2-5: CONTROL OVER USE:
No building or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or
structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, raised, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered, except in conformity with the
regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. (1977
Code)
10-2-6: CONTROL OVER BULK:
All new buildings shall conform to the bulk regulations established herein for
the district in which each building is located, and no existing building shall
be enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered, converted, or relocated in
such a manner as to conflict with the bulk regulations of this title for the
district in which such building shall be located, except in a residence
district, a lot of record which was designated as a numbered lot in the
recorded subdivision plat that was a record prior to the effective date of this
title and such lot does not conform with the minimum lot width or area
requirements of this title may be used for a single- family detached dwelling,
provided there is conformance with all other applicable regulations of this
title, or as otherwise permitted in this title. (Ord. 1849, 8-22-2006)
10-2-7: BUILDING ON LOT:
In single-family residence districts, every single-family detached dwelling
hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot, and there
shall be not more than one dwelling unit nor more than one principal building
on one lot, except as otherwise provided by this title. (1977 Code)
10-2-8: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
   (A)   Accessory uses shall be permitted with all permitted and conditional
uses as allowed in the various zoning districts.
   (B)   Accessory uses shall be compatible with the principal use and shall
not be established prior to the establishment of the principal use, and shall
not include the keeping, propagation, or culture of pigeons, poultry, rabbits,
bees, or livestock, whether or not for profit.
   (C)   Radio or television poles or towers and antennas, attached or
detached, not more than thirty five feet (35') in height aboveground shall be
permitted as accessory structures on lots in any district. (1977 Code)
   (D)   Except as otherwise regulated herein, an accessory building hereafter
erected, altered, enlarged or moved on a lot shall conform with the following:
(Ord. 2097, 6-24-2014)
      1.   Proximity To Principal Building: A detached accessory building shall
not be nearer than ten feet (10') from the nearest wall of the principal
building.
      2.   Attached Accessory Building Setbacks: An accessory building attached
to the principal building shall adhere to the required setbacks for the zoning
district in which the building is located.
      3.   Detached Accessory Building Setbacks; Exceptions: A detached
accessory building shall adhere to the front yard, side yard, and side yard
abutting a street setback for the district in which it is located and be not
less than five feet (5') from the rear lot line, except:
         (a)   On corner lots, the building should not be closer to the rear
lot line than the required interior side yard setback for the district in which
the building is located.
         (b)   On through lots, not less than the distance required for a front
yard setback for the district in which the building is located from the rear
lot line adjoining a street; and
         (c)   An accessory building having vehicular access from an alley,
shall be set back not less than ten feet (10') from the lot line abutting the
alley. (Ord. 2014, 7-10-2012)
      4.   Location Of Propane Tanks: Propane tanks larger than one hundred
twenty five (125) gallon water pounds must be located outside, in the rear yard
at least ten feet (10') away from all principal structures and at least ten
feet (10') from the rear lot line. On a through lot, the rear yard shall be the
yard most opposite the street having the residence address.
         (a)   Foundations: Propane tanks shall rest on either a concrete,
asphalt, masonry or equal quality surface.
         (b)   Screening: All propane tanks shall be properly screened from the
view of adjacent properties by a fence, wall or hedge.
         (c)   Maintenance: Propane tanks shall be properly maintained to
assure safe operation. The ground below and around the tank shall be kept clear
of grass and weeds. (Ord. 2097, 6-24-2014)
   (E)   A detached accessory building shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in
height. The maximum height may be increased as long as all setbacks are
increased by one foot (1') for each additional foot of height exceeding
eighteen feet (18').
   (F)   The footprint of a detached accessory building on lots smaller than
one acre shall not exceed the ground floor area of the principal building. The
footprint may be increased by one-half (1/2) the ground floor area of the
principal building for lots having an area of one acre, with an additional
increase of one-half (1/2) the ground floor area of the principal building for
each additional acre. (Ord. 2014, 7-10-2012)
10-2-9: YARDS, GENERAL:
   (A)   The minimum yard space required for one structure shall not again be
considered as yard space for another adjoining structure.
   (B)   No lot shall be reduced in area so that the yards or other open space
and lot area become less than required by this title. (1977 Code)
   (C)   On streets where a front yard setback of more or less depth than
required by this title has been maintained for principal buildings existing on
lots or tracts having a frontage of forty percent (40%) or more of the total
frontage on one side of any street lying between two (2) intersecting streets,
the front yard setback line shall be established by determining the average
setback distance of the principal buildings on the same side of the street,
measured from the street right of way line to the nearest wall of the principal
building, but in no instance shall the established front yard setback be
greater than what is required by the applicable zoning district, nor shall the
required setback be decreased by more than ten feet (10'). (Ord. 1849, 8-22-
2006)
   (D)   On a through lot, either of the lot lines abutting a street right of
way line may be established as its front lot line, except that where two (2) or
more through lots are contiguous and a front lot line has been duly
established, the same street lot line shall thereafter be deemed to be the
front lot line of all such contiguous lots. (1977 Code)
10-2-10: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS:
Obstructions in required yards shall be permitted in accordance with the
following:
   (A)   In all yards:
      1.   Awnings and canopies, projecting into a yard not more than twenty
five percent (25%) of the depth or width of the yard;
      2.   Chimneys projecting twenty four inches (24") or less into the yard;
      3.   Flagpoles;
      4.   Ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental
features projecting not more than eighteen inches (18") into a yard;
      5.   Ornamental light standards;
      6.   Steps which are necessary for access to permitted buildings or for
access to lots from streets, and required exterior fire escapes; and
      7.   Trees, shrubs and flowers including flower boxes and urns. (1977
Code)
   (B)   In front yards and side yards abutting a street:
      1.   Fuel pumps and air and water outlets in conjunction with automobile
service stations, provided they shall be set back at least fifteen feet (15')
from the front lot line;
      2.   One-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less into the
yard;
      3.   Open off street parking spaces in B-1, B-2, and M districts;
      4.   Overhanging eaves and gutters, projecting not more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the depth of the yard;
      5.   Signs and nameplates as regulated in other applicable codes of the
city; and
      6.   Balconies and open porches may project a maximum of ten feet (10').
   (C)   In rear yards:
      1.   Air conditioning condensers for central air conditioning units,
provided location conforms with other applicable ordinances and codes of the
city;
      2.   Arbors and trellises;
      3.   Balconies may project a maximum of ten feet (10');
      4.   Open porches may project a maximum of ten feet (10');
      5.   Enclosed off street parking spaces, attached or detached, provided
such accessory building shall not cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the
required area of a rear yard;
      6.   Fallout shelters, attached or detached;
      7.   One-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less into the
yard;
      8.   Open off street parking and off street loading spaces as herein
regulated;
      9.   Outdoor fireplaces; birdbath and other lawn furniture either
temporarily or permanently affixed to the ground;
      10.   Overhanging roof eaves and gutters, provided eaves and gutters of
detached accessory buildings are not less than two feet (2') from a lot line;
      11.   Playground and laundry drying equipment;
      12.   Sheds, toolrooms, or similar buildings customarily accessory to the
principal use;
      13.   Tennis courts, private. (Ord. 1849, 8-22-2006)
   (D)   In interior side yards:
      1.   Open off street parking spaces;
      2.   Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting twenty four inches (24") or
less into the yard. (1977 Code)
10-2-11: TRAILERS AND MOBILE HOMES AS REGULATED BY MOBILE HOME PARK SECTION:
   (A)   Trailers and mobile homes shall not be permitted in any district as
accessory buildings, except when used as temporary offices or storage space
incidental to construction of a building development for the period of time
such construction is actively undertaken, and provided trailers and mobile
homes used for such purposes are located on the same lot as the building
development on a lot contiguous thereto, or when located in a mobile home park.
(1977 Code)
   (B)   Mobile homes, trailers or similar portable structures used or so
constructed as to permit their being used as a dwelling place for one or more
persons are prohibited except within the confines of a licensed mobile home
park, except that parking mobile homes for display prior to sale or storage
prior to delivery may be permitted in districts where mobile home or trailer
sales or manufacturing establishments are permitted or as conditional uses.
(Ord. 1620, 9-22-1998)
10-2-12: FLOOR AREA RATIO APPLICATION IN PARTICULAR CASES:
Where two (2) or more contiguous lots are in common ownership and there was, on
the adoption of this code, an existing building on one of such lots with less
than the permitted maximum floor area ratio, the owner may elect to add the
unused portion of the floor area ratio of the existing building to the maximum
permitted floor area ratio of any addition to the existing building to be
constructed on the adjoining lot. (1977 Code)
10-2-13: BED AND BREAKFAST:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:
 
                                 An operator occupied residence providing
                                 accommodations for a charge to the public with
                                 no more than five (5) guestrooms for rent, in
                                 operation for more than ten (10) nights in a
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: twelve (12) month period. Breakfast may be
                                 provided to the guests only. Bed and breakfast
                                 establishments shall not include motels,
                                 hotels, boarding houses, or food service
                                 establishments.
GUESTROOM:                       A sleeping room intended to serve no more than
                                 two (2) transient guests per night.
                                 The owner of the bed and breakfast
                                 establishment, or the owner's agent, who is
OPERATOR:                        required by this section to reside in the bed
                                 and breakfast establishment, or on contiguous
                                 property. (Ord. 2060, 9-10-2013)
 
   (B)   Permit Required; Fee:
      1.   No bed and breakfast establishment shall commence doing business
until a license has been issued by the city. Each applicant for a new or
renewal license, shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for licenses
issued in 2023. For new or renewed licenses each subsequent year, the fee shall
be increased by fifty dollars ($50.00) until 2026 whereupon the fee for all new
licenses shall remain at two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Said fee shall be
paid prior to the inspections being made as required hereof. Said fee shall be
nonrefundable, even if the license is never issued.
      2.   No license shall be granted for a period longer than one year, every
license shall expire one year after date of issuance. No licensee may assign,
sell, or transfer to any other person, even if such other person intends to
conduct the same business, occupation or activity as the licensee at the
location used by the licensee. Such other person must apply and pay the fee for
a new license in accordance with the provisions of this code.
   (C)   Inspection Reports; Proof Of Registration: Within ninety (90) days
after the issuance of a bed and breakfast license each applicant shall provide:
      1.   A proof of registration with the Illinois department of revenue and
the city for the purpose of collecting and submitting hotel/motel tax.
      2.   A fire inspection report from the Savanna fire department stating
that the subject bed and breakfast establishment complies with fire and safety
regulations applicable to said establishments shall be filed with the zoning
officer prior to issuing the license.
      3.   A health inspection report from Whiteside County health department
stating that the subject bed and breakfast establishment complies with state
health regulations applicable to said establishment shall be filed with the
zoning officer prior to issuing the license.
      4.   A city zoning and building report from the building official stating
that the subject bed and breakfast establishment complies with city building,
electrical and plumbing codes applicable to said establishment shall be filed
with the zoning officer prior to issuing the license.
      5.   Certificate of successful completion from the health department as
described in the current addition of the state of Illinois food service
sanitation rules and regulations shall be submitted to the zoning officer
within six (6) months after the date of issuance.
   (D)   Application; Site Plan; Floor Plan: An application for a bed and
breakfast establishment shall include such information as the zoning
administrator may require, including, but not limited to, a site plan depicting
existing conditions of any proposed modifications to buildings, walks, drives,
parking, berming, planting, fencing, signing and lighting. Pertinent elevations
or perspective drawings may be requested for more accurate review of various
details; photographs of the proposed house, accessory buildings and lot shall
be provided; and a floor plan of the house showing all rooms and room sizes and
the designation of room usage shall be provided.
   (E)   Districts Where Permitted: It is hereby declared to be the intention
of the city council that bed and breakfast establishments be permitted in all
zoning districts except manufacturing districts in conformity with regulations
herein specified.
   (F)   Act Adopted: Adoption of 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 820/1 et seq.,
as amended cited as the "bed and breakfast act" is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference for the regulation of bed and breakfast
establishments within the zoning districts established.
   (G)   Designation Of Health Department: It is hereby declared to be the
intention of the city council that the Whiteside County health department be
and is hereby designated to provide for inspection of bed and breakfast
establishments.
   (H)   Guest Register: The establishment operator shall maintain a guest
register listing the name, complete address and automobile license plate
number, which register must be maintained for each such guest for a period of
three (3) years after such guest has stayed in the establishment. Such register
shall be made available for inspection by any city, county or state official
charged with monitoring compliance with city, county or state regulations
relating to bed and breakfast establishments.
   (I)   Signs: A sign may be displayed in accordance with section
4-3-2 of this code.
   (J)   Liability Insurance: Prior to obtaining a license, proof of liability
insurance coverage in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) per occurrence and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00)
annual aggregate with respect to the bed and breakfast establishment shall be
provided to the zoning officer. Said proof shall also be provided prior to
license renewal.
   (K)   Impact Of A Bed And Breakfast Establishment: It is the stated
intention of the city that a bed and breakfast establishment shall not
significantly change the character of any particular zoning district.
      1.   The capacity of a particular zoning lot to absorb the impact of said
establishments shall be considered. Consideration shall be given as a guide in
determining the number of guestrooms to be permitted in a bed and breakfast
establishment, to lot size, natural topography and vegetation, setback
requirements, parking requirements, the location of the house on the lot, the
proximity of the house to neighboring houses, the size of the house and the
number of original bedrooms indigenous to a particular house design.
      2.   The number of guestrooms permitted in a particular house shall
relate to the size of the zoning lot, such that the smaller the zoning lot, the
fewer guestrooms shall be permitted.
      3.   The availability of off street parking shall be considered. The
capacity of a zoning lot to accommodate off street parking shall be related to
the size and nature of the lot.
   (L)   Parking Requirements: Off street parking shall be provided in
accordance with chapter 8 of this title, except as follows: A minimum of two
(2) off street spaces parking for each bed and breakfast establishment will be
required.
   (M)   Plumbing Requirements: All buildings used for vacation rental
establishments shall provide adequate approved sanitary facilities including at
least one water closet, one washbasin and one bathtub or shower installed to
meet basic requirements of sanitation and personal hygiene in accordance with
the Illinois plumbing code in accordance with the following:
 
Number Of Guestrooms Number Of Sanitary Facilities Required
                      
1                    1
2                    1
3                    1
4                    2
5                    2
 
(Ord. 1430, 2-18-1992; amd. Ord. 1440, 8-25-1992; Ord. 2060, 9-10-2013; Ord.
2317, 1-24-2023)
CHAPTER 3
ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Establishment Of Districts
10-3-2: Zoning District Map And Boundaries Of Districts
10-3-3: Annexed Territory
10-3-4: Exemptions
10-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this title, the city is
hereby divided into the following districts:
R-1 Single-family detached residence district
R-2 Single-family detached residence district
R-3 General residence district
C-R Commercial-recreation district
B-1 Retail business district
B-2 General business district
B-3 Service business district
B-4 General business district
M   General manufacturing district (1977 Code)
 
10-3-2: ZONING DISTRICT MAP AND BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Zoning District Map: The districts and their boundaries are as shown
upon a zoning district map entitled "city of Savanna, Illinois, zoning district
map, dated January 1, 1977", which map and all amendments thereto and
notations, references, and other information shown thereon are hereby
incorporated by reference and made a part of this title, with the same force
and effect as if the said zoning district map, amendments, notations,
references, and other information were fully herein set forth. The original
zoning district map, properly attested to, is on file with the city
superintendent.
   (B)   Boundaries Of Districts: Where uncertainty exists with respect to the
boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning district map and
made a part of this title, the following rules apply:
      1.   Where district boundaries are indicated as following streets or
alleys or extensions thereof, such boundaries shall be construed to be the
centerlines of said streets, alleys or extensions thereof.
      2.   Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where
the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the
district boundaries, shall be construed to be the lot lines, unless the
boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map. Within unsubdivided property,
the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be in accordance with
dimensions as designated on the map.
      3.   Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership,
the regulations of this title for either portion of the lot may, at the owner's
discretion, apply to the entire area of the lot or twenty five feet (25')
beyond the zoning district boundary line, whichever is lesser distance. (1977
Code)
10-3-3: ANNEXED TERRITORY:
No building or structure shall be erected on and no new use where no buildings
or structures are involved shall be established on any land hereafter annexed
to the city until an amendment to this title is enacted by the city council for
designating the zoning district classification covering such annexed land. The
city council, or building inspector, shall, either before or not later than
ninety (90) days after any land is annexed, file an application for an
amendment to this title and the zoning district recommended. The application
shall thereafter be processed and enacted in accordance with provisions of this
chapter governing amendments thereto. (1977 Code)
10-3-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The regulations of this title do not specify or regulate the type or location
of: any poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, and laterals, pipes,
valves and/or other similar distributing equipment of a public utility as
defined in the applicable statutes of the state of Illinois. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 4
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-4-1: General Regulations
10-4-2: R-1 Single-Family Residence District
10-4-3: R-2 Single-Family Residence District
10-4-4: R-3 General Residence District
10-4-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Conversions: In all general residence districts, the average of the
floor areas of all dwelling units secured by the conversion of a residence
building shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet, and an efficiency
unit may be counted as seventy five hundredths (0.75) dwelling unit in
computing such average. (1977 Code)
   (B)   Lot Area, Lot Width, And Side Yard Regulations Applicable To Lots For
Single-Family Detached Dwellings In Subdivision Containing Qualifying Permanent
Open Spaces:
      1.   Whenever a landowner, developer, or subdivider has provided
qualifying permanent open spaces as a part of a recorded plat of a subdivision
containing lots for single-family detached dwellings for which the final plat
of such subdivision has received approval for recordation by the planning and
zoning board and city council, after the effective date of this title, the lots
within such subdivision may have a minimum lot area ten percent (10%) less than
herein otherwise required for the district or districts in which such
subdivision is located. Moreover, the minimum lot width and the minimum side
yard width as otherwise herein required in the applicable district regulations
may be reduced by not more than five percent (5%), but no lot shall be reduced
to less than fifty feet (50') in width or a side yard reduced to less than four
feet (4') in width. When qualifying permanent open space is accessory to
private or semipublic school or other approved institutional use, such
reductions shall be not more than one-half (1/2) of the reductions referred to
above, in all cases.
      2.   Qualifying permanent open spaces shall be land, designated for open
spaces in the comprehensive plan of the city, which is located within the
subdivision or not more than one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) linear
feet from the nearest exterior boundary line thereof, or when located within
the perimeter of a subdivision, may also include land not so designated in the
comprehensive plan, but which is recommended by the planning and zoning board
and approved by the city council for a specific subdivision. Qualifying
permanent open space allocated to any subdivision shall have an area of not
less than four (4) acres or ten percent (10%) of the area of the subdivision,
exclusive of streets and alleys, whichever is the greater area. Land for
qualifying permanent open space shall be: (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-
2016)
         (a)   Dedicated by the landowner, developer, or subdivider to a public
governmental body for use as a site for a public park, public school, or other
public use open area;
         (b)   Conveyed for a private recreation area; or (1977 Code)
         (c)   Contributed or sold at not more than one-half (1/2) its
appraised value for use as a site for a private or semipublic school or other
approved institutional use. Buildings on all such qualifying permanent open
spaces, shall not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of such open space area.
When title to land is not held by a governmental body, the use of such land for
open space shall be perpetuated by recorded covenants accompanying a recorded
subdivision plat. The city council, after receiving the recommendation of the
planning and zoning board, may approve a qualifying open space that is not
located within the perimeter of the final plat of the subdivision when there is
an irrevocable commitment by the owner or owners of such abutting or adjacent
land to dedicate or convey land for qualifying permanent open space. (1977
Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
      3.   One or more qualifying permanent open spaces may apply to any given
such subdivision, except when all or a part of a unified open space, as
designated on the comprehensive plan, is located within the perimeter of the
subdivision, such land shall be designated as all or part of the qualifying
permanent open space, and where such open space land has an area in excess of
ten percent (10%) of the total area of the subdivision, exclusive of areas
devoted to the streets, or in excess of four (4) acres, whichever is the
greater, such excess land shall be used for open space use either as a
qualifying permanent open space for an adjacent subdivision or reserved for
acquisition, or arrangements made by acquisition, by the city or other
governmental body for public open space use. (1977 Code)
10-4-2: R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
   (A)   Permitted Uses:
Parks and playgrounds, public.
Schools, nonboarding, elementary, junior high, and high: On a lot not less than
five (5) acres in area.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed such
construction.
Accessory uses to the above permitted uses: Including, but not limited to, home
occupations, off street parking and off street loading facilities, and signs as
regulated. (1977 Code)
   (B)   Conditional Uses:
Churches, temples or synagogues: On a lot not less than one hundred eighty feet
(180') in width and not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in area.
Clubs or lodges, private, fraternal or veteran organizations where fermented
malt beverages and intoxicating liquors may not be sold or served.
Colleges, universities and accessory uses thereto: On a lot not less than
twenty (20) acres in area.
Convents, monasteries, and seminaries: On a lot not less than one hundred
eighty feet (180') in width and not less than forty thousand (40,000) square
feet in area.
Growing of farm, garden, and nursery crops in the open: Provided that no
livestock or poultry are kept, and no offensive odors or dusts are created, and
further provided that no retail sales are conducted from a store or stand
erected or maintained on the premises.
Hospitals: On a lot not less than five (5) acres in area.
Libraries: On a lot not less than one hundred feet (100') in width and fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet in area.
Parks and playgrounds: Private, not for profit.
Planned developments: On a lot not less than forty (40) acres in area.
Public utility and governmental service uses on lots having areas and widths as
approved by the city council:
Electric distribution centers.
Fire stations.
Gas regulator stations.
Police stations.
Railroad rights of way.
Telephone exchanges and transmission equipment buildings; microwave relay
towers and outdoor telephone booths.
Transit and public transportation facilities, including passenger shelters, and
turning and parking areas.
Water filtration plants, pumping stations, and reservoirs.
Accessory uses, customarily incidental to the above allowable special uses;
including, but not limited to, off street parking and off street loading.
Schools; boarding, elementary, junior high, or high: On a lot not less than one
hundred eighty feet (180') in width and not less than one acre in area.
Two-family detached dwellings only as herein regulated in the R-3 district,
except that the lot area minimum shall be two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet per dwelling unit. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1198, 8-12-1980; Ord.
1214, 1-27-1981; Ord. 1349, 3-14-1989)
   (C)   Lot Area:
      1.   Single-family detached dwellings: Not less than twelve thousand
(12,000) square feet.
      2.   Nonresidential uses: As herein set forth for each use.
   (D)   Lot Width:
      1.   Single-family detached dwelling: Not less than eighty feet (80').
      2.   Nonresidential uses: As herein set forth for each use.
   (E)   Floor Area Ratio:
      1.   Single-family detached dwellings: Not applicable.
      2.   Nonresidential permitted uses and conditional uses: Not more than
0.3.
   (F)   Building Height:
      1.   Single-family detached dwellings: Not more than two and one- half
(21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35'), whichever is less.
      2.   Nonresidential permitted uses and conditional uses: Not more than
forty five feet (45').
   (G)   Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling:
      1.   One-story dwellings without cellar: Not less than one thousand three
hundred fifty (1,350) square feet.
      2.   One-story dwellings with a cellar: Not less than one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet.
      3.   Dwellings having more than one story: Not less than nine hundred
(900) square feet.
   (H)   Yards: Except as may be otherwise herein required, yards shall be
provided on each lot in accordance with the following:
      1.   Front yard: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
      2.   Side yards:
         (a)   Two (2) side yards neither of which is less than ten feet (10')
in width.
         (b)   Nonresidential permitted uses and special uses: Two (2) side
yards, neither of which is less than fifteen feet (15') in width.
         (c)   On corner lots, the side yard abutting a street shall be not
less than forty feet (40') in width, except on a corner lot, subdivided and
duly recorded on the effective date of this title, having insufficient width to
provide such yard of forty feet (40') in width and still maintain a buildable
width of thirty five feet (35'), the side yard abutting a street may be reduced
in width by the distance necessary to maintain such buildable width of thirty
five feet (35'), provided such side yard shall have a width of not less than
twenty five percent (25%) of the width of the lot.
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
      4.   Yards, general, nonresidential permitted uses and conditional uses:
For buildings more than twenty five feet (25') in height, each front, side and
rear yard as required above shall be increased in width or depth by two feet
(2') for each additional one foot (1') of building height over twenty five feet
(25').
   (I)   Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with
applicable regulations set forth herein in chapter 8 of this title. (1977 Code)
10-4-3: R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Same as those uses permitted in the R-1 district.
   (B)   Conditional Uses: Same as those uses permitted in the R-1 district.
   (C)   Lot Area:
      1.   Single-family detached dwelling: Not less than five thousand (5,000)
square feet.
      2.   Nonresidential uses: As herein set forth for each use.
   (D)   Lot Width:
      1.   Single-family detached dwelling: Not less than fifty feet (50').
      2.   Nonresidential uses: As herein set forth for each use.
   (E)   Floor Area Ratio:
      1.   Single-family detached dwellings: Not applicable.
      2.   Nonresidential permitted uses and conditional uses: Not more than
thirty five feet (35').
   (F)   Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling:
      1.   One-story dwellings without cellar: Not less than nine hundred (900)
square feet.
      2.   One-story dwelling with cellar: Not less than eight hundred twenty
(820) square feet.
      3.   Dwellings having more than one story:
         (a)   Not less than eight hundred (800) square feet for a one and one-
half (11/2) story building.
         (b)   Not less than six hundred fifty (650) square feet for two- story
buildings.
   (G)   Yards: Except as may herein otherwise be required or required by the
city council for a conditional use, yards shall be provided in each lot in
accordance with the following:
      1.   Front yards: Not less than twenty feet (20') in depth.
      2.   Side yards:
         (a)   Two (2) side yards, neither of which is less than six feet (6')
in width.
         (b)   Nonresidential permitted uses and conditional uses: Two (2) side
yards, neither of which is less than fifteen feet (15') in width.
         (c)   On corner lots the side yard abutting a street: Not less than
twenty five feet (25') in width, except on a corner lot, subdivided and duly
recorded on the effective date of this title, having insufficient width to
provide such yard of twenty five feet (25') in width and still maintain a
buildable width of thirty feet (30'), the side yard abutting a street may be
reduced in width by the distance necessary to maintain such buildable width of
thirty feet (30') provided such side yard shall have a width of not less than
twenty five percent (25%) of the width of the lot.
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than twenty feet (25') in depth, except on a
corner lot; not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
      4.   Yards, general: Nonresidential permitted uses and special uses: For
buildings more than forty five feet (45') in height, each front, side and rear
yard as required above shall be increased in width or depth by two feet (2')
for each additional one foot (1') of building over forty five feet (45').
   (H)   Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with
applicable regulations set forth herein in chapter 8 of this title. (1977 Code)
10-4-4: R-3 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
   (A)   Permitted Uses:
Libraries.
Multi-family dwellings, but not more than six (6) dwelling units in a building,
except as approved by the city council after receiving written recommendations
from the building official.
Parks and playgrounds, public.
Schools, nursery, elementary, junior high, and high: Nonboarding.
Single-family detached buildings.
Single-family semidetached dwellings.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed such
construction.
Two-family semidetached dwellings.
Accessory uses to the above permitted uses, including, but not limited to, home
occupations, off street parking and off street loading facilities, and signs as
regulated. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1158, 2-13-1979)
   (B)   Conditional Permitted Uses:
Conditional uses allowed in the R-2 district.
Institutions for the care of the aged and for children: On a lot not less than
one hundred fifty feet (150') in width and forty thousand (40,000) square feet
in area.
Lodging houses: On a lot not less than seventy five feet (75') in width and ten
thousand (10,000) square feet in area.
Nursing homes: On a lot not less than one hundred feet (100') in width and
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area.
Planned developments: On a lot not less than ten (10) acres in area.
Accessory uses to the above allowable special uses, including, but not limited
to, off street parking and off street loading. (1977 Code)
   (C)   Lot Area:
 
Type Of Dwelling           Minimum Lot Area Per
                           Dwelling Unit In Square Feet
Single-family detached     5,000
Single-family semidetached 4,000
Two-family detached        3,500
Multiple-family
 1 bedroom                 2,400
 2 bedroom                 3,600
 
   (D)   Lot Width:
      1.   Single-family detached dwelling: Not less than fifty feet (50').
      2.   Single-family semidetached dwelling: Not less than seventy feet
(70') (35 feet for each dwelling).
      3.   Two-family dwelling: Not less than fifty feet (50').
      4.   Multiple-family dwelling: Not less than eighty feet (80').
   (E)   Floor Area Ratio:
      1.   Not applicable to single-family and two-family detached dwellings.
      2.   Multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential permitted uses and
conditional uses: Not more than 0.5.
      3.   Nonresidential use: As in the R-2 district.
   (F)   Building Height:
      1.   All dwelling types: Not more than thirty feet (30') or two and one-
half (21/2) stories, whichever is lower.
      2.   Nonresidential permitted uses and conditional uses: Not more than
fifty feet (50').
   (G)   Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling:
      1.   Single-family detached dwellings: As in the R-2 district.
      2.   Single-family semidetached dwellings:
         (a)   One-story dwelling: Not less than eight hundred fifty (850)
square feet; and
         (b)   Two-story dwelling: Not less than six hundred (600) square feet.
      3.   Two-family detached dwelling: Not less than eight hundred fifty
(850) square feet.
   (H)   Yards: Except as may herein otherwise be required or required by the
city council for a conditional use, yards shall be provided in each lot in
accordance with the following:
      1.   Front yard: Not less than twenty feet (20') in depth.
      2.   Side yards:
         (a)   Two (2) side yards, neither of which is less than five feet (5')
in width except;
            (1)   As in the R-2 districts for single-family detached dwellings
on lots of record in subdivisions recorded prior to the effective date of this
title and such lots have widths less than otherwise herein required;
            (2)   For multiple-family dwellings: Two (2) side yards neither of
which is less than nine feet (9') in width.
         (b)   Nonresidential permitted uses and conditional uses: Two (2) side
yards, neither of which is less than fifteen feet (15') in width.
         (c)   On corner lots, the side yard abutting a street for all uses
shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width.
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than twenty feet (20') in depth, except where
the rear lot line abuts on an alley, or service drive not less than twenty
eight feet (28') when measured from the centerline of the alley or service
drive.
      4.   Yards, general: Residential permitted and special uses: For
buildings more than thirty feet (30') in height, each front, side and rear yard
as required above shall be increased in width or depth by one foot (1') for
each additional one foot (1') of building height over thirty feet (30').
   (I)   Spacing Between Buildings: When two (2) or more multiple- family
dwelling buildings are on a lot or on contiguous lots, initially under single
ownership or control, the distance between the building walls shall be as
follows:
      1.   When the front wall of a building faces the front wall or rear wall
of the nearest building, the distance between the two (2) building walls shall
be not less than fifty feet (50').
      2.   When the rear wall of a building faces the rear wall of the nearest
building, the distance between the two (2) building walls shall be not less
than forty feet (40').
      3.   When the side wall of a building faces the front or rear wall of the
nearest building, the distance between the two (2) building walls shall be not
less than thirty feet (30'), except when the side wall contains more than four
(4) windows on a floor, two (2) or more of which are not from bathrooms or
storage rooms, such distance between buildings shall be not less than forty
feet (40'), or fifty feet (50') if main entrance doorways are in such side
walls.
      4.   When the side wall, which contains not more than four (4) windows,
on a floor, and two (2) or more of which are from bathrooms or storage rooms,
faces such side wall of the nearest building, the distance between the two (2)
building walls shall be not less than ten feet (10'). When the facing side
walls of either of such buildings contain more than two (2) window openings on
each floor from rooms that are not bathrooms or storage rooms, the distance
between walls shall be not less than forty feet (40'), except when the side
wall contains a main entrance doorway such distance shall be not less than
fifty feet (50').
      5.   A wall of a detached building forming the end of a court shall be
not less than ten feet (10') from the nearest wall of a building forming the
sides of the court and a building forming the end of the court may be attached
to one or both of the buildings forming the sides of the court, provided the
distance between facing walls of the buildings forming the sides of the court
is not less than the applicable requirements as set forth above.
      6.   When any wall or part thereof which contains no windows or doorways
faces such a wall or part thereof, of the nearest building, the distance
between such two (2) building walls may be not less than ten feet (10').
   (J)   Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with
applicable regulations set forth herein in chapter 8 of this title. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 5
C-R COMMERCIAL-RECREATION DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Intent
10-5-2: C-R Commercial-Recreation District
10-5-1: INTENT:
The commercial-recreation district regulations are intended to provide for the
orderly, compatible development and operation of buildings and structures and
the uses thereof or the uses of land where no buildings are involved for such
specialized uses that will provide for maximum utilization of the recreation
potential of the Mississippi River and the Palisades State Park. (1977 Code)
10-5-2: C-R COMMERCIAL-RECREATION DISTRICT:
   (A)   General Requirements:
      1.   No land or buildings shall be devoted to any use other than a use
permitted hereinafter in the commercial-recreation district in which such land
or buildings shall be located.
      2.   Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this title,
except uses lawfully established on the effective date of this title and
rendered nonconforming by the provisions herein, shall be subject to the
regulations of chapter 9 of this title. (1977 Code)
      3.   Conditional uses, as hereinafter listed in the commercial-
recreation district, may be allowed subject to the approval of the planning and
zoning board. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (B)   Permitted Uses:
      1.   Boat sales and service (not including sale or storage of fuel and
oil).
      2.   Bowling alleys.
      3.   Camera and photographic supply stores.
      4.   Clubs or lodges, private, fraternal or veterans' organizations where
fermented malt beverages and intoxicating liquors may be sold.
      5.   Gift and souvenir stores.
      6.   Hotels.
      7.   Ice cream and candy stores.
      8.   Motels.
      9.   Restaurants (not including drive-in) where dancing or live
entertainment is not provided, but where fermented malt beverages and
intoxicating liquors may be sold.
      10.   Sporting goods stores.
      11.   Theaters (not including drive-in).
      12.   Accessory uses customarily incidental to the operations of the
above principal uses, including, but not limited to, off street parking and off
street loading spaces, and signs as regulated and when accessory to clubs,
lodges, hotels or motels, the following uses when located within the principal
building: uses listed above as permitted uses under subsections (B)2, (B)3,
(B)5, (B)7, (B)9, (B)10, and (B)11 of this section and shops or counters for
the retail sales of books, newspapers, magazines, tobacco and similar items,
and recreation uses as allowed herein as special uses provided such uses shall
only be established only after the issuance of a special use permit. (1977
Code)
   (C)   Conditional Uses:
      1.   Archery ranges.
      2.   Baseball driving ranges.
      3.   Bathhouses and cabanas.
      4.   Boat docks and harbors for pleasure craft.
      5.   Charter, excursion, and sightseeing boat establishments.
      6.   Go-kart tracks.
      7.   Golf course, miniature or par 3.
      8.   Golf driving ranges.
      9.   Ice skating rinks.
      10.   Mobile home parks. On a lot not less than five (5) acres in area
and each mobile home site not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet in
area and no less than forty feet (40') in width, and accessory uses, buildings,
or structures such as a community center, containing park and playground and
building with recreational, laundry and office facilities. There shall be
provided at the boundaries of the mobile home park front, side and rear yards
having a depth or width of not less than forty feet (40'), and containing no
obstruction except drives, trees and shrubs. Sanitary sewerage, stormwater, and
water systems, service drives, off street parking with not less than one and
one-half (11/2) spaces for each mobile home, grading and landscaping,
buildings, and other improvements, shall be construed in accordance with
development plans and specifications recommended by the planning and zoning
board and approved by the city council.
      11.   Parks and playgrounds, public or private.
      12.   Planned developments on tracts of land ten (10) acres or more in
area under unified ownership and development, and which may contain uses that
are not permitted or conditional uses in this district provided such use
exception does not occupy more than fifteen percent (15%) of the total area of
the lot or fifteen percent (15%) of the floor area of buildings.
      13.   Resorts, publicly or privately owned and operated and there shall
be contained in the resort, dwelling units and lodging rooms as set forth in
subsection (C)13(a) of this section and two (2) or more of the uses set forth
in subsections (C)13(b) and (C)13(c) of this section; and may contain accessory
uses set forth in subsection (C)13(d) of this section.
         (a)   Dwelling units and lodging rooms for guests and employees of the
resort, and when located in hotels, lodges or clubhouses or detached buildings
containing only dwelling units or lodging rooms.
         (b)   Indoor recreation facilities for use only by guests of the
resort and when located in the principal building or a detached recreation
building or clubhouse as follows: swimming pools, ice skating rinks, tennis
courts; gymnasiums and accessory facilities; theaters, bowling alleys and other
recreation facilities, as approved by the city council after receiving the
recommendation of the planning and zoning board.
         (c)   Outdoor recreation facilities, for use only by guests of the
resort as follows: boating, swimming, waterskiing, fishing, and other water
sports; ice skating, skiing, ice boating, curling, hockey and other winter
sports; basketball, softball, volleyball, and similar sports; tennis courts;
standard, par 3, pitch and putt and miniature golf courses; theaters; and other
outdoor recreation facilities as approved by the city council after receiving
the recommendation of the planning and zoning board.
         (d)   Accessory buildings and uses thereof customarily incidental to
the uses set forth in subsections (C)13(a), (C)13(b), and (C)13(c) of this
section, including off street parking, off street loading, and signs, when
location, area, design, and illumination of signs are approved by the city
council after receiving the recommendation of the planning and zoning board,
and accessory uses for hotels, lodges, or clubhouses may also include, when
located in the principal building, restaurants and cocktail lounges, curio,
gift, sporting goods, flower and wearing apparel shops; tobacco, newspaper,
magazine, and bookstores or counters and food and drug stores for serving only
guests of the resorts.
      14.   Restaurants (not including drive-in) where live entertainment and
dancing are permitted and where fermented malt beverages and intoxicating
liquor may be sold.
      15.   Restaurants, drive-in.
      16.   Shuffleboard courts.
      17.   Swimming pools.
      18.   Tennis courts.
      19.   Tourist parks, operated by the city. On a tract of land not less
than five (5) acres in area, and where facilities for parking mobile homes and
travel trailers are for transient guests not more than fourteen (14)
consecutive days in any thirty (30) day period.
      20.   Trampoline centers.
      21.   Other similar recreational uses. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-
2016)
   (D)   Lot Area:
      1.   Permitted Uses: Not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet,
except not less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet for a lot
containing a detached building in which there are two (2) or more principal
permitted uses. (1977 Code)
      2.   Special Uses: Not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet or a
greater lot area as herein required or as may be required by the city council
after receiving the recommendation of the planning and zoning board for a
specific conditional use.
   (E)   Lot Width: Not less than fifty feet (50'), except a greater lot width
as herein required or as may be required by the city council after receiving
the recommendation of the planning and zoning board for a specific conditional
use. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (F)   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.8, except for outdoor recreation
uses, buildings shall not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the total
area of the lot.
   (G)   Building Height: Not to exceed three (3) stories or forty feet (40')
in height, whichever is lower. (1977 Code)
   (H)   Yards: Except as herein may be required for setbacks along
thoroughfares, or as may be required by the city council after receiving the
recommendation of the planning and zoning board for a specific special use,
yards shall be provided as follows: (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
      1.   Front yard and side yard adjoining a street: Not less than twenty
feet (20') in depth.
      2.   Side yards, interior: Two (2) side yards, each not less than five
feet (5') in width, except when a side yard is adjoining or is across the alley
from a residence district, it shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in
width.
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than twenty feet (20').
   (I)   Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with
applicable regulations herein set forth in chapter 8 of this title. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 6
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Intent
10-6-2: B-1 Retail Business District
10-6-3: B-2 General Business District
10-6-4: B-3 Service Business District
10-6-5: B-4 General Business District
10-6-1: INTENT:
Business district regulations govern the development and use of the full range
of business and commercial establishments needed to provide service to the
citizens of Savanna and its trading area. Regulations in the various business
districts provide for the groupings of compatible business and commercial
establishments in accordance with their function and extent of service. (1977
Code)
10-6-2: B-1 RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
   (A)   General Requirements:
      1.   Dwellings and lodging rooms, are permitted only as herein regulated
in accordance with R-2 and R-3 districts.
      2.   All business establishments shall be retail trade or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers and all goods produced on the
premises shall be sold on the premises where produced.
      3.   All business, servicing, or processing shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings, except for off street parking and loading, and
accessory drive-in facilities customarily incidental to the principal use, when
permitted as a conditional use, unless the person conducting the business,
servicing or processing causes the city to be named as an additional insured
under their public liability insurance policy and furnishes continuing proof of
such insurance and executes a hold harmless agreement in a form approved and
furnished by the city and in favor of the city, and provided that a minimum six
foot (6') passageway for pedestrians shall be left open on any public sidewalk
involved.
      4.   All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning,
servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods, or products, shall conform
at least with the performance standards established for the M manufacturing
district, provided that performance standards shall, in every case, be applied
at the boundaries of the lot on which such activity takes place.
      5.   Parking of trucks in the open within one hundred fifty feet (150')
of a residence district boundary line, shall be limited to vehicles of not over
one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity. Trucks in excess of one and one-half
(11/2) tons' capacity used in conjunction with operation of any business
permitted in this district shall not be parked in the open within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of a residence district, except during normal business hours.
   (B)   Permitted Uses:
      1.   Any of the following uses shall be permitted on a lot in a B-
1 district:
Antique shops.
Art and school supply stores.
Art galleries.
Bakeries; retail sales and not more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area
may be devoted to processing of bakery goods.
Banks and financial institutions.
Barbershops.
Beauty parlors.
Bicycle stores; sales, rental and repair.
Boat sales and service including accessory uses such as boat motors, fishing
gear, bait, all-terrain vehicles and water cycles. All said items for sale or
rent. All service and repair work shall be conducted within enclosed buildings
on a lot not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area when accessory
open sales facilities are provided.
Book and stationery stores.
Camera and photographic supply stores.
Candy and ice cream stores.
Cannabis business establishments.
Carpet and rug stores.
China and glassware stores.
Clothing and costumer rental stores.
Clothing stores.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Currency exchanges.
Custom dressmaking.
Delicatessens.
Department stores.
Drugstores.
Dry cleaning and laundry receiving establishments; processing to be done
elsewhere.
Dry goods stores.
Electrical, gas and other household appliance retail sales stores; including
repair and servicing of phonographs, radios and televisions when incidental to
the principal use.
Employment agencies.
Florist shops.
Fraternal, philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions, above first floor.
Furniture stores; including upholstering when conducted as part of the retail
operation and secondary to the principal use.
Furrier shops; including accessory uses such as storage and conditioning of
furs.
Gift shops.
Grocery stores.
Haberdasheries.
Hardware stores.
Hobby shops; for retailing of items to be assembled or used away from the
premises.
Hotels; including dining and meeting rooms, provided that hotel lobby, other
than entrances, does not occupy space fronting on a street.
Interior decorating shops; including accessory uses such as upholstering, and
making of draperies, slipcovers, and other similar articles.
Jewelry stores; including watch repair.
Laboratories; medical and dental.
Launderette, coin operated.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Libraries, public.
Liquor stores; retail sales, package goods only.
Loan offices.
Locksmith shops.
Mail order service storage.
Meat markets, retail sales only.
Medical and dental clinics.
Millinery shops.
Motels.
Museums.
Music stores; sheet music and phonograph record sales.
Musical instrument retail stores and accessory repairs servicing.
Newspaper offices, but not including printing.
Office supply stores.
Offices; business, professional and public.
Paint and wallpaper stores.
Parking lots or storage garages, for passenger automobile and motor trucks
under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
Pawnshops.
Photography studios, including developing and printing of photographs when
conducted on the premises as accessory to conduct of principal use.
Picture framing shops, when conducted on the premises for retail trade.
Post offices.
Radio and television broadcasting studios.
Recording studios, when located above the first floor.
Restaurants, including live entertainment, dancing and cocktail lounges.
Restricted production and repair limited to the following: art needlework,
clothing, custom manufacturing and alterations for retail only of jewelry from
precious metals and watches; when located above the first floor or on the first
floor, not less than fifty feet (50') from the front building line.
Sewing machine sales and service stores, household machines only.
Shoe and hat repair stores.
Shoe stores.
Sporting goods stores.
Tailor shops.
Taverns and cocktail lounges.
Telegraph offices.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the
duration of such construction.
Tobacco shops, retail sales.
Toy shops.
Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
Typewriter and adding machine sales establishments, including accessory uses
such as repair and service.
Variety stores.
Wearing apparel shops.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, including,
but not limited to, off street parking, off street loading and business signs
as herein regulated.
   (C)   Conditional Uses (As Approved By The City Council After Receiving
Recommendations From The Planning And Zoning Board): Any of the following uses
shall be permitted on a lot in a B-1 district located within the central
business district or on a lot in a B-1 district abutting a lot in the central
business district designated in a B-1 or B-2 business district, or within a
planned development containing three (3) acres or more of area in any B-
1 district:
Auction rooms.
Automobile accessory stores when there are no driveways across the street
sidewalk into the principal or accessory building.
Automobile service stations on a lot not less than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet in area.
Catering establishments.
Churches, temples and synagogues on a lot not less than twelve thousand
(12,000) square feet in area.
Frozen food shops, including also locker rental.
Golf courses, miniature or par 3. The site lighting shall not be illuminated
between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
and shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not to
create a nuisance.
Job printing shops.
Meat markets, including processing but not slaughtering, and sale of meat and
meat products and poultry to restaurants, hotels, clubs and other similar
establishments when conducted as part of the retail business on the premises
and such processing is conducted within the principal building not less than
twenty feet (20') from the front building line.
Meeting halls.
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, including the assembly or manufacture
of such articles.
Planned developments, on a tract of land not less than three (3) acres in area.
Plumbing, heating, lighting, and air conditioning stores for retail sales of
fixtures, equipment and supplies and accessory shops.
Public utility and governmental service uses. The location, width, and area of
the lot for each of the following uses shall be as approved by the planning and
zoning board:
Bus stations.
Electric substations.
Gas regulator stations.
Parks, recreation buildings and community centers, public.
Post offices.
Railroad rights of way.
Telephone transmission equipment buildings and microwave relay towers.
Schools, commercial or trade, including those teaching music, dancing,
business, commercial, or technical subjects when operations do not involve
danger of fire and explosion, and objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust,
odor, glare, heat, or other similar influences.
Theaters, not including outdoor theaters; provided that only the entrance
doorways and outer lobby have frontage on a street.
Warehouse, storage facilities.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above conditional uses including,
but not limited to, off street parking, off street loading and signs as
regulated, and dwelling units or lodging rooms customarily accessory to
religious institutional uses and clubs and lodges.
   (D)   Floor Area Ratio:
      1.   For buildings on lots within or abutting the central business
district: Not more than 2.0.
      2.   For buildings in a planned development: Not more than 0.6.
      3.   For buildings on lots at other locations: Not more than 0.75 except
no building or part thereof for occupancy by one principal use shall have more
than five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area.
   (E)   Yards: Except as may be otherwise required for a planned development,
yards shall be provided as follows:
      1.   Front Yard: No front yard shall be required, except when a B-
1 district occupies a part of the frontage along one side of a street within a
block and the remainder of the block is in a residence district or when a B-
1 district is across the street from a residence district a yard having a depth
as herein required for the residence district shall be required.
      2.   Side Yards:
         (a)   No interior side yards shall be required, except if a side yard
is provided on one or both sides of a building, each side yard shall be not
less than five feet (5') in width.
         (b)   A side yard not less than five feet (5') in width shall be
provided along a side lot line that adjoins or is across an alley from a lot in
any residence district.
         (c)   On a corner lot, regulations set forth above for a front yard
shall apply for a side yard adjoining a street.
      3.   Rear Yard: No rear yard setback shall be required provided that the
construction of a building or structure at the lot line does not constitute a
danger to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
   (F)   Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with
applicable regulations herein set forth in chapter 8 of this title. (1977 Code;
amd. Ord. 1118, 5-10-1977; amd. Ord. 1132, 10-11-1977; amd. Ord. 1141, 2-14-
1978; amd. Ord. 1417, 8-27-1991; amd. Ord. 1432, 4-14-1992; amd. Ord. 1795, 6-
14-2005; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016; amd. Ord. 2251, 9-24-2019)
10-6-3: B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
   (A)   General Requirements:
      1.   Dwelling units and lodging rooms are permitted only as herein
regulated as an accessory use and as lodging rooms in a hotel.
      2.   All business establishments shall be retail trade or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers and all goods produced on the
premises shall be sold on the premises where produced.
      3.   Multi-family dwelling units are permitted as approved by the city
council after receiving recommendations from the planning and zoning board and
regulated in the R-3 zoning requirements.
      4.   Except as otherwise herein allowed for specific uses and for off
street parking or loading, all business, servicing, processing, or storage
shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
      5.   Drive-in type of operations, commercial recreation establishments
customarily operated in the open, and open sales lots conducted as all or a
part of the operation of a permitted use or conditional use in this district
shall be allowed only as a conditional use.
      6.   All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning,
servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods, or products shall conform at
least with the performance standards herein set forth for the M manufacturing
district, provided that performance standards shall, in every case, be applied
at the boundaries of the lot on which such activity takes place.
      7.   Trucks used in conjunction with any use permitted in this district
may be parked in the open only during normal business hours. This does not
apply to trucks engaged in pick up and delivery of goods and merchandise after
normal business hours.
   (B)   Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted at any location in
this district:
As permitted in the B-1 district.
Amusement establishments including bowling alleys, pool halls, dance halls,
gymnasiums, swimming pools and ice skating rinks.
Auction rooms.
Automobile accessory stores.
Automobile sales establishments on a lot not less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet.
Blueprinting and photostating establishments.
Building material sales and production, with outdoor storage, provided the
performance standards for the M manufacturing district shall be applied; and
provided the area for outside storage is completely surrounded by a uniformly
constructed solid fence or wall not over eight feet (8') in height; and
provided no storage shall project higher than the height of the fence; and
situated on a lot not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area.
Building material sales with outdoor storage, when the area for outside storage
is completely surrounded by a uniformly painted solid fence or wall not over
eight feet (8') in height and no storage shall project higher than the height
of the fence or wall.
Cabins situated on a single parcel of land not less than five (5) acres in area
or as approved by the city council only after receiving recommendations from
the planning and zoning board of the city of Savanna.
Campgrounds provided the premises are on a contiguous tract of land of not less
than one acre. All campgrounds must be operated in accordance with applicable
Illinois, county and municipal statutes and ordinances.
Applications for campgrounds shall be made to the mayor, in writing, signed by
the applicant. The application shall identify the name, age and address of the
applicant in the case of an individual; in the name of a copartnership, the
names, ages and addresses of each copartner; in the name of a corporation or
limited liability company, the names and addresses of the officers and
directors.
Cannabis business establishments on a lot with an area of not less than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet, and no closer than one thousand feet (1,000')
from a school property boundary.
Car wash.
Catering establishments.
Clubs and lodges, nonprofit.
Contractor's offices and shops with no outside storage.
Dry cleaning establishments.
Electrical and gas fixtures and equipment, sales and shops.
Exhibition halls and meeting halls.
Exterminating shops.
Fraternal, philanthropic, and eleemosynary institutions.
Frozen food stores and lockers.
Garages, public.
Greenhouses, retail.
Importers and distributors.
Laboratories, medical, dental or optical.
Launderette, coin operated.
Laundries.
Mail order houses, order and service centers.
Motor vehicle sales, provided that repair and servicing of motor vehicles are
within enclosed buildings located on a lot not less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet.
Newspaper distribution agencies, for home delivery and retail trade.
Newspaper offices including printing.
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, including the assembly or manufacture
of such articles.
Parking lots and storage garages for motor vehicles.
Pawnshops.
Pet service, domestic.
Pet shops.
Plumbing, heating and ventilating establishments; retail sales and shops.
Printing and publishing establishments.
Radio, television and household appliance service and repair shops.
Recording studios.
Religious institutions; churches, chapels, temples and synagogues, convents,
monasteries and theological schools.
Restricted production and repair, limited to the following: needlework,
clothing, such as custom manufacturing and alterations; jewelry from precious
metals; watches; dentures; optical lenses; and upholstering.
Schools; music, dance, business or trade, when operations conform with
applicable requirements herein in the B-1 district conditional uses.
Secondhand stores and rummage shops.
Self-service stores; coin operated vending machines.
Taxidermists.
Telegraph service stations.
Theaters, indoor.
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses including,
but not limited to, off street parking, off street loading and signs as
regulated and dwelling units or lodging rooms customarily accessory to
religious institutional uses and clubs and lodges.
   (C)   Conditional Uses (As Approved By The City Council After Receiving
Recommendations From The Planning And Zoning Board):
Automobile service stations on a lot not less than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet in area.
Boat sales establishments on a lot not less than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet in area when accessory open sales facilities are provided.
Drive-in establishments including banks, restaurants and other uses customarily
providing drive-in facilities, except theaters; location of vehicular ingress
and egress and number and location of spaces for parking of automobiles of
customers being served or waiting to be served shall be as approved by the
planning and zoning board.
Health centers, public; on a lot having a width and area as approved by the
planning and zoning board.
Open sales lots; as a principal use or when a customary accessory use to a
permitted use in this district.
Parks and recreational buildings, private or semipublic; not operated for
profit on a lot not less than one acre and over and when development plans and
types and operation of uses therein are approved by the planning and zoning
board.
Planned developments, business; on a lot not less than five (5) acres in area.
Public utility transportation and governmental service uses as follows.
Location, width and area of lot for each use, as approved by the planning and
zoning board.
Bus stations.
Fire stations.
Gas regulator stations.
Parks, recreation buildings and community centers; public.
Passenger railroad stations.
Police stations.
Railroad rights of way.
Taxi stands.
Telephone exchanges and telephone transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above conditional uses including,
but not limited to, off street parking, off street loading and signs as
regulated.
   (D)   Floor Area Ratio: As in the B-1 district.
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Side Yards:
         (a)   No interior side yards shall be required, except if a side yard
is provided on one or both sides of a building; each side yard shall be not
less than five feet (5') in width.
         (b)   A side yard not less than five feet (5') in width shall be
provided along a side lot line that adjoins or is across an alley from a lot in
any residence district.
         (c)   On a corner lot, regulations set forth above for a front yard
shall apply for a side yard adjoining a street.
      2.   Rear Yards: Not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth or twenty
percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever is less.
   (F)   Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with
applicable regulations herein set forth in chapter 8 of this title. (1977 Code;
amd. Ord. 1249, 3-8-1983; amd. Ord. 1338, 6-28-1988; amd. Ord. 1800, 6-28-2005;
amd. Ord. 1833, 4-11-2006; amd. Ord. 2116, 1-27-2015; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-
2016; amd. Ord. 2251, 9-24-2019)
10-6-4: B-3 SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT:
This service business district classification is established to accommodate a
wide range of specialized commercial and business uses including highway
oriented service and commercial recreation types of establishments to serve a
trade area embracing a large segment of an urban region.
   (A)   General Requirements: Dwellings and lodging rooms are permitted, only
as herein regulated in accordance with the R-2 single-family residence
district.
      1.   All establishments shall be for service directly to consumers.
      2.   All business, servicing, or processing shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings except for off street parking or loading.
      3.   Parking of trucks in the open within one hundred fifty feet (150')
of a residence district boundary line shall be limited to vehicles of not over
one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity. Trucks in excess of one and one-half
(11/2) tons' capacity used in conjunction with operation of any business
permitted in this district shall not be parked in the open within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of a residence district boundary line, except during normal
business hours or during periods beyond when parked for pick up and delivery
operations. (1977 Code)
   (B)   Permitted Uses: The planning and zoning board shall approve, prior to
issuance of a permit, the location with respect to distance from a residence
district boundary line and development and operation plans for the following
principal uses and accessory uses except off street parking and signs that are
not conducted in an enclosed building:
Blueprinting and photocopying establishments.
Contractors' offices and shops with no outside storage.
Laboratories; medical, dental or optical.
Medical or dental clinics or offices.
Offices, general or professional, private.
Printing, publishing, lithography establishments.
Research laboratories.
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors.
   (C)   Conditional Uses (As Approved By The City Council After Receiving The
Recommendations From The Planning And Zoning Board):
Banks, drive-in, when distance from nearest street intersection and location of
vehicular ingress and egress are approved by the planning and zoning board.
Churches, temples and synagogues; as herein regulated as a conditional use in
the B-1 district.
Convents, monasteries and theological schools as herein regulated as a
conditional use in the B-1 district.
Planned development on a tract of land not less than five (5) acres in area.
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (D)   Floor Area Ratio: Not more than 0.75. (1977 Code)
   (E)   Yards:
      1.   Side Yards:
         (a)   No interior side yards shall be required, except if a side yard
is provided on one or both sides of a building; each side yard shall be not
less than five feet (5') in width.
         (b)   A side yard not less than five feet (5') in width shall be
provided along a side lot line that adjoins or is across an alley from a lot in
any residence district.
         (c)   On a corner lot, regulations set forth above for a front yard
shall apply for a side yard adjoining a street.
      2.   Rear Yards: Not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth or twenty
percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever is less. (Ord. 1834, 4-11-
2006)
   (F)   Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with
applicable regulations herein set forth in chapter 8 of this title. (1977 Code)
10-6-5: B-4 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
   (A)   General Requirements:
      1.   Dwellings and lodging rooms are permitted only as herein regulated
in accordance with R-2 and R-3 districts.
      2.   Except as otherwise herein allowed for specific uses and for off
street parking or loading, all business, servicing, processing, or storage
shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
      3.   All business establishments shall be retail trade or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers and all goods produced on the
premises shall be sold on the premises where produced.
      4.   Multi-family dwelling units are permitted only as herein regulated
in accordance with R-3 districts.
      5.   Parking of trucks in the open within one hundred fifty feet (150')
of a residence district boundary line, shall be limited to vehicles of not over
one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity. Trucks in excess of one and one-half
(11/2) tons' capacity used in conjunction with operation of any business
permitted in this district shall not be parked in the open within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of a residence district, except during normal business hours.
   (B)   Permitted Uses: Any of the following uses shall be permitted on a lot
in a B-4 district:
Antique shops.
Appliances retail sales stores, including repair and servicing.
Art and school supply stores.
Art galleries.
Automobile accessory stores.
Bakeries.
Banks and financial institutions.
Barbershops.
Beauty parlors.
Bicycle stores, sales, rental and repair.
Blueprinting and photostating establishments.
Book and stationery stores.
Business machine sales and service.
Camera and photographic supply stores.
Candy and ice cream stores.
Carpet and rug stores.
Catering establishments.
China and glassware stores.
Clothing and costumer rental stores.
Clothing stores.
Clubs and lodges, nonprofit.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Contractor's offices and shops with no outside storage.
Currency exchanges.
Custom dressmaking.
Delicatessens.
Department stores.
Drugstores.
Dry cleaning and laundry receiving establishments; processing to be done
elsewhere.
Dry cleaning establishments.
Dry goods stores.
Electrical and gas fixtures and equipment, sales and shops.
Employment agencies.
Exterminating shops.
Florist shops.
Fraternal, philanthropic, and eleemosynary institutions.
Frozen food stores and lockers.
Furniture stores.
Furrier shops, including accessory uses such as storage and conditioning of
furs.
Garages, public.
Gift shops.
Greenhouses, retail.
Grocery stores.
Hardware stores.
Hobby shops.
Hotels.
Importers and distributors.
Interior decorating shops.
Jewelry stores.
Laboratories.
Launderettes, coin operated.
Laundries.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Libraries, public.
Loan offices.
Locksmith shops.
Mail order houses, order and service centers.
Mail order service storage.
Meat markets.
Medical clinics.
Meeting halls.
Motels.
Motor vehicle sales, provided that repair and servicing of motor vehicles are
within enclosed buildings located on a lot not less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet.
Music stores.
Musical instrument retail stores and accessory repairs servicing.
Newspaper distribution agencies, for home delivery and retail trade.
Newspaper offices.
Office supply stores.
Offices; business, professional and public.
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores.
Paint and wallpaper stores.
Parking lots or storage garages, for passenger automobiles and motor trucks
under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
Pawnshops.
Pet grooming services, domestic, overnight boarding prohibited.
Photography studios.
Post offices.
Printing and publishing establishments.
Radio and television broadcasting studios.
Radio, television and household appliance, service and repair shops.
Recording studios.
Religious institutions.
Restaurants.
Secondhand stores and rummage shops.
Self-service stores; coin operated vending machines.
Sewing machines sales and service stores.
Shoe and hat repair stores.
Shoe stores.
Sporting goods stores.
Tailor shops.
Taxidermists.
Telegraph offices.
Telegraph service stations.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the
duration of such construction.
Theaters, indoor.
Tobacco shops, retail sales.
Toy stores.
Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors.
Upholstery shops.
Variety stores.
Video, audio sales and rentals.
Wearing apparel shops. (Ord. 1365, 11-28-1989)
   (C)   Conditional Uses (As Approved By The City Council After Receiving
Recommendations From The Planning And Zoning Board):
Auction rooms.
Automobile service stations with grocery sales, bakery, pizza shop, including
retail sale of beer and wine only for the consumption off the premises, on a
lot not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area.
Building material sales with outdoor storage, when the area for outside storage
is completely surrounded by a uniformly painted solid fence or wall not over
eight feet (8') in height, and no storage shall project higher than the height
of the fence or wall.
Health centers, public; on a lot having a width and area as approved by the
planning and zoning board.
Plumbing, heating, lighting, and air conditioning stores for retail sales of
fixtures, equipment and supplies, and accessory shops.
Public utility and governmental service uses. The location, width, and area of
the lot for each of the following uses shall be as approved by the planning and
zoning board:
Bus stations.
Fire stations.
Gas regulator stations.
Parks, recreation buildings and community centers; public.
Passenger railroad stations.
Police stations.
Railroad rights of way.
Recreational buildings operated not for profit.
Taxi stands.
Telephone exchanges and telephone transmission equipment buildings and
microwave relay towers.
Schools, commercial or trade, including those teaching music, dancing,
business, commercial, or technical subjects when operations do not involve
danger of fire and explosion, and objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust,
odor, glare, heat, or other similar influences.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above conditional uses including,
but not limited to, off street parking, off street loading and signs as
regulated. (Ord. 1483, 3-22-1994; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (D)   Floor Area Ratio: Floor area ratio is not more than 2.0.
   (E)   Yards: Except as may be otherwise required for a planned development,
yards shall be provided as follows:
      1.   Front Yard: No front yard shall be required, except when a B-
4 district occupies a part of the frontage along one side of a street within a
block and the remainder of the block is in a residence district, or when a B-
4 district is across the street from a residence district, a yard having a
depth as herein required for the residence district shall be required.
      2.   Side Yards:
         (a)   No interior side yards shall be required, except if a side yard
is provided on one or both sides of a building, each side yard shall be not
less than five feet (5') in width.
         (b)   A side yard not less than five feet (5') in width shall be
provided along a side lot line that adjoins or is across an alley from a lot in
any residence district.
      3.   Rear Yard: Rear yards not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth
or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever is less.
      4.   Corner Lot: Regulations set forth above for a front yard shall apply
for a side yard adjoining a street for a corner lot.
   (F)   Lot Size: Minimum ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   (G)   Lot Width: Minimum lot frontage, seventy five feet (75').
   (H)   Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with
applicable regulations herein set forth in chapter 8 of this title.
   (I)   Retail Business Operational Hours: Except as permitted under the
conditional uses at subsection (C) of this section, hours of retail business
operations shall be restricted to the period from five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. (Ord. 1365, 11-28-1989)
CHAPTER 7
M MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Intent
10-7-2: General Requirements
10-7-3: M General Manufacturing District
10-7-1: INTENT:
The manufacturing districts' regulations are intended to govern the locations,
types, scope and method of operations for expansion of existing and development
of new industrial and allied establishments within the framework of the
industrial growth goals of the city. The regulations are designed to preserve
those lands designated on the Savanna comprehensive city plan for industrial
and allied developments by preventing intrusions therein of buildings,
structures and uses that do not complement or are not compatible with the use
of such land for desired industrial developments. In addition, uses hereafter
established in the manufacturing districts are regulated in accordance with
their compliance with performance standards governing methods of operations for
the manufacturing district in which they are located. (1977 Code)
10-7-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: In manufacturing districts indicated in the zoning
district map, no land shall be used and no building or structure shall be
erected or altered and used or designed and intended to be used in whole or in
part for any other use than one or more of the uses designated hereinafter as a
permitted or conditional permitted use and under conditions specified in the
manufacturing district in which the land, building, or structure is or shall be
located, except the following:
      1.   A use lawfully established on the effective date of this title,
provided that uses, buildings, or structures rendered nonconforming by this
title shall be subject to regulation herein set forth in chapter 9 of this
title.
      2.   Conditional uses, as hereinafter listed and under conditions
stipulated in each district.
   (B)   Prohibited Buildings, Structures, And Uses: Buildings or structures
shall not hereafter be erected or structurally altered, or new uses of land
hereafter established or existing uses of land hereafter enlarged for any of
the following uses: abattoirs; arsenals; crematories; creosote treatment or
manufacture; fat rendering; fertilizer manufacture; fireworks or explosive
manufacture or storage; dumping, reduction, or other processing of garbage,
dead animals, offal or refuse, except when conducted in a publicly operated
incinerator plant; ore reduction; petroleum processing or refining; pyroxylin
manufacture; natural or synthetic rubber, caoutchouc, or gutta percha
manufacture or treatment; salt works; sauerkraut manufacture; soap manufacture;
smelters; stockyard or slaughter of animals or fowl; tallow, grease, or lard
manufacture or treatment; tanning, curing, or storage of rawhides or skins; tar
distillation or manufacture; junkyards; or automobile wrecking yards.
   (C)   Activities Licensed By Council: No activities involving the storage,
utilization, or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by
detonation shall be permitted, except such as are specifically licensed by the
council, or are used as customarily incidental to the operation of a principal
use in such quantities, and in a manner conforming with applicable performance
standards hereafter set forth in this chapter. Such materials shall include,
but shall not be confined to: all primary explosives such as lead azide, lead
styphnate, fulminates and tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX,
PETN, and picric acid; propellants and components thereof such as
nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine, and its derivatives;
pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and
potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerin;
unstable organic compounds such as acetylides, tetrazoles, perchloric acid,
perchlorates, chlorates, hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than
thirty five percent (35%); and nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and
products and reactor elements such as uranium 235 and plutonium 239.
   (D)   Setbacks Along District Boundary Lines: No buildings, structures or
parcel of land, which are used for any establishment, the principal use of
which is manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing,
cleaning, servicing, or testing of materials, products or goods shall be
located in an M district within fifty feet (50') of a residence district
boundary line, except when directly across a street from a residence district,
there shall be provided for such uses, a yard along such street of not less
than forty feet (40') in depth, except off street parking may be located in
such open spaces when set back not less than forty feet (40') from a lot line
adjoining a street, and when located within forty feet (40') of an interior lot
line of a lot in a residence district such parking area shall be effectively
screened from the residential lot.
   (E)   Operations Within Enclosed Buildings: Operations of any establishments
engaged in manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing,
storing, cleaning, servicing and testing of materials, products and goods or
retail or wholesale sales shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings, except:
      1.   Off street parking and off street loading when conforming with
regulations herein set forth in chapter 8 of this title.
      2.   Establishments of the drive-in type offering goods and services to
customers waiting in parked automobiles.
      3.   Servicing, repairing, testing, cleaning and other operations of
railroads and other transportation facilities customarily out of doors.
      4.   Storage and testing areas provided that such areas located within
five hundred feet (500') of a residence district shall be completely enclosed
behind a solid fence or wall or chainlink fence faced with dense plantings of
trees or shrubs which in the case of a wall or fence shall be not less than six
feet (6') or more than eight feet (8') in height.
      5.   Other uses customarily conducted in the out of doors recreation
facilities. (1977 Code)
10-7-3: M GENERAL MANUFACTURING DISTRICT:
   (A)   Permitted Uses:
      1.   Any establishment, the principal use of which is manufacturing,
fabricating, processing, assembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing, or
testing of materials, goods, or products, provided that such establishment
qualifies as a permitted use by operations conforming with M district
performance standards, and other regulations herein set forth in section
10-7-2 of this chapter.
      2.   The following additional uses shall be permitted provided that
manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembly, repairing, storing, cleaning,
servicing, or testing of materials, goods, or products, shall conform at least
with M district performance standards applicable to an M district and other
requirements herein set forth in section
10-7-2 of this chapter, except when conformance with performance standards is
not applicable such buildings, structures, and uses need not set back from
district boundary lines further than hereinafter required for yards:
Air, rail, or motor freight terminal and railroad switching, classification and
car yards; repair shops or roundhouse or freight depot or warehouse.
Automobile service stations on a lot not less than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet in area.
Bottling works.
Building material sales establishments; dimension lumber, millwork, cabinets,
and other building materials, including milling, planing, jointing, and
manufacture of millwork.
Cannabis business establishments on a lot with an area of not less than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet, and no closer than one thousand feet (1,000')
from a school property boundary.
Cartage, express and parcel delivery establishments but not motor freight
terminals.
Clubs and lodges.
Contractor's offices and shops.
Currency exchanges.
Dry cleaning establishments.
Dwelling units for watchmen and their families, located on the premises where
they are employed.
Fuel and ice retail sales establishments.
Garages, public, including painting, body and fender work and motor rebuilding.
Greenhouses, wholesale.
Laundries.
Mail order houses.
Medical and dental clinics.
Meeting halls and offices of labor organizations.
Milk distribution stations.
Monument establishments, including accessory open sales lots.
Packing and crating establishments.
Public utility and governmental service uses as follows:
Bus transit facilities, including shelters, passenger stations, parking areas,
and service buildings.
Electric distribution centers and substations.
Fire stations.
Gas regulator stations.
Police stations.
Public utility and governmental service establishments; including offices,
storing, testing, repairing, and servicing, but not including electronic
generator plants, except equipment used to generate only the electrical
requirements of the premises on which the generator is located, gas
manufacturing plants, or storage facilities for natural or artificial gas;
either above or below the ground, or batch mixing plants for asphaltic or
portland cement concrete.
Radio and television towers.
Railroad rights of way, including rights of way for spur, lead, or team tracks,
and passenger stations.
Telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers and telephone transmission
equipment and other service buildings.
Water filtration plants, pumping stations and reservoirs, and sewage treatment
plants and lift stations; public or community.
Publishing and printing establishments.
Radio and television studios, stations, and towers, transmitting and receiving.
Recreation buildings and community centers.
Restaurants, including live entertainment or dancing and including accessory
cocktail lounges.
Sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, adult bookstores,
adult entertainment cabarets, adult motion picture theaters, adult novelty
stores as defined in this code.
Specific regulations related to sexually oriented businesses:
1. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually
oriented business or use without a valid adult use business license issued by
the city pursuant to title 3, chapter 11, "Adult Entertainment Licensing And
Regulation", of this code.
2. Location Of Sexually Oriented Businesses: In M general manufacturing
district, sexually oriented businesses may be allowed, provided that such
establishments are not located within three thousand feet (3,000') of the
property boundaries of any school, daycare center, cemetery, public park,
forest preserve, public housing and place of religious worship and provided
that a sexually oriented business shall not locate within one thousand feet
(1,000') of any other sexually oriented business.
3. Exterior Building Appearance: Exterior building appearance and signage of
all sexually oriented businesses shall be designed to ensure that the use does
not detract from the ability of businesses in the vicinity to attract customers
nor affect the marketability of properties in the vicinity for sale at their
assessed values.
4. Standard Of Measurement: The distances provided under this use shall be
measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects
from the closest point of the structure or portion of the structure occupied or
proposed for occupancy by the sexually oriented business to the nearest point
of the parcel or property or land use district boundary from which the proposed
land use is to be separated.
Signs, advertising.
Stadiums, auditoriums, arenas, or armories.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes or real estate sales for a period
not to exceed the duration of construction or in the case of real estate sales,
not more than two (2) years.
Trade schools.
Wholesale or jobbing establishments.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use.
   (B)   Conditional Uses (As Approved By The City Council After Receiving
Recommendations From The Planning And Zoning Board):
Airports and heliports.
Automobile laundries, distance from nearest street intersection and location of
vehicular ingress and egress shall be approved by the planning and zoning
board.
Mobile home parks on a tract of land not less than five (5) acres. Each mobile
home shall be on a lot not less than two thousand four hundred (2,400) square
feet in area, one and one-half (11/2) off street parking spaces shall be
provided for each mobile home and development and operation plans shall be
approved by the planning and zoning board.
Park, playgrounds and other out of door recreation facilities, private,
semiprivate or public, including par 3 or standard golf courses and other
outdoor recreation facilities as may be recommended by the planning and zoning
board and approved by the city council.
Planned development; manufacturing on a tract of land not less than ten (10)
acres in area.
Radio and television towers exceeding the maximum height as herein set forth in
chapter 2 of this title.
Sanitary landfills or earth landfills; locations and methods of operation shall
be as approved by the planning and zoning board.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use.
   (C)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth.
      2.   Side Yards: Two (2) side yards, each side yard not less than fifteen
feet (15') in width except a side yard adjoining a street, not less than thirty
feet (30') wide.
      3.   Rear Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'), except when a rear
lot line adjoins a railroad spur, lead, team, or siding track right of way, a
rear yard need not be provided.
   (D)   Floor Area Ratio: Not more than 0.75.
   (E)   Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with
applicable regulations herein set forth in chapter 8 of this title. (1977 Code;
amd. Ord. 1794, 5-24-2005; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016; amd. Ord. 2251, 9-24-
2019)
CHAPTER 8
OFF STREET PARKING AND OFF STREET LOADING FACILITIES
SECTION:
10-8-1: Scope Of Regulations
10-8-2: Existing Parking Facilities
10-8-3: Permissive Parking And Loading Facilities
10-8-4: Damage Or Destruction
10-8-5: Control Of Off Site Parking Facilities
10-8-6: Off Street Parking
10-8-7: Off Street Loading
10-8-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The off street parking and off street loading provisions of this title shall
apply as follows:
   (A)   Unless exempted, accessory off street parking and off street loading
facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of this chapter for
all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the
effective date of this title. However, where a building permit has been issued
prior to the effective date of this title, and provided that construction is
begun within six (6) months of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to
completion, parking and loading facilities in the amounts required for the
issuance of said building permit may be provided in lieu of any different
amount required by this title. (Ord. 1997, 2-28-2012)
   (B)   When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises shall
be increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity, or other units of measurement in the amount specified herein
requiring parking or loading facilities, such additional parking and loading
facilities as herein required shall be provided.
   (C)   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter
be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as
required for such new use. However, if the said building or structure was
erected prior to the effective date of this title, additional parking or
loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements
for the new use would exceed those for the existing use, if the latter were
subject to the parking and loading provisions of this title. (1977 Code)
10-8-2: EXISTING PARKING FACILITIES:
Accessory off street parking facilities in existence on the effective date of
this title and located on the same lot as the building or use served shall not
hereafter be reduced below the requirements for a similar new building or use
under the provisions of this title. (1977 Code)
10-8-3: PERMISSIVE PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of
off street parking and loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or
buildings, provided that all regulations herein governing the location, design,
and operation of such facilities are adhered to. (1977 Code)
10-8-4: DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION:
For any conforming or nonconforming building or use which is in existence on
the effective date of this title, which subsequently thereto is damaged or
destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion, or other cause, and which is
reconstructed, reestablished, or repaired, off street parking and loading
facilities shall be provided. Such parking or loading facilities equivalent to
any maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored or
continued in operation, except in no case shall it be necessary to restore or
maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this
title for equivalent new uses or construction. (1977 Code)
10-8-5: CONTROL OF OFF SITE PARKING FACILITIES:
In cases where parking facilities are permitted on land other than the lot on
which the building or use served is located, such facilities shall be in the
same possession as the lot occupied by the building or use to which the parking
facilities are accessory. A covenant running with the land must be recorded in
the office of the recorder of deeds of Carroll County, Illinois, on the lot
upon which the accessory off street parking is located which prohibits any
other use on that lot until such time as either one of the following conditions
occur:
   (A)   The structure on the lot containing the principal use is removed and
the principal use terminated; or
   (B)   Another lot of the required size within the required distance is
properly developed and used for the required accessory off street parking in
place of and in lieu of the initial lot used for accessory off street parking
with the same requirements, covenants, and conditions attaching to such
substitute accessory use lot as approved by the same authority as required for
approval of such initial use lot. The said covenants shall be recorded in the
office of the recorder of deeds of Carroll County, Illinois. (1977 Code)
10-8-6: OFF STREET PARKING:
Off street parking facilities for motor vehicles shall be provided in
accordance with additional regulations set forth hereinafter:
   (A)   Use: Accessory off street parking facilities required as accessory to
uses herein listed shall be solely for the parking of automobiles of patrons,
occupants, or employees. When bus transportation is provided for patrons,
occupants, or employees of a specific establishment, additional open or
enclosed off street parking spaces for each bus to be parked on the premises
shall be provided in accordance with regulations herein for access, in yards,
design, and maintenance and area applicable to accommodating such buses. (1977
Code)
   (B)   Exemptions:
      1.   When the application of the off street parking regulations specified
hereinafter results in a requirement of not more than three (3) spaces on a
single lot in any business or manufacturing district, such parking spaces need
not be provided. The sum of the number of required spaces shall be used for
instances where two (2) or more uses exist on a single lot. This exemption
shall not apply to dwelling units or lodging rooms.
      2.   Due to the uniqueness of the B-1 retail business district, with the
presence of on street parking and public parking facilities, it shall be exempt
from the off street parking and off street loading requirements of this chapter
to preserve the character of its historic buildings. However, nothing shall
prohibit the voluntary establishment of off street parking spaces.
   (C)   Computation: When determining the number of parking spaces to be
provided, the gross square footage of a structure shall be used, excluding
restrooms, storage areas and rooms used for mechanical equipment such as
furnaces and water heaters. When determination of the number of off street
parking spaces required by this title results in a requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded while a
fraction in excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one parking space.
(Ord. 1997, 2-28-2012)
   (D)   Collective Provision: Off street parking facilities for separate uses
may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces so provided is not
less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use and provided
that all regulations governing location of accessory parking spaces, in
relation to the use served, are adhered to. Further, no parking spaces or
portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless
otherwise authorized by the planning and zoning board. (1977 Code; amd. Ord.
2158, 4-26-2016)
   (E)   Design And Maintenance:
      1.   Open And Enclosed Parking Spaces: Accessory off street parking
spaces located on the same lot as occupied by the use served may be opened to
the sky or enclosed in a building. Accessory off street parking spaces located
elsewhere than on the same lot occupied by the use shall be opened to the sky.
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1997, 2-28-2012)
      2.   In Yards: Off street parking spaces, open to the sky, may be located
in any yard except a front yard and a side yard adjoining a street. Parking
facilities shall be designed to provide ample area for piling snow, without
depositing snow on a public right of way, or adjoining properties.
      3.   Area: A required off street parking space shall have a width of nine
feet (9') and a length of nineteen feet (19'), exclusive of access drives or
aisles, ramps, columns, or office or work areas. Enclosed parking spaces shall
have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7').
      4.   Access: Each required off street parking space shall open directly
upon an aisle or driveway and have a minimum width of twenty four feet (24'),
in order to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such
parking space. All off street parking facilities shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley, which shall be
located as far as practical from an intersection of a public right of way.
      5.   Surfacing: All open, off street parking areas and all access drives
and aisles containing four (4) or more parking spaces shall be improved with a
durable pavement consisting of not less than seven inches (7") of water bound
macadam base with a wearing surface of not less than two inches (2") of asphalt
or the equivalent within one year from the date that construction began on the
parking area. Asphalt millings may be used as surfacing materials if an
appropriate binder is applied to keep the millings in place. Parking areas and
access drives and aisles for less than four (4) parking spaces shall be
improved at least with a gravel base and dustproof surfacing. In areas where it
can be shown that permeable soils are present and allow proper drainage, the
superintendent of public works or his/her assigned designee may permit the use
of permeable paving materials, including, but not limited to, porous concrete,
permeable interlocking concrete pavers, concrete grid pavers, and porous
asphalt. Compacted gravel and/or similar materials, including, but not limited
to, asphalt millings and broken up concrete, will not be considered as
permeable pavement. Parking lots constructed of gravel and similar materials
shall be permitted only upon the approval of a variation.
      6.   Screening And Landscaping: All open automobile parking areas
containing four (4) or more parking spaces, which are located across a public
right of way from, or adjacent to a lot in a residence district, or lot whose
primary use is for a dwelling, shall be effectively screened on each side
adjoining or fronting on such property line by a wall and/or fence with a
minimum height of six feet (6'), but not to exceed eight feet (8'), densely
planted compact hedge with a minimum height of three feet (3') at the time of
planting, or a landscaped berm with a minimum height of two and one-half feet
(2.5') planted with deciduous trees, shrubs and grass installed in such a
manner as to not obstruct the clear view of motorists and pedestrians at
intersections of driveways, sidewalks and roadways. Walls and fences shall only
be used for screening of parking areas that are adjacent to interior lot lines.
For parking facilities containing fifty (50) or more parking spaces, interior
and perimeter landscaping shall be provided equal to ten percent (10%) of the
impervious surface area of the parking facility. All perimeter and interior
landscaping shall be protected by a raised curb. Each interior landscape area
shall be equal to one parking space in area and be placed to provide shade,
break up long rows of parking spaces, or to help delineate drive aisles.
Further, each interior landscape area shall be planted with a deciduous tree
with a diameter of two and one-half inches (2.5") at the time of planting.
Perimeter landscaping shall have a minimum width of ten feet (10') be planted
with deciduous trees, shrubs and plants. All landscaping shall be done in a
fashion so as to not create a visual barrier to motorists and pedestrians.
(Ord. 1997, 2-28-2012)
      7.   Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas
shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not to
create a nuisance, and in a parking area containing four (4) or more parking
spaces such lighting shall be extinguished not more than one-half (1/2) hour
after the close of business except as may otherwise be permitted or required by
the planning and zoning board for maintaining illumination with less
candlepower after the time specified above. (Ord. 1997, 2-28-2012; amd. Ord.
2158, 4-26-2016)
      8.   Maintenance: All off street parking and loading areas shall be
maintained in good repair, and in safe condition at all times, so as not to
constitute a hazard to public safety or a visual or aesthetic nuisance to
surrounding land.
All off street parking and loading areas shall be periodically restored to
maintain a clear identification of separate parking stalls.
   (F)   Location: All parking spaces required to serve buildings or uses
erected or established in single-family residence districts after the effective
date of this title shall be located on the same lot or adjoining lot as the
building or use served. Buildings or uses other than single-family dwellings
existing on the effective date of this title which are subsequently altered or
enlarged so as to require the provision of parking spaces under this title or
new uses may be served by parking facilities located on land other than the lot
on which the building or use served is located, provided such facilities are
within three hundred feet (300') walking distance of said building and the land
must either be under the same ownership as the use being served, or if the land
is not under the same ownership, then it must be controlled by a perpetual
lease agreement, the proof of which must be provided before the use can be
established.
   (G)   Employee Parking: Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall
be based on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on
the premises at any one time.
   (H)   Required Spaces: The minimum number of off street parking spaces
accessory to designated uses shall be provided as follows: (Ord. 1997, 2-28-
2012)
Business, commercial and industrial
uses:
                                         1 parking space for each 1.5
                                         employees, and in addition, reservoir
                                         standing spaces to accommodate
                                         automobiles awaiting entrance to the
                                         automobile laundry equal in number to
 Automobile laundries                    5 times the maximum capacity of the
                                         automobile laundry. Maximum capacity,
                                         in this instance, shall mean the
                                         greatest possible number of
                                         automobiles undergoing some phase of
                                         laundering at the same time.
                                         1 parking space for each island of
 Automobile service stations             gasoline pumps, plus 2 for each
                                         service stall.
 Banks                                   1 parking space for each 400 square
                                         feet of floor area.
 Beauty parlors                          1 parking space for each 100 square
                                         feet of floor area.
                                         At least 1 parking space for each
 Boat sales and services                 employee, including the owner or
                                         manager plus an equal number of
                                         parking spaces for customer parking.
 Business, professional and public       1 parking space for each 250 square
 administration or service office        feet of floor space.
 buildings
 Furniture and appliance store, motor
 vehicle sales establishments, and       1 parking space for each 400 square
 establishments for repair of household  feet of floor area.
 equipment or furniture
 Manufacturing and industrial uses as    1 parking space for each 2 employees
 may be permitted in the manufacturing   but not less than 1 parking space for
 districts                               each 600 square feet of floor space.
 Medical and dental clinics or offices   1 parking space for each 250 square
 for group practice                      feet of floor space.
 Public utility and public service uses  1 parking space for each 2 employees.
 Restaurants, not including drive-in     1 parking space for each 100 square
 establishments                          feet of floor area in the building.
                                         1 parking space for each 4 seats up to
 Theaters                                400 seats, plus 1 parking space for
                                         each 6 seats over 400.
 Undertaking establishments and funeral  1 parking space for each 100 square
 parlors                                 feet of floor space.
                                         4 parking spaces plus 1 parking space
                                         for each 1,500 square feet of floor
 Warehouse, storage, wholesale and mail  space over 4,500 square feet, or when
 order establishments                    the number of employees is
                                         specifically indicated, 1 parking
                                         space for each 2 employees employed on
                                         the premises.
 All other business and commercial       1 parking space for each 250 square
 establishments                          feet of floor area.
                                         Parking spaces for other permitted
                                         uses not listed above shall be
                                         provided in accordance with
 Other uses                              requirements designated by the
                                         planning and zoning board and in the
                                         case of special uses, as recommended
                                         by the planning and zoning board and
                                         required by the city council.
 Uses in a business and office planned   The required number of parking spaces
 development under unified control or    for each use shall be 2 times the
 ownership on a tract of land 3 acres    required number of parking spaces as
 or more in area                         heretofore set forth for such use.
Dwelling and lodging uses:
                                         1 parking space plus 1 additional
 Boarding and rooming houses and         parking space for each lodging room or
 apartment hotels                        suite of lodging rooms and each
                                         dwelling unit.
                                         11/2 parking spaces for each lodging
                                         room or suite of rooms comprising a
 Hotels and motels                       lodging unit, plus additional parking
                                         space as herein required for
                                         affiliated uses such as restaurants
                                         and retail stores.
 Multiple-family dwellings               11/2 parking spaces for each dwelling
                                         unit.
 Single-family dwellings                 1 parking space for each dwelling.
 Two-family dwellings                    1 parking space for each dwelling
                                         unit.
Recreational uses, commercial or
noncommercial:
                                         7 parking spaces for each lane plus
 Bowling alleys                          such additional spaces as may be
                                         required herein for affiliated uses
                                         such as restaurants and the like.
                                         1 parking space for each 3 persons
 Health salons, swimming pools, skating  based upon the maximum number of
 rinks, and other permitted amusement    persons that can be accommodated at
 establishments                          the same time in accordance with such
                                         design capacity, and 1 parking space
                                         for each 2 employees.
                                         1 parking space for each 2 employees,
 Parks, recreation areas, and community  plus spaces in adequate number as
 centers                                 determined by the planning and zoning
                                         board to serve the visiting public.
Schools, institutions and auditoriums or
other places of assembly:
 Auditoriums, and auditoriums as         1 parking space for each 5 seats, or
 accessory to churches, schools, and     for each 100 inches of seating space
 other institutional establishments      in the main auditorium or assembly
                                         hall.
                                         1 parking space for each 6 students,
 Colleges, junior colleges and           based upon the maximum number of
 universities                            students that can be accommodated in
                                         accordance with design capacity.
                                         1 parking space for each 5 seats or
                                         for each 100 inches of seating space.
                                         When such facilities for public
 Gymnasiums, stadiums, grandstands,      assembly are accessory to a school,
 meeting halls, convention halls, and    and when approved by the planning and
 exhibition halls                        zoning board, the required number of
                                         parking spaces may be reduced by the
                                         number of spaces provided, as herein
                                         required for the applicable school.
                                         1 space per bed for 100 beds or lesser
                                         size; 1.1 spaces per bed for 101 to
 Hospitals                               300 beds; 1.2 spaces per bed for 301
                                         to 500 beds; and 1.3 spaces per bed
                                         for over 500 beds.
 Libraries, museums, art galleries, and  1 parking space for each 800 square
 aquariums                               feet of floor area.
 Nursing homes and similar types of      1 parking space for each 3 beds.
 establishments
                                         1 parking space for each lodging room
 Private clubs and lodges                and 1 parking space for each 4 seats
                                         in accordance with design seating
                                         capacity of the main meeting room.
                                         When the number of parking spaces as
                                         required herein are provided for an
                                         auditorium or other places of public
                                         assembly accessory to a school, and
                                         when approved by the planning and
 Schools                                 zoning board, additional parking
                                         spaces need not be provided when the
                                         number of parking spaces for each
                                         auditorium or other places of public
                                         assembly is equal to or in excess of
                                         the applicable requirements set forth
                                         in subsection 1, 2, or 3 of this use:
                                         1 parking space for each 2 employees,
 1. Commercial or trade, music, dance    plus 1 space for each 4 students,
 or business                             based on the maximum number of
                                         students that can be accommodated in
                                         accordance with such design capacity.
                                         1 parking space for each 7 students
                                         based on the maximum number of
 2. High, public or private              students that can be accommodated in
                                         accordance with such design capacity
                                         of the building.
 3. Nursery, elementary or junior high;  1 parking space for each faculty
 public or private                       member and each other full time
                                         employee.
 
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1997, 2-28-2012; Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (I)   Prohibited: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall
be permitted in conjunction with any parking facilities, except to allow
repairs necessary to drive a vehicle from the parking facility. No gasoline or
motor oil shall be sold in conjunction with any accessory parking facilities.
(Ord. 1997, 2-28-2012)
10-8-7: OFF STREET LOADING:
Off street loading spaces accessory to designated uses shall be provided as
follows:
   (A)   Location: All required loading spaces shall be located on the same lot
as the use served. When located within the off street parking area, efforts
should be made to avoid interrupting or blocking vehicular and pedestrian
travel. No permitted or required loading space shall be located within twenty
five feet (25') of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets. No
loading space shall be located in a required side yard abutting a residence
district or a required front yard, and any loading space located in a required
yard shall be open to the sky.
   (B)   Size: An off street loading space shall be not less than ten feet
(10') in width and thirty five feet (35') in length, except when a loading
space having a length greater than thirty five feet (35'), is required herein
it shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width. Enclosed off street
loading spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14').
(Ord. 1997, 2-28-2012)
   (C)   Access: Each required off street loading berth shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner approved
by the enforcing officer.
   (D)   Surfacing: All open off street loading berths shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base not less than seven inches (7") thick, or equal,
surfaced with not less than two inches (2") of asphaltic concrete or some
comparable all weather, dustless material, and shall be subject to approval by
the public works superintendent of the city.
   (E)   Utilization: Space allocated to any required off street loading space
shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the requirements for any off
street parking spaces.
   (F)   Minimum Facilities: Uses for which off street loading facilities are
herein required but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the
minimum prescribed for such required facilities, shall be provided with
adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle, off any adjacent
alley, service drive, or open space on the same lot. (1977 Code)
   (G)   Off Street Loading Space Requirements:
      1.   The minimum number of off street loading spaces accessory to
nonresidential uses in residence districts, business districts and the
manufacturing district shall be: One loading space for buildings containing ten
thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor
area, plus one additional loading space for each additional one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. (Ord.
1997, 2-28-2012)
CHAPTER 9
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
SECTION:
10-9-1: Statement Of Purpose
10-9-2: Authority To Continue Nonconforming Buildings, Structures And Uses
10-9-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming
uses, buildings and structures, and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall
be gradually eliminated upon reaching the end of their respective normal useful
life, in accordance with the authority granted by Illinois statutes. (1977
Code)
10-9-2: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
Any building, structure or use which existed lawfully at the time of the
adoption of this title, and which remains or becomes nonconforming upon the
adoption of this title or of any subsequent amendment thereto, may be continued
only in accordance with the following regulations:
   (A)   Repairs And Alterations: Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made
to a nonconforming building or structure, provided that no structural
alteration shall be made in or to such building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in
the district in which it is located, except those required by law, or except to
make the building or structure and use thereof conform to the regulations of
the district in which it is located. Ordinary repairs and alterations shall be
determined by the building inspector, and shall include, among other things,
the replacement of storage tanks where the safety of operation of the
installation requires such replacement.
   (B)   Additions And Enlargements:
      1.   A nonconforming building or structure all or substantially all of
which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which
it is located shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such
nonconforming building or structure and use thereof, including all additions
and enlargements thereto, is made to conform to all the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
      2.   A nonconforming building or structure which is nonconforming only as
to bulk, may be added to or enlarged, provided such addition or enlargement
conforms to all regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (C)   Moving: No building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other location unless every portion of such building or structure, and the
use thereof, is made to conform to all regulations of the district in which the
moved building is located.
   (D)   Restoration Of Damaged Nonconforming Buildings Or Structures: A
building, structure or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which
it is located, and which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or
act of God to the extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which
it was before the occurrence will exceed sixty percent (60%) of the total cost
of reconstructing the entire building or structure, shall not be restored
unless said building or structure and the use thereof shall conform to all
regulations of the district in which it is located. In the event that such
damage or destruction is less than seventy percent (70%) of the cost of
reconstructing the entire building or structure, no repairs or construction for
restoration shall be made unless such work is started within one year from the
date of the partial destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion.
   (E)   Discontinuance Of Use Of Nonconforming Building Or Structure: A
building, structure or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which
it is located, and in which the use has ceased by discontinuance or
abandonment, on the effective date hereof or thereafter is abandoned and
remains unoccupied, or is not used for a continuous period of one year, shall
not thereafter be occupied or used, except by a use which conforms to the use
regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (F)   Change Of Use In Nonconforming Building Or Structures: The
nonconforming use of a building or structure all or substantially all of which
is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is
located, may be changed to a use permitted in the district in which the
building or structure is located, or the nonconforming uses of a part of such
building may be extended to the remaining parts of the building but no change
or extension of use shall extend or otherwise modify any provision made in this
title for elimination of such nonconforming building or structure and the use
thereof.
   (G)   Elimination Of Nonconforming Buildings, Structures And Uses:
      1.   The following nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall be
subject to amortization provisions herein set forth under subsection (G)2 of
this section:
         (a)   Residence Districts: Any nonconforming principal and accessory
building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed and used
or intended for a permitted or conditional use that is allowed only in a
business or manufacturing district shall be subject to the amortization
provisions of this title.
         (b)   Business Districts: Any principal or accessory building or
structure, all or substantially all of which is designed and used or intended
for a permitted or conditional use that is allowed in any manufacturing
district, and located in any business district, and such nonconforming building
or structure and the use thereof that is designed and used or intended for a
permitted or conditional use that is allowed only in a B-3 district and located
in a B-1 and B-2 district shall be subject to the amortization provisions of
this title.
         (c)   Manufacturing Districts: No lawfully established principal and
accessory nonconforming building or structure and a lawful nonconforming use
thereof shall be subject to the amortization provisions of this title.
Moreover, a single-family detached dwelling may be erected on a lot in an
existing recorded subdivision in which fifty percent (50%) or more of the lots
contained single-family detached dwellings on the effective date of this title.
      2.   Amortization Provisions: All nonconforming buildings, structures,
and uses as set forth in subsections (G)1(a), (G)1(b), and (G)1(c) of this
section that were nonconforming prior to and remain nonconforming after the
adoption of this title, or which become nonconforming by subsequent amendments
thereto shall be removed, or converted, and therefore devoted to uses permitted
in the districts in which they are located within six (6) months after the
applicable amortization periods as follows:
         (a)   Assessed valuation more than five thousand dollars: In
accordance with the types of construction classification set forth in the
building code of the city.
            (1)   Fireproof construction and noncombustible construction: Forty
(40) years from date of original building permit or twenty five (25) years from
effective date of this title or amendments thereto, whichever last occurs.
            (2)   Exterior masonry wall construction: Thirty (30) years from
date of original building permit or twenty (20) years from effective date of
this title or amendments thereto, whichever last occurs.
            (3)   Frame constructions: Twenty (20) years from date of original
building permit or ten (10) years from effective date of this title or any
amendments thereto, whichever last occurs.
         (b)   Assessed valuation at least two thousand dollars but not more
than five thousand dollars: Eight (8) years from date of original building
permit or four (4) years from effective date of this title or any amendments
thereto, whichever last occurs.
         (c)   Assessed valuation less than two thousand dollars: Four (4)
years from date of original building permit or two (2) years from effective
date of this title or any amendments thereto, whichever last occurs.
Note: Assessed valuations referred to in subsections (G)2(a), (G)2(b) and (G)2
(c) of this section are the unequalized assessed valuations of improvements of
a lot, established for real estate tax purpose for the year of 1962 by Carroll
County.
   (H)   Nonconforming Use Of Conforming Buildings Or Structures: The existing
nonconforming use of a part or all of a conforming building or structure may be
continued subject to the following provisions: (1977 Code)
      1.   The nonconforming use of a part of such building or structure
existing in any residential district shall not be expanded or extended into any
other portion of such building or structure nor changed to any other
nonconforming use. The nonconforming use of a part of such building or
structure existing in any business district may be expanded and extended into
other portions of existing buildings or structures designed for business use,
including any subsequent additions or enlargements thereto, only after suitable
assurances are obtained from the city council prior to any such expansion or
extension of said nonconforming use.
      2.   If the nonconforming use of such existing building or structure
located in any residential district is discontinued or abandoned for a period
of six (6) months, it shall not be renewed and any subsequent use of such
building or structure shall conform to the use regulations of the district in
which the premises is located. (Ord. 1406, 3-12-1991)
      3.   Any lawful nonconforming use in a conforming building or structure
existing in a residence district on the effective date of this title or any
amendments thereto but is herein allowed as a permitted or conditional use only
in a business or manufacturing district, shall be entirely discontinued within
five (5) years from the effective date of this title or any amendments thereto.
(1977 Code)
      4.   Any existing nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure
located in any business district may be continued in the event total
reconstruction of the entire building being used for said nonconforming use is
diligently prosecuted to construction completion within one year from date of
issuance of a building permit. Any permit issued under this section shall
become invalid if the construction work is not commenced within six (6) months
from date of issuance of a building permit. Said permit shall become invalid if
the construction work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months
after the time of commencing work. (Ord. 1406, 3-12-1991)
   (I)   Nonconforming Use Of Land: The nonconforming use of land not involving
a building or structure, or in connection with which any building or structure
thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use of land, may be
continued subject to the following provisions:
      1.   Expansion Or Extension: Such nonconforming use shall not be expanded
or extended beyond the area it occupies.
      2.   Renewal Restrictions: If such a nonconforming use of land is
discontinued or abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months, it shall
not thereafter be renewed, and subsequent use of land shall conform to the
regulations of the district in which the land is located.
      3.   Not Changed: No nonconforming use of land shall be changed to
another nonconforming use.
      4.   Elimination Of Nonconforming Use Of Land: The nonconforming use of
land shall be discontinued in accordance with the following, except that in R-
1 and R-2 districts the allowable term shall be reduced by fifty percent (50%):
         (a)   Where no buildings or structures are employed in connection with
such use of land, discontinued within one year from the effective date of this
title or any amendments thereto.
         (b)   Where the only buildings or structures or other physical
improvements employed are accessory or incidental to such use of land and have
an assessed valuation of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00),
discontinued within two (2) years from the effective date of this title or any
amendments thereto.
         (c)   Where the improvements, underground or substantially at ground
level, which comprise all or substantially all of the improvements employed in
such use of land and which have an assessed valuation of more than two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00), discontinued within five (5) years from the effective date
of this title or any amendments thereto.
         (d)   Where the nonconforming use of land is accessory to the
nonconforming use of a building or structure, it shall be discontinued on the
same date on which the nonconforming use of the building or structure is
discontinued.
Note: Assessed valuations referred to in subsections (I)4(b) and (I)4(c) of
this section are the unequalized assessed valuations of improvements on a lot
established for real estate tax purposes for the year of 1962 by Carroll
County. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 10
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
10-10-1: Zoning Certificates
10-10-2: Certificates Of Occupancy
10-10-3: Plats
10-10-4: Duties Of The Building Inspector
10-10-5: Amendments
10-10-6: Penalty
10-10-1: ZONING CERTIFICATES:
   (A)   A permit as required by the building code and other applicable codes
and ordinances of the city for excavation, erection, addition, or alteration of
any building or structure or land improvement when no buildings or structures
are involved shall not be issued until the building inspector certifies on such
permit that there is conformance with the regulations of this title.
   (B)   When applicable for a specific use, the city council shall require
that an application for a zoning certificate and certificate of occupancy shall
have affixed to it a statement from a professional engineer, registered in the
state of Illinois certifying the levels of noise, vibration, smoke, and
particulate matter, toxic and noxious matter, odorous matter, glare and heat
and the maximum quantities of flammable materials and other materials or
products that decompose by detonation to be stored or utilized on the premises
in the operation of the use for which the zoning certificate and the
certificate of occupancy is being requested and that there is compliance with
all regulations of this title.
   (C)   Within fifteen (15) days after the date of an application for a zoning
certificate which requires a statement from a professional engineer as set
forth in subsection (B) of this section, the building inspector, after
receiving the approval of the city council, shall issue a zoning certificate.
However, when in the opinion of the city council, the operation of the use for
which a zoning certificate is requested would not in fact further the intent
and purpose of this title, the building inspector may delay action for approval
or denial of a zoning certificate for a period of not more than thirty (30)
days from the date of application. The building inspector shall approve or deny
such an application only after receiving a report relative thereto from a
professional engineer or testing laboratory retained by the city and after
approval by the city council. (1977 Code)
10-10-2: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
   (A)   No change in the use or occupancy of the land, nor any change of use
or occupancy in an existing building, other than a conforming dwelling, shall
be made, nor shall any new building or structure be occupied or used for any
purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building
inspector.
   (B)   An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be filed at the
time of filing an application for a permit as set forth in subsection (A) of
this section. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued only after the
building inspector has made a final inspection of the building, structure or
land improvement for which a permit was issued and finds that there is also
compliance with all applicable regulations of this title.
   (C)   The building inspector may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy
for the use of a portion of the building, structure, or land improvement that
is completed in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the city
and the remaining portion is in the process of completion. Such temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be for a period not to exceed six (6) months
from the date of its issuance and, if required, for an extension of not more
than a total of three (3) additional months.
   (D)   A certificate of occupancy shall also be required for the continuation
of all nonconforming uses of land, buildings, or structures created by the
passage of this title. Application for such certificate of occupancy for
nonconforming uses shall be filed with the building inspector by the owner or
lessee of the land or building occupied by such nonconforming use within one
year from the effective date of this title. It shall be the duty of the
building inspector to issue a certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming use.
   (E)   A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the
office of the building inspector, and copies shall be furnished on request to
any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in land or in a building
affected by such certificates of occupancy. A fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall
be paid for each copy thereof, except no fee shall be charged for certificate
of occupancy as required in subsection (D) of this section. (1977 Code)
10-10-3: PLATS:
   (A)   Each application for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by a
plat, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built
upon, the size, shape and location on the lot, of uses of land where no
buildings or structures are involved, and such other information as may be
required to provide for the enforcement of this title. A record of applications
and plats shall be kept in the office of the building inspector.
   (B)   It shall be the applicant's responsibility to locate any permanent lot
markers as may be required by the building official for the enforcement of this
title. A minimum of two (2) lot markers shall be required by the building
official to satisfy this section.
The permit applied for, if granted, is issued on the representations made
herein and any permit issued may be revoked by the building official without
notice on any breach of representation or conditions. (Ord. 1173, 7-24-1979)
10-10-4: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The building inspector of the city, or other officials that have been or shall
be duly appointed by the city council shall enforce this title and in addition
thereto, and in furtherance of said authority, shall:
   (A)   Certify on permits issued under the building code and other applicable
codes and ordinances of the city that there is conformance with the regulations
of this title;
   (B)   Issue all certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records
thereof;
   (C)   Conduct inspections of building, structures, and uses of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this title;
   (D)   Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including, but
not limited to, all maps, amendments, special uses, variations, appeals, and
applications therefor, and designate on the zoning district map each amendment,
and special uses; (1977 Code)
   (E)   Initiate, direct, and review from time to time, a study of the
provisions of this title and submit written reports of his recommendation
relative to proposed amendments of this title to the planning and zoning board
not less frequently than once each year; and
   (F)   Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be required by
the planning and zoning board in the exercise of its duties. (1977 Code; amd.
Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
10-10-5: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   Authority: The regulations imposed and the districts created under the
authority of this title may be amended, from time to time, by ordinance in
accordance with applicable Illinois statutes. An amendment shall be granted or
denied by the city council only after public hearing before the planning and
zoning board and a report of its finding and recommendations has been submitted
to the city council.
   (B)   Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by the city
council, by the planning and zoning board or by any resident of or owner of
property in the city.
   (C)   Processing: An application for an amendment shall be filed with the
enforcing officer and thereafter referred to the planning and zoning board with
a request to hold a public hearing and submit a report of its findings and
recommendations to the city council in accordance with applicable Illinois
statutes.
   (D)   Decision: The city council, upon report of the planning and zoning
board and without further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed
amendment in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes, or may refer it back
to the planning and zoning board. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (E)   Processing Fee: The applicant shall submit, in advance, for each
application for amendment to the zoning text or zoning map the sum of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) processing fee. (Ord. 1741, 9-9-2003)
   (F)   Notice Of Public Hearings: In addition to those publication
requirements of the Illinois state statutes, the city, the planning and zoning
board shall cause the notice of public hearing to be mailed to the property
owners who are adjoining and/or adjacent to the property which is the subject
of the proposed variation or amendment. However, failure to give such notice
shall not invalidate the proceedings. (Ord. 1506, 8-23-1994; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-
26-2016)
10-10-6: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
or for any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be as set out in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE; JURISDICTION; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose And Jurisdiction
11-1-2: Rules And Definitions
11-1-1: PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION:
Because each new subdivision accepted by the city becomes a permanent unit in
the basic physical structure of the future community, and to which the future
community will, of necessity, be forced to adhere, all subdivisions hereafter
planned within the incorporated limits of the city, and within the
unincorporated areas lying within one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the
corporate limits, shall, in all respects be in full compliance with the
regulations hereinafter contained in this title. These regulations are designed
to provide for the orderly and harmonious development of the city, for the
coordination of streets within new subdivisions with other existing or planned
streets, and to secure a uniform system of utilities and services, and
otherwise to promote realization of the comprehensive plan 1 . (1977 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-14-1, 5/11-15-1.
11-1-2: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
   (A)   The singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes
the singular.
   (B)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future
the present.
   (C)   The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive.
   (D)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   (E)   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of
this title, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition
thereof; and any word appearing in parentheses directly after a word herein
defined shall be construed in the same sense as that word.
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this title, shall be
construed as herein defined:
ALLEY: A right of way which affords secondary means of access to properties
abutting upon a street.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one or more
streets and parks, cemeteries, shorelines of waterways, corporate limit lines,
or other lines of demarcation.
BUILDING COMMISSIONER: The building commissioner of the city of Savanna, or his
duly authorized representative.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line within a lot or other parcel of land so
designated on the final plat, which denotes the area between such line and the
adjacent street right of way line where an enclosed building and other
obstructions are prohibited, except those obstructions that are permitted by
zoning ordinance regulations.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Savanna.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street within a subdivision which has wider right of way
and roadway widths, and which is a prime entrance or circulating street. Its
primary function is to distribute and collect traffic to and from minor
streets.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The composite of the functional and geographic elements of
the official comprehensive plan of the city of Savanna and environs or any
segment thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts, text of reports,
implementing ordinances and the official map.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street with a single outlet.
EASEMENT: A quantity of land set aside over or under which a liberty, privilege
or advantage in land without profit, is dedicated and is distinct from
ownership of the land, is granted either to the public, a particular person, or
a combination of both.
FINAL PLAT: A map or plan of a subdivision and any accompanying material as
described in chapter 4 of this title.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A minor street which is parallel to any either adjacent to or
within the right of way of a thoroughfare.
HALF STREET: A street of less than the total required width along one or more
property lines of a subdivision.
LAND IMPROVEMENT: Any sanitary sewerage system, storm sewer system water supply
and distribution systems, roadway, side strip, sidewalk, pedestrianway, no
access strip, off street parking area, or other improvement which the city may
require under this title.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer
of ownership or for building development.
LOT, BUTT: The words "butt lot" mean a lot at the end of a block and located
between two (2) corner lots.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: The words "double frontage lot" mean a lot which has a
pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) substantially parallel streets.
MINOR STREET: A street of limited continuity. Its primary purpose is to serve
abutting properties.
"NO ACCESS" STRIP: A land area at least twelve feet (12') wide along the rear
lot line of a double frontage lot and abutting a thoroughfare within which no
vehicular driveways shall be permitted.
OWNER OR SUBDIVIDER: Includes any person, firm, association, partnership,
private corporation, public or quasi-public corporation, or a combination of
any of them, or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in
the land sought to be subdivided or divided to commence and maintain
proceedings under the provisions of this title.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A right of way across or within a block designated for
pedestrian use.
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD: The Savanna city planning and zoning board.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision as
described in chapter 3 of this title.
ROADWAY: That portion of the street designated for vehicular use.
SIDE STRIP: The unpaved strip of land within a street right of way and is
parallel to the roadway.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street designated for pedestrian use.
STREET: A right of way which affords primary means of access by pedestrians and
vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue,
highway, road, boulevard, easement or however otherwise designated.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between the right of way lines of a given
street.
SUBDIVISION: A described tract of land which is to be, or has been, divided
into two (2) or more lots or parcels, or any division of land when a new street
is involved, for the purpose of transfer of ownership of building development.
A subdivision shall not include the following:
(A) The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five (5)
acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access.
(B) The division of lots or blocks in any recorded subdivision which does not
involve any new streets or easements of access.
(C) The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and
contiguous land.
(D) The conveyance of parcels of land or interest therein for use as right of
way for railroads or other public utility facilities.
(E) The conveyance of land owned by railroad or other public utility which does
not involve any new streets or easements of access.
(F) The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants or
conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
(G) Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
(H) The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the division
into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or tract of land
existing on the effective date hereof which do not involve any new streets or
easements.
The term "subdivision" includes resubdivision and, where it is appropriate to
the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: The basic land planning principles established as
guides for the preparation of preliminary plats.
THOROUGHFARE: A street with a high degree of continuity and serving as an
arterial trafficway between the various districts of Savanna and its environs.
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
CHAPTER 2
PROCEDURE
SECTION:
11-2-1: Scope
11-2-2: Preliminary Plat
11-2-3: Final Plat
11-2-4: Land Division
11-2-1: SCOPE:
Before subdividing any tract or parcel of land in the city and the
unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the city
limits, an owner or subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat and a final plat
to be acted upon by the city authorities in accordance with the following
requirements. (Prior to preparation of final preliminary plat drawings, it is
recommended that the subdivider consult with the planning and zoning board and
other city officials to determine conformity to the comprehensive plan,
official map, zoning ordinance, and compliance with this title and other
applicable city ordinances.) (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
11-2-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   (A)   The owner or subdivider shall file an application for approval of the
preliminary plat with the city clerk. Five (5) copies of the preliminary plat
and the required filing fee shall accompany the application. (1977 Code)
   (B)   The city clerk shall refer four (4) copies of the preliminary plat to
the planning and zoning board, at least ten (10) days in advance of the next
meeting of the planning and zoning board.
   (C)   The planning and zoning board shall notify the owner or subdivider as
to the time and place of the planning and zoning board meeting at which he will
be afforded an opportunity of being heard.
   (D)   The planning and zoning board shall approve or disapprove the
application for preliminary plat approval within ninety (90) days from the date
of filing the application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of
required supporting documents, whichever date is later, unless such time is
extended by mutual consent.
   (E)   When the preliminary plat has been acted upon by the planning and
zoning board, it shall be referred to the city council. If the planning and
zoning board approves the plat, it shall so indicate on the plat, and if it
disapproves such plat, it shall furnish the city council and the applicant a
written statement setting forth the reason for disapproval and specifying with
particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this
title and official map, and with the intent of the comprehensive plan. The city
council shall accept or reject said plan within thirty (30) days after its
regular stated meeting following the action of the planning and zoning board.
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (F)   Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the city council, the
following notice of approval shall be stamped upon four (4) prints thereof, and
required signatures affixed:
      NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plat of a subdivision shown hereon
has received approval by the City Council of the City of Savanna, Illinois, and
upon compliance by the subdivider with requirements of qualifications governing
the approval of preliminary plats and with other revisions and stipulations
that may be required, the City Council will receive the final plat for
consideration when submitted by the subdivider in such form and within such
time as required by the Subdivision Regulations of the City.
The City Council of the City of Savanna, Illinois
Date        19   
By          
            Mayor
Attest            
            City Clerk
   (G)   The four (4) prints of such approved preliminary plat shall be
distributed by the city clerk as follows: (1977 Code)
      1.   One print shall be sent to the planning and zoning board. (1977
Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
      2.   One print shall be sent to the city engineer.
      3.   One print shall be retained by the city clerk for filing.
      4.   One print shall be returned to the subdivider. (1977 Code)
   (H)   Approval of the preliminary plat by the planning and zoning board and
city council shall be conditioned upon stipulations as set forth in section
11-7-1 of this title. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
11-2-3: FINAL PLAT:
   (A)   Within one year after approval of the preliminary plat by the city
council the owner or subdivider shall file an application for approval of the
final plat with the city clerk. In case application for approval of a final
plat is made for a part or parts of an approved preliminary plat, the city
council may extend the time for application of approval of final plats for
other parts of the approved preliminary plat until a later date or dates beyond
the foregoing one year period. (1977 Code)
   (B)   The application for final plat approval shall include the original
drawing drawn with ink on linen tracing cloth or its equivalent, one
transparency print and four (4) contact prints of the final plat, four (4)
copies of all supporting maps, plans and other drawings, and all other required
documents. The final plat shall retain the design characteristics of the
approved preliminary plat, except that the planning and zoning board may
recommend and the city council may require such changes or revisions as are
deemed necessary in the interest and needs of the community, in keeping with
the provisions of this title. Accordingly, the city council shall refer the
application for approval of the final plat to the planning and zoning board for
recommendation and report relative to design characteristics of the final plat.
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (C)   When the subdivider or owner, submitting the application for final
plat approval, has filed with the city clerk all drawings, maps and other
documents required by this title to be furnished in support thereof and when
all such material meets all requirements of this title and other applicable
provisions of this code, the city council shall approve the proposed plat
within sixty (60) days from the date of filing the last required document or
other paper or within sixty (60) days of filing application for final approval
of the plat, whichever date is later, or a period of time beyond such sixty
(60) day period that is mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the city
council.
   (D)   Upon approval by the city council, the city clerk shall secure one
transparency print and three (3) contact prints of the approved final plat, and
three (3) copies of the approved supporting documents. The cost of such prints
and copies of documents shall be paid by the subdivider. (1977 Code)
      1.   One contact print of the final plat and, when applicable, one copy
of the accompanying protective covenants shall be delivered to the planning and
zoning board. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
      2.   One contact print and all specifications, drawings and estimates
shall be delivered to the city engineer.
      3.   One transparency print and one contact print and all other
supporting documents shall be retained by the city clerk.
   (E)   The final plat in exact form as approved by the city council shall be
filed for record by the city clerk. The city clerk shall secure three (3) print
copies of the recorded plat for city files. The subdivider shall pay recording
fees and the cost of the print copies. (1977 Code)
11-2-4: LAND DIVISION:
Before dividing lots or blocks in any recorded subdivision which in any case
does not involve new streets or easement of access, or the sale or exchange of
parcels or tracts of land following division into no more than two (2) parts of
a particular parcel or tract of land existing on the effective date hereof
which does not involve any new street or easement of access, the owner or
divider shall file with the city clerk, the original drawing and four (4)
contact prints of a certified plat of survey showing the proposed division of
such lots, blocks, parcels or tracts of land. Three (3) prints of the plat of
survey shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning board at least ten (10)
days before the next meeting of the planning and zoning board. Not more than
fifteen (15) days after the meeting at which the plat of survey is referred to
the planning and zoning board, the chairman of the planning and zoning board
shall notify the owner or divider whether a new street or easement of access is
required. In the event that a new street or easement of access is required the
notice shall stipulate that an application for final plat approval containing
such maps, certifications and supporting documents as required by the planning
and zoning board shall be filed with the city clerk for processing as herein
set forth in section
11-2-3 of this chapter and section
11-7-1 of this title. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
CHAPTER 3
PRELIMINARY PLAT
SECTION:
11-3-1: Scope
11-3-2: Identification And Description
11-3-3: Existing Conditions
11-3-4: Subdivision Design Features
11-3-1: SCOPE:
The preliminary plat and required accompanying maps shall be drawn on tracing
paper or tracing cloth in a manner that clear and legible prints can be made
and shall show the following information as provided for in this chapter. (1977
Code)
11-3-2: IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION:
The following information is required:
   (A)   Proposed name of the subdivision, not a duplication of a name of any
plat heretofore recorded in the city or in Carroll County, Illinois.
   (B)   Location by section, town and range, or by other approved legal
description.
   (C)   Boundary line survey on an accompanying map which is prepared and
certified by a registered surveyor, and topographic survey data on an
accompanying map which indicates source of survey data.
   (D)   Name and address of the owner or subdivider of the proposed
subdivision and designer of such subdivision.
   (E)   Graphic scale, shall not have a greater differentiation than one inch
equals one hundred feet (1" = 100').
   (F)   North point (designated as true north).
   (G)   Date of preparation. (1977 Code)
11-3-3: EXISTING CONDITIONS:
The following information is required:
   (A)   Boundary lines of proposed subdivision in accordance with subsection
11-3-2(C) of this chapter.
   (B)   Total acreage therein.
   (C)   Existing zoning districts in proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts.
   (D)   Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted
streets or other rights of way showing types of improvement (if any), railroad
and utility rights of way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent
buildings and structures, easements and section and corporate lines within the
tract and to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract.
   (E)   Location and size of existing sewer lines, water mains, culverts or
other underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of one hundred
feet (100') beyond the tract also indicating such data as locations and surface
and invert grade elevations of catch basins, manholes and fire hydrants. (1977
Code)
   (F)   Location map, if required by the planning and zoning board, drawn at a
scale of not less than one inch equals one thousand feet (1" = 1,000'), showing
boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land within an area
bounded by nearest arterial streets or other natural boundaries, but not less
than one-half (1/2) mile beyond the subdivision boundaries in subdivisions
located beyond the city limits, identifying type of use and ownership of
surrounding land and showing alignments of existing streets. (1977 Code; amd.
Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (G)   Topographic data including existing contours at vertical intervals of
not more than two feet (2'), except in unusual topographical conditions; such
vertical intervals may be required to be altered as determined by the city
engineer. (Topographic data shall refer to United States geodetic survey or
adjusted city of Savanna datum.) Locations of watercourses, marshes and other
significant features. Soil boring data and seepage tests may be required at
locations and depths as determined by the city engineer.
   (H)   Locations of or reference to locations of existing monuments or survey
markers used in preparation of survey and grade elevation of each monument and
marker. (1977 Code)
11-3-4: SUBDIVISION DESIGN FEATURES:
The following information is required:
   (A)   The preliminary plat shall be in substantial accord with the
comprehensive plan as amended from time to time.
   (B)   Layout of streets showing right of way widths and street names (not
duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the city or its environs
unless such street is an extension of or in line with an already named street
in which event that name shall be used) and showing proposed through streets
extended to boundaries of subdivision.
   (C)   Location and width of alleys, pedestrianways and utility easements.
   (D)   Layout, total number of lots and dimensions on the lot containing the
minimum width and depth and on the lot containing the maximum width and depth.
   (E)   Minimum front and side street building setback lines, indicating
dimensions.
   (F)   The city of Savanna zoning districts proposed for the subdivision to
be annexed.
   (G)   Areas (other than those listed in subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this
section), if any, intended to be dedicated or reserved for nonresidential
purposes, indicating in each the approximate acreage. Such areas shall be
designated by letter or number.
   (H)   Proposed location of sewer lines and stormwater drains and proposed
method of sewage and waste disposal. (1977 Code)
   (I)   If deemed necessary by the planning and zoning board, proposed
detailed grading plans of blocks and lots. No land will be approved for
subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding or which contains inadequate
drainage facilities or other topographic conditions which may increase danger
to health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard unless the
subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the city
engineer and planning and zoning board make such land safe for development and
occupancy. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
CHAPTER 4
FINAL PLAT
SECTION:
11-4-1: Scope
11-4-2: General Requirements; Exceptions
11-4-3: Additional Delineation
11-4-4: Certificates
11-4-1: SCOPE:
A final plat shall be accurately drawn with black waterproof drawing ink on
transparent linen tracing cloth, or equal, in a manner that clear and legible
transparent or contact prints or photostatic copies can be made, and shall show
the following information as provided for in this chapter. (1977 Code)
11-4-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTIONS:
All information required on the preliminary plat shall be required for the
final plat, except provisions in subsections
11-3-3(B) to (H) inclusive, and
11-3-4(D), (E), (F) and (H) of this title. (1977 Code)
11-4-3: ADDITIONAL DELINEATION:
The following information shall be required:
   (A)   Accurate angular and lineal dimensions for all lines, angles and
curvatures, with functions used to describe all boundaries including perimeter
survey of tract, streets, alleys, easements, areas to be reserved for public
use and other important features. Error of closure of boundary line surveys
shall not exceed one in ten thousand (1 foot for each 10,000 feet of perimeter
survey). Angular error shall not exceed plus or minus twenty (±20) seconds. Lot
lines shall show dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet, and when an angle
occurs in any lot line between lot corners, the measurement of the angle shall
be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. The final plat shall show accurately
the location of all permanent lot markers as actually installed.
   (B)   An identification system for all blocks and lots using consecutive
numbers for lots within a block.
   (C)   True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines and
official monuments (not less than 3), which shall be accurately described in
the plat by location, size and elevation.
   (D)   Municipal, township or section lines accurately referenced to the
lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
   (E)   Accurate location of all monuments which shall be placed at all block
corners, angle points and at intermediate points as shall be required by the
city engineer, and installed in such a manner that they may be located by a
licensed surveyor. All USGS, state, county, city or other official bench marks,
monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be
preserved in precise position.
   (F)   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated
or reserved by public use or for the exclusive use of property owners within
the subdivision.
   (G)   Protective covenants, or filed as an accompanying document. (1977
Code)
11-4-4: CERTIFICATES:
The application for approval of the final plat shall not be deemed completed
until the following certificates, other than the city clerk's certificate, have
been executed:
   (A)   Owner's Certificate1:
   OWNER'S CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF CARROLL   )
This is to certify that the undersigned is the owner of the land described in
the annexed plat, and has caused the same to be surveyed and subdivided, as
indicated thereon, for the uses and purposes therein set forth, and does hereby
acknowledge and adopt the same under the style or title thereon indicated.
The undersigned hereby dedicates for public use the lands shown on this plat
for thoroughfares, streets, alleys and public services; and hereby also
reserves for the Interstate Telephone Company and the Interstate Power Company,
the easement provisions which are stated on their standard form which is
attached hereto.
                                
   Title
   Dated this       day of           , 19     .
1. Corporate owner's certificate should be accompanied by a corporate form of
acknowledgement.
(B)   Notary Certificate:
NOTARY CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF CARROLL   )
I,           , a Notary Public in and for said County, in the State aforesaid,
do hereby certify that           , personally known to me to be the same person
(s) whose name(s) is subscribed to the foregoing instrument as such owner(s),
appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that he signed the
annexed plat as his own free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes
therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this       day of           , 19     .
                                
   Notary Public
(C)   Surveyor's Certificate:
   SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF CARROLL   )
This is to certify that I,          , Registered Illinois Land Survey No.
     , have surveyed and subdivided the following described property:      
as shown by the annexed plat which is a correct representation of said survey
and subdivision. All distances are shown in feet and decimals thereof. I
further certify that all regulations enacted by the City Council relative to
plats and subdivisions have been complied with in the preparation of this plat.
Given under my hand and Seal at          , Illinois, this       day of
        , 19     .
                                 
(D)   City Engineer:
CITY ENGINEER
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF CARROLL   )
I,           , City Engineer of the City of Savanna, Illinois, hereby certify
that the land improvements described in the annexed plat and the plans and
specifications therefor meet the minimum requirements of the City and have been
approved by all public authorities having jurisdiction thereof.
Dated at Savanna, Carroll County, Illinois, this       day of                ,
19     .
                                 
   City Engineer
(E)   County Clerk's Certificate:
COUNTY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF CARROLL   )
I,           , County Clerk of Carroll County, Illinois, do hereby certify that
there are no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid forfeited taxes, and no
redeemable tax sales against any of the land included in the annexed plat.
Given under my hand and Seal at Mount Carroll, Carroll County, Illinois this
      day of           , 19     .
                                 
   County Clerk
(F)   Certificate As To Special Assessments:
   CERTIFICATE AS TO SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF CARROLL   )
I,           , City Treasurer of the City of Savanna, do hereby certify that
there are no delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited special assessments or
any deferred installments thereof that have been apportioned against the tract
of land included in the plat.
Dated at Savanna, Carroll County, Illinois, this         day of              ,
19     .
                                 
   City Treasurer
(G)   Plat Certification:
PLAT CERTIFICATION
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF CARROLL   )
Approved by the Board of Supervisors of Carroll County, Illinois, this      
day of           , 19     .
                                 
   Plat Officer
(H)   City Clerk's Certificate:
CITY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF CARROLL   )
I,           , City Clerk of the City of Savanna, Illinois, hereby certify that
the annexed plat was presented to and by resolution duly approved by the City
Council of said City at its meeting held on           , 19     , and that the
required bond or other guarantee has been posted for the completion of the
improvements required by the regulations of said City.
In witness whereof I have hereto set my hand and Seal of the City of Savanna,
Illinois, this      , day of            , 19     .
                                 
   City Clerk
Note: Except as otherwise required by statute, certification on final plats of
subdivision located in the unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2)
miles beyond the city limits shall be those required by any future Carroll
County subdivision regulations, except when city subdivision regulations are
more restrictive, the applicable certifications contained herein shall also be
required. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 5
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Street Plan
11-5-2: Streets
11-5-3: Alleys And Pedestrianways
11-5-4: Easements
11-5-5: Block Standards
11-5-6: Lot Standards
11-5-1: STREET PLAN:
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the comprehensive plan and official map and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets; to reasonable
circulation of traffic within the subdivision and adjoining lands; to
topographic conditions; to runoff of stormwater; to public convenience and
safety; and in their appropriate relations to the proposed uses of the area to
be served. (1977 Code)
11-5-2: STREETS:
   (A)   All right of way widths shall conform to the following minimum
dimensions: (1977 Code)
               Residential Manufacturing
Type Of Street Subdivision Or Business
                           Subdivision
                                Residential                     Manufacturing
Type Of Street                  Subdivision                     Or Business
                                                                Subdivision
Collector streets1              70 feet                         80 feet
Minor streets                   60 feet                         60 feet
                                Not permitted except when
Half streets                    recommended by the planning and Not permitted
                                zoning board
Cul-de-sac streets              60 feet                         60 feet
Frontage road (not in rights of 40 feet                         50 feet
way or thoroughfares)
Thoroughfares2:
 Major thoroughfares            120 feet                        120 feet
 Secondary thoroughfares        100 feet                        100 feet
 
   Notes:
       1.    A collector street may be required by the planning and zoning
board: a) in a residential subdivision containing 20 acres or more in area; b)
in any subdivision as an extension of an existing or planned collector street
in an adjacent subdivision; and c) in any manufacturing or business
subdivision.
       2.    All major and secondary thoroughfares shall be in accordance with
the above minimum standards unless otherwise designated by the state highway
department or on the official map of the city of Savanna and environs.
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (B)   Where there is a deflection in horizontal centerlines within a given
block at any given point in excess of ten degrees (10°), a curve shall be
inserted with a radius of not less than:
 
Collector street 300 feet
Minor street     100 feet
 
   (C)   Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical
curves. Minimum length in feet of these curves shall provide a stopping sight
distance of not less than three hundred feet (300'), measured from an eye level
four feet (4') high.
   (D)   Minor streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
   (E)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty
feet (150') should be avoided.
   (F)   It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences
encourage safe and efficient traffic flow and, in general, be at or near right
angles avoiding acute angles. An intersection of more than two (2) streets
shall be avoided unless specific conditions of design indicate otherwise. (1977
Code)
   (G)   Alleys are not permitted in residential subdivisions unless deemed
necessary by the planning and zoning board and alleys may be provided in
business or manufacturing subdivisions.
   (H)   Cul-de-sac streets in single-family residential districts shall be not
more than five hundred feet (500') in length, measured along their centerlines
from the streets of origin to the ends of their rights of way, or may be longer
than five hundred (500) linear feet, provided not more than fifteen (15) lots
abut upon their right of way lines. In multiple-family residential areas, such
streets shall not exceed four hundred feet (400') in length. Each cul-de-sac
street shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape with a minimum diameter
of one hundred twenty feet (120'), except a cul-de-sac street that has not more
than five (5) lots fronting on its right of way, or a temporary cul-de-sac
street may have a terminus of the "T" type or other variation of the circular
shape as approved by the planning and zoning board.
   (I)   Half streets shall be prohibited except when recommended by the
planning and zoning board and approved by the city council, and where the city
council finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other
half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever an existing or
dedicated half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half
of the street shall be platted within such tract. A half street shall be graded
and improved with a roadway in accordance with cross section design standards
and profile grades applicable to the entire street width, as established by the
city engineer and approved by the city council. When the other half of an
existing half street is developed, it shall conform with such established cross
section design and profile grades of the entire street width. The width of a
half street shall not be less than one-half (1/2) the required right of way
width of the street. A roadway pavement of not less than eighteen feet (18') in
width and if recommended by the planning and zoning board and approved by the
city council, a curb along both edges of the pavement, shall be installed in
accordance with standards herein set forth. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-
2016)
   (J)   Provisions shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian access to
residential property abutting thoroughfares either by providing: 1) frontage
roads; or 2) by backing lots to the thoroughfares and providing access by a
collector, minor or cul- de-sac street one lot depth removed and with a no
access strip along the rear lot line. These standards are established for the
purpose of providing protection to residential properties and to provide for
traffic safety and the efficient use of the thoroughfare for its intended
function of accommodating through traffic.
   (K)   Gradients of streets shall be at least four-tenths percent (0.4%) and
shall not exceed on:
 
Collector streets 8 percent
Minor streets     10 percent
 
(1977 Code)
11-5-3: ALLEYS AND PEDESTRIANWAYS:
   (A)   Alleys, when permitted in residential subdivisions as herein
regulated, shall be not less than twenty feet (20') wide and alleys in
commercial and manufacturing subdivisions shall be not less than twenty four
feet (24') wide. (1977 Code)
   (B)   Pedestrianways, when required by the planning and zoning board and
approved by the city council, shall be not less than twelve feet (12') wide.
(1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
11-5-4: EASEMENTS:
   (A)   Utility distribution or transmission installations serving the
subdivision and, when required, stormwater drainageways shall be located in
easements as designated on the subdivision plat of record. Such easements shall
be located along the rear lot lines or side lot lines at locations of
extensions of utility installations between blocks for continuity of
drainageways. They shall occupy not less than the rear six feet (6') of lot
depth or six feet (6') of lot width adjoining the applicable side lot line.
Additional easements at other locations on the lot or additional widths may be
recommended for specific conditions by the city engineer and required by the
city council.
   (B)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural drainageway, channel or
stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement, conforming substantially
with the areas bordering such watercourse that are subject to flooding. The
boundaries of such areas subject to flooding shall be as designated by the city
engineer. (1977 Code)
11-5-5: BLOCK STANDARDS:
   (A)   In residential subdivisions, the maximum length of blocks containing
lots less than one hundred fifty feet (150') in width shall be one thousand two
hundred (1,200) linear feet, and the maximum length of blocks containing lots
one hundred fifty feet (150') and over in width shall be one thousand eight
hundred (1,800) linear feet. No blocks shall be less than nine hundred (900)
linear feet in length unless approved by the planning and zoning board.
Pedestrianways leading to schools, parks or other common destinations may be
required by the planning and zoning board.
   (B)   In manufacturing and business subdivisions, maximum length of blocks
shall be as recommended by the planning and zoning board and approved by the
city council. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (C)   The shape of blocks shall be determined by topographical features, the
basic street system and traffic pattern, lot depths, and areas designated for
public and other nonresidential land uses. (1977 Code)
   (D)   Where a subdivision borders upon or is traversed by a railroad right
of way or thoroughfare, the city council may require, when recommended by the
planning and zoning board, a street (on 1 or both sides of such right of way or
street) approximately parallel to and at a distance removed suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land, i.e., park purposes, deep residential
lots fronting on it with a no access strip along the rear lot lines, and off
street parking, business or other uses as permitted by zoning ordinance
regulations. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
11-5-6: LOT STANDARDS:
   (A)   In general, lots should be as nearly rectangular in shape as
practicable. (1977 Code)
   (B)   Width and area of lots shall conform with lot width and area
requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance of the city or that of Carroll
County in the unincorporated areas beyond the city limits. Corner lots shall be
increased in width by twenty percent (20%) over the width of typical interior
lots, except that corner lots need not exceed ninety feet (90') in width, if
the ninety feet (90') in width is greater than the width of the typical lot,
except the planning and zoning board may require a greater width to provide for
the proper development of intersection design and traffic safety. (1977 Code;
amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (C)   Depth of lots shall be not less than one hundred twenty feet (120')
for interior lots, and not less than one hundred ten feet (110') for corner
lots, provided the width is increased to give equivalent area. (1977 Code)
   (D)   Width, area and depth of lots in a manufacturing or business
subdivision shall be as approved by the planning and zoning board. (1977 Code;
amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (E)   All lots shall abut upon a street.
   (F)   Side lot lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the
street line, or substantially so. (1977 Code)
   (G)   Double frontage lots are not permitted, except where lots back upon a
thoroughfare, upon a body of water in separate or undivided ownership, or as
specifically approved by the planning and zoning board in manufacturing and
business subdivisions.
   (H)   Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream shall
have an additional depth or width as required by the planning and zoning board
in order to provide acceptable building sites. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-
26-2016)
   (I)   In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for natural
features such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots, or similar
conditions. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 6
REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-6-1: Scope
11-6-2: Standards And Specifications Of Design
11-6-3: Sanitary Sewerage System
11-6-4: Storm Sewer System
11-6-5: Water Supply
11-6-6: House Services
11-6-7: Streets And Alleys
11-6-8: Pedestrianways (Rep. by Ord. 1189, 2-26-1980)
11-6-9: Public Utilities
11-6-10: As Built Plans
11-6-1: SCOPE:
Before a final plat of subdivision may be approved by the city council, the
owner or subdivider shall submit to the city engineer completed plans and
specifications, prepared by a registered engineer, covering the improvements
and utilities described in the subdivider's plat, and the city engineer shall
certify in writing to the city council that such improvements and utilities
meet the minimum requirements of the city, county, state and other authorities
having jurisdiction, and comply with the requirements as set forth in this
chapter. (1977 Code)
11-6-2: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS OF DESIGN:
Design, dimensions, materials and methods of construction of improvements for
water, drainage, public sanitary sewer and/or sewerage treatment works, streets
and alleys, curbs and gutters, sidewalks and crosswalks, shall be submitted to
the city consulting engineer for certification that said systems shall be
constructed and designed in accordance with approved standards. All fees
required by this section shall be paid for by the subdivider. (Ord. 1189, 2-26-
1980)
11-6-3: SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM:
   (A)   Public sanitary sewerage systems, including sanitary sewer stub
service terminals, shall be constructed by the subdivider in accordance with
section
11-6-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Where sanitary sewer mains of larger capacity than necessary are
required, as directed by the city council, to serve the subdivision as
delineated in the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall be required to pay for
the proportionate benefit of the installation to his subdivision, as
established by the city council. (Ord. 1189, 2-26-1980)
11-6-4: STORM SEWER SYSTEM:
   (A)   A system of stormwater drainage shall be constructed by the
subdivider, consisting of natural watercourses, storm sewers and other
necessary facilities which will drain the subdivision and protect roadway
pavements and be in accordance with section
11-6-2 of this chapter. Open ditches shall be prohibited in state or county
rights of way.
   (B)   Where storm sewer mains of larger capacity than necessary are
required, as directed by the city council to serve the subdivision as
delineated in the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall be required to pay for
the proportionate benefit of the installation to his subdivision, as
established by the city council. (Ord. 1189, 2-26-1980)
11-6-5: WATER SUPPLY:
   (A)   Public water supply and distribution systems, including water service
stub terminals, shall be constructed by the subdivider in accordance with
section
11-6-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Where water supply mains of larger capacity than necessary are
required, as directed by the city council to serve the subdivision as
delineated in the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall be required to pay for
the proportionate benefit of the installation to his subdivision, as
established by the city council. (Ord. 1189, 2-26-1980)
11-6-6: HOUSE SERVICES:
House services for sewer and water shall be constructed to connect each lot or
building site with the utility service mains for each utility required in the
provisions of this title as follows:
   (A)   Such house services shall extend from the main to the property line.
   (B)   House water service for each single-family residence shall be minimum
three-fourth inch (3/4"), type K, copper or approved equal and shall be
terminated at a shutoff valve and box of a type approved by the city engineer
and located fourteen feet six inches (14'6") beyond the outside curb lines of
the proposed roadway pavement. In no case shall the buffalo box be located in
the sidewalk or driveway, or buried underground. (Ord. 1189, 2-26-1980)
   (C)   Upon completion of the construction of all such house sewer and water
connections with the utility mains, three (3) accurate maps showing the exact
location of all such sewer and water mains, together with manholes, shutoff
valves, and similar facilities being part thereof, by distances in feet from
street lines, and of all such house service connections in distances in feet
from side lot lines approved by the engineer or the city, shall be filed with
the city clerk and the planning and zoning board. (Ord. 1189, 2-26-1980; amd.
Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (D)   The connection from the main to the sanitary house drain shall be six
inch (6") vitrified tile. (Ord. 1189, 2-26-1980)
11-6-7: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   (A)   Grading:
      1.   All stumps, trees that cannot be saved, boulders and similar items
shall be removed.
      2.   Before any paving work is commenced, all street grading shall be
properly completed as shown on the grading plan and approved by the city
engineer.
      3.   After grading of streets is completed and approved, and before any
base course of the roadway pavement is laid, all of the underground work, such
as water, sewer and gas mains, house service connections therewith, and all
underground conduits for electric and telephone lines, shall be completely
installed in place and approved.
      4.   When considered necessary by the city engineer, settlement of all
trench backfill shall be accelerated by means of water introduced through holes
jetted into backfilled trenches to a point approximately two feet (2') above
the top of the sewer pipe. The holes shall be jetted not greater than six feet
(6') apart unless otherwise directed by the city engineer. The jetting process
shall conform to the standards set forth in the state of Illinois "Standard For
Road And Bridge Construction", section 66.7. Any depressions which develop
within the street right of way due to settlement of backfilling material shall
be refilled and repaved at the subdivider's expense or, where the subdivider is
not involved, by the company responsible for the trenching, in a manner
acceptable to the city engineer.
      5.   The surface course of the roadway pavement shall not be laid until
backfilling of all trenches dug across the roadway has completely settled or
compacted to the satisfaction of the city engineer. Said trenches shall be
backfilled with suitable material, mechanically tamped in eighteen inch (18")
lifts, and brought to the required grade. The surface course shall not be laid
until at least six (6) months after the base course is completed.
      6.   Corings, at least three (3) per block, only on request of the city
engineer for cause, shall be taken under city supervision after the paving has
been completed and after the subdivider has requested acceptance of the street.
(1977 Code)
   (B)   Roadway Pavement:
      1.   All streets and alleys within the subdivision shall be improved
durable hard surfaced roadway. Materials and method of construction shall be in
compliance with the city's consulting engineer's standards and specifications.
(Ord. 1189, 2-26-1980)
      2.   Roadway pavements shall have an overall width in accordance with the
following minimum dimensions:
      PAVEMENT WIDTH
      (Between Backs Of Curbs Or
      Outer Edges Of Roadway Pavement)
 Residential Subdivisions Manufacturing
                          Or Business
                          Subdivisions
                      Residential Subdivisions                   Manufacturing
                      Lots Less Than      Lots 20,000 Sq. Ft. Or Or Business
                      20,000 Sq. Ft.      More                   Subdivisions
                      In Area             In Area
Collector street      36 ft.              36 ft.                 50 ft.
Minor street          27 ft.              24 ft.                 30 ft.
Cul-de-sac street     27 ft.              24 ft.                 30 ft.
Half street           When permitted, not                        Not permitted
                      less than 20 ft.
Frontage road (not in
rights of way of      24 ft.              22 ft.                 24 ft.
thoroughfares)
Thoroughfares         In accordance with federal, state, county or local
                      requirements
Alleys                20 ft.              20 ft.                 24 ft.
 
(1977 Code)
Cul-de-sac street turnaround areas shall have a minimum diameter, measured from
faces of the outside of curb or outside edges of roadway pavement, of eighty
feet (80') for residential subdivisions and one hundred feet (100') for
manufacturing and business subdivisions, and roadway pavements in T type or
other variations of the circular type terminus shall be as recommended by the
planning and zoning board and approved by the city council. (1977 Code; amd.
Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (C)   Access Driveways: A paved access from the property line to the street
pavement shall be provided in accordance with this code regulating driveways
and culverts, and shall be constructed in compliance with the city's consulting
engineer's standards and specifications. (Ord. 1189, 2-26-1980)
   (D)   Side Strips (Parkways): Parkways having a width in accordance with
street cross section design shall be required on both sides of all streets.
They shall be graded and prepared for seeding by the subdivider with at least
four inches (4") of topsoil. Median strips in streets shall be considered as
parkways unless paved, shall be uniform throughout the course of the street,
but shall not be subject to the ten foot (10') width requirement. All median
strips shall be bordered by a roll type curb and gutter with storm drainage
inlets where needed, as approved or unless otherwise directed by the city
engineer. (1977 Code)
   (E)   Curbs And Gutters: Curbs and gutters shall be provided if the planning
and zoning board, after consulting with the city engineer, recommends providing
curbs and gutters. (Ord. 1404, 2-26-1991; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (F)   Public Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be provided if recommended by the
planning and zoning board and approved by the city council and shall be
constructed in accordance with this code regulating sidewalks and in compliance
with the city's consulting engineer's standard and specifications. (Ord. 1189,
2-26-1980; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
   (G)   Street Lighting System: (Rep. by Ord. 1404, 2-26-1991)
   (H)   Street Signs: (Rep. by Ord. 1189, 2-26-1980)
   (I)   Street Trees: Trees may be planted along all streets where trees do
not exist. The plantings shall be in accordance with title 8 of this code.
(Ord. 1404, 2-26-1991)
11-6-8: PEDESTRIANWAYS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1189, 2-26-1980)
11-6-9: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
   (A)   All utility distribution lines for telephones, electric and gas
service in the subdivision shall be placed underground unless permission for
overhead telephone or electric lines is specifically given by the city council.
Installation of such facilities shall be made in compliance with the applicable
orders, rules and regulations of the Illinois commerce commission now or
hereafter effective and the subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with
rules and regulations, now and hereafter effective and filed with said
commission pursuant to the Illinois public utilities act of any public utility
whose service will be required for the subdivision with respect to the
provision of such facilities.
   (B)   Underground telephone, electric and gas service shall be placed within
easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with
other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be located so
as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. (1977 Code)
11-6-10: AS BUILT PLANS:
Upon completion of the installation of improvements in a subdivision, one set
of tracings on cloth or equal material suitable for use in reproduction which
shows all improvements as actually installed in the field on linen plans shall
be filed with the city engineer. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 7
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-7-1: Plans And Specifications For Land Improvements
11-7-2: Agreements
11-7-3: Public Use Areas
11-7-4: Acceptance Of Streets
11-7-5: Fee For Filing Preliminary Plat
11-7-6: City Engineer's Service
11-7-7: Buildings Within Proposed Major Street Rights Of Way
11-7-8: Building Permit
11-7-9: Occupancy Permit
11-7-10: Division Of Lands Without Platting
11-7-11: Variations
11-7-12: Enforcement
11-7-13: Record Of Plats
11-7-14: Violation, Penalty
11-7-1: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR LAND IMPROVEMENTS:
After the approval of the preliminary plat and prior to filing an application
for approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall submit to the city engineer
and other public officials having jurisdiction, preliminary plans and
specifications, prepared by a registered engineer, for required land
improvements; and if required by the planning and zoning board, detailed
grading plans of lots and blocks. The city engineer and other public officials
having jurisdiction shall approve such preliminary plans and specifications or
set forth the revisions necessary for approval. Based upon the conditions of
approval of the preliminary plans and specifications the subdivider shall have
prepared, by a registered engineer, final plans and specifications covering
such required land improvements. Such plans and specifications shall be
approved by the city engineer and other public officials having jurisdiction
and such approval certified on the final plat. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-
26-2016)
11-7-2: AGREEMENTS:
   (A)   Any owner or subdivider filing an application for approval of a final
plat shall submit a statement of agreement that: The land improvements required
by chapter 6 of this title shall be completed by the owner or subdivider in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer and all
inspection fees required by section
11-7-6 of this chapter and one set of plans and specifications showing such
improvements as installed shall be paid to or filed with the city within two
(2) years following the approval of the final plat by the city council. (1977
Code)
   (B)   A completion bond or an undertaking in lieu of a completion bond
together with an irrevocable letter of credit, in the form attached to the
ordinance codified herein and on file in the city offices, shall be posted by
such owner or subdivider with the city clerk prior to recording of the final
plat. Such completion bond or undertaking in lieu of a completion bond together
with an irrevocable letter of credit shall be in a penal sum sufficient to
cover the cost of the land improvements required by chapter 6 of this title or,
in lieu of a bond, a deposit of cash or other security or undertaking
acceptable to the city council. Such cost for the completion of the required
land improvements shall be in accordance with cost estimates prepared by the
city engineer and approved by the city council. If a completion bond or other
guarantee is posted, there should be good and sufficient surety thereon,
approved as to form by the city attorney and conditioned upon the installation
of said improvements and payment of inspection fees, within two (2) years
following the approval of the final plat. If cash or other security is
deposited, it is to be used insofar as it is sufficient to defray the cost of
making such improvements, including inspection fees. Any unused balance will be
returned to the depositor. There shall be no reduction of that portion of the
bond or other guarantee or deposit applying to a particular improvement, unless
and until that improvement is complete and accepted or approved by the city
council, except that upon the completion of the subgrade, base course and one-
half (1/2) of the thickness of the wearing surface course of a street, alley or
parking area, the city council may reduce that amount of that portion of the
bond or other guarantee or deposit covering such land improvements, but such
reduction shall not be more than an amount equal to ninety percent (90%) of the
estimated cost of installation of the subgrade and base course. (Ord. 1404, 2-
26-1991)
   (C)   The completion bond shall be acknowledged before a notary public by
the principal and surety and shall be in substantially the same form:
1. Completion Bond:
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, THAT: WE                     , as principal and
as surety, are firmly bound to the City of Savanna, Illinois, in the penal sum
of $          , lawful money of the United States of America, for the payment
of such sum, well and truly to be made, we bind ourselves, our heirs,
executors, administrators and assigns, jointly and severally, by these
presents.
The condition of the above obligation is such that:
WHEREAS,                       has obtained, according to law and ordinances of
the City of Savanna, approval of the (Plat of                ), being a
Subdivision of                 in Carroll County, Illinois, conditioned upon:
(a) that by                 date the making of certain improvements, to-wit:
           as more fully described in plans dated             and prepared by
                    , and (b) the execution and delivery of this bond.
NOW, if the said                shall well and faithfully and in a good and
workmanlike manner of good materials according to law and ordinances of the
City of Savanna and in conformity with said plans dated                ,
construct said improvements, and pay all inspection fees payable to said City
for reason of such construction.
THEN THIS OBLIGATION shall be null and void; otherwise the same shall remain in
full force and effect.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands and Seals this
                day of                     , 19         .
               Principal
               Surety
      2.   Certificate Of Notary:
         NOTARY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
COUNTY OF CARROLL   )
I,                , a Notary Public in and for said County, in the State
aforesaid, do hereby certify that                , personally known to me to be
the same person(s) whose name(s) are subscribed to the foregoing instrument,
appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed the
above instrument as their free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes
therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this            day of                ,
19        .
               Notary Public
Note: Such agreements, as set forth above shall not be required for
subdivisions located in the unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2)
miles beyond the city limits when there is evidence that agreements are entered
into between the owner or subdivider and Carroll County, except when the city
standards of public improvements are of higher quality than Carroll County
standards, such agreements may be required by the city.
   (D)   The city clerk shall not certify the approval of the city council on
the final plat until the required bond or deposit or any other undertaking has
been filed as required by this section. (1977 Code)
11-7-3: PUBLIC USE AREAS:
When an area of land for public use (in addition to streets, alleys,
pedestrianways and utility easements) shall be recommended by the planning and
zoning board and required by the city council to be located in whole or in part
in a subdivision, the subdivider shall designate on the preliminary plat and
final plat that such land is reserved for public use. If such land is not
acquired or arrangements made for acquisition by the city, a school board or
other governmental body within one year after the date of recordation of the
final plat, such land may thereafter be used by the subdivider for a use
permitted at its location by zoning regulations or, if applicable, in
accordance with more restrictive protective covenant requirements. (1977 Code;
amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
11-7-4: ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS:
If any plat of subdivision contains public streets or thoroughfares which are
herein dedicated as such, whether located within the corporate limits of the
city or all or in part outside thereof, or contains existing streets located
outside of said corporate limits, the approval of the plat by the city council
or the subsequent annexation of the property to the city shall not constitute
an acceptance thereon or therein, irrespective of any act or acts by an
officer, agent or employee of the city with respect to such streets or
improvements. The acceptance of such streets or thoroughfares shall be made
only by the adoption of a resolution by the city council, after there has been
filed with the city clerk a certificate by the city engineer certifying that
all improvements required to be constructed or installed in or upon such
streets or thoroughfares, in connection with the approval of the plat of
subdivision by the city council, have been fully completed and the construction
or installation thereof has been approved by him. No permanent connection shall
be made or maintained with the sanitary or storm sewer or water supply systems
of the city to serve property within the subdivision until the certificate by
the city engineer as hereinabove provided has been filed, and not until any
money owing to the city for permit fees for the connections within said system
or any of them have been paid. (1977 Code)
11-7-5: FEE FOR FILING PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The fee hereinafter set forth shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of
submission of a preliminary plat. No plat shall be forwarded to the planning
and zoning board for review without a receipt from the city clerk being
exhibited showing full payment of said fee. Payment of the fee is in no way
contingent on whether the plat of subdivision submitted is approved or
disapproved. The amount of the fee shall be determined by the gross acreage of
the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following schedule: (Ord. 1405,
3-12-1991; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
 
Number Of Acres             Fee Per Plat
Up to and including 10      $200.00
Over 10 to and including 20 250.00
Over 20 to and including 40 300.00
Over 40                     350.00
 
(Ord. 1405, 3-12-1991)
11-7-6: CITY ENGINEER'S SERVICE:
The cost incurred by the city for the review of plans and specifications by the
city engineer shall be paid by the owner or subdivider. Such costs shall be
paid to the city clerk at the time of application for approval of a final plat.
All required land improvements to be installed under the provisions of this
title shall be inspected during the course of construction by the city engineer
or other city employee duly appointed by the city council. The cost of such
inspection shall be at a rate fixed by the city council and shall be paid by
the owner or subdivider to the city clerk. (1977 Code)
11-7-7: BUILDINGS WITHIN PROPOSED MAJOR STREET RIGHTS OF WAY:
After the effective date hereof, no permanent building or structure shall be
erected within the rights of way of major thoroughfares as shown on the
comprehensive plan or official map of the city. (1977 Code)
11-7-8: BUILDING PERMIT:
No building permit shall be issued by any governing official for the
construction of any building, structure or improvement to land on any lot
within a subdivision, which has been approved under this title until there has
been compliance with all requirements of this title. (1977 Code)
11-7-9: OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
No occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official for the use of
any building or structure within a subdivision approved under this title until
required land improvements have been installed and accepted by the city council
except street and alley improvements as herein required may be in the process
of installation, provided that roadway pavement base course has been installed
and is suitable for vehicular traffic. (1977 Code)
11-7-10: DIVISION OF LANDS WITHOUT PLATTING:
No lot or tract of land located within the city, or within the area of
jurisdiction of the planning and zoning board, and which contains an area of
more than one-half (1/2) acre, shall be divided or redivided in any manner into
two (2) or more lesser tracts for building site purposes without subdividing or
resubdividing and platting such tract in the manner provided by the statutes of
the state of Illinois. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 2158, 4-26-2016)
11-7-11: VARIATIONS:
The planning and zoning board may recommend variations from the requirements of
this title in specific cases which, in its opinion, do not adversely affect the
comprehensive plan or intent of this title. Such recommendations shall be
communicated to the city council or governing county authorities in writing,
substantiating the recommended variation. The city council may approve
variations from the requirements of this title when, in its opinion, such
variations will not adversely affect the comprehensive plan or the intent of
this title. The city council shall not approve variations that result in
requirements less than required by any future Carroll County subdivision
regulations ordinance for subdivisions located in the unincorporated areas
under the extraterritorial jurisdiction of this title. (1977 Code; amd. Ord.
2158, 4-26-2016)
11-7-12: ENFORCEMENT:
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the recorder's office
or have any validity until it shall have been approved in a manner prescribed
in this title. The city council, by resolution, shall appoint the enforcing
officer of this title, and it shall be his duty to enforce the provisions
hereof. The enforcing officer may call upon any department or official of the
city to furnish him with such information and assistance as he may deem
necessary for the observance or enforcement of this title, and it shall be the
duty of such department or officer to furnish such information and assistance
whenever required. (1977 Code)
11-7-13: RECORD OF PLATS:
All of such plats of subdivision, after the same have been submitted and
approved as provided in this title, shall be filed and kept by the city clerk
among the records of the city. (1977 Code)
11-7-14: VIOLATION, PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this title shall forfeit, upon
conviction, to the city not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, plus the costs of the
action, and each day that such violation continues shall be deemed to be a
separate offense. (1977 Code)
 
