VILLAGE CODE
of
SHERMAN, ILLINOIS
2010
Code current through:
Ord. 2023-17, passed 12-19-2023
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the Village of Sherman, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 2023-17, passed December 19, 2023. Ordinances of the
Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to
the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 24-05
AN ORDINANCE IMPLEMENTING A MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS'
OCCUPATION TAX AND A MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX FOR THE VILLAGE
OF SHERMAN, ILLINOIS
 
WHEREAS, the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, provides that the
corporate authorities of each municipality may pass all ordinances and make all
rules and regulations proper or necessary, to carry into effect the
powers granted to municipalities, with such fines or penalties as may be deemed
proper; and,
 
WHEREAS, the Village of Sherman is a home rule Illinois municipality pursuant
to the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, as amended; and,
 
WHEREAS, Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
provides that, beginning on January 1,  2026, all Illinois municipalities may
impose a tax "upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at
retail in the municipality" (the "Municipal Grocery Tax") (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
and,
 
WHEREAS, the Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax may be imposed "at
the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from these sales" (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
and,
 
WHEREAS, any Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue; and,
 
WHEREAS, Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
requires any municipality imposing a Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation
Tax under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
to also impose a Service Occupation Tax at the same rate, "upon all persons
engaged, in the municipality, in the business of making sales of service, who,
as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer groceries"
as "an incident to a sale of service" (the "Municipal Grocery Service
Occupation Tax") (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24); and,
WHEREAS, any Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue; and,
 
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village believe that it
is appropriate, necessary and in the best interests of the Village of Sherman
and its residents, that the Village of Sherman levy a Municipal Grocery
Retailers' Occupation Tax as permitted by Section
8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24); and,
 
 
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Sherman believe
that it is
 
appropriate, necessary and in the best interests of the Village of Sherman and
its residents, that the Village of Sherman levy a Municipal Grocery Service
Occupation Tax as permitted by Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-24); and,
 
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained, by the President and Board of Trustees
of the Village of Sherman as follows:
 
Section 1. Incorporation of Recitals. The foregoing recitals shall be and are
hereby incorporated as findings of fact as if said recitals were fully set
forth herein.
 
Section 2. Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax Imposed. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail
in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales
made in the course of such business while this Ordinance is in effect. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject
to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
8-11-24).
 
Section 3. Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax. A tax is hereby imposed
upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales
of service, who, as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer
groceries as an incident to a sale of service.
The rate of this tax shall be the same rate identified in Section 2, above. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
 
Section 4. Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer Both Taxes. The taxes
hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of lllinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
 
Section 5. Clerk to file Ordinance with Illinois Department of Revenue. As
required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this Ordinance
with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before April 1, 2025.
 
Section 6. Effective Date. The taxes imposed by this Ordinance shall take
effect on the later of: (i) January 1, 2026; (ii) the first day of July next
following the adoption and filing of this Ordinance \-Vith the Department
of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding April 1st; or, (iii) the first
day of January next following the adoption and filing of this Ordinance with
the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding October 1st.
 
Section 7. Repeal of Conflicting Provisions. All ordinances, resolutions and
policies or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance
are, to the extent of the conflict, expressly repealed on the effective date of
this Ordinance.
Section 8. Severability. If any provision of this Ordinance or application
thereof to any person or circumstances is ruled
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not
 
 
affect other provisions or applications of this Ordinance that can be given
effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid provision
or invalid application of this Ordinance is severable.
 
Section 9. Headings/Captions. The headings/captions identifying
the various sections and subsections of this Ordinance are for reference only
and do not define, modify, expand or limit any of the terms or provisions of
the Ordinance.
 
Section 10. Publication. The Clerk is directed by the corporate authorities to
publish this Ordinance in pamphlet fonn. This Ordinance shall be
in full force and effect after its passage and publication in accordance with
65 ILCS 5/1-2-4.
 
0
PASSED THIS 20th day of August, 2024.
 
AYES: NAYS:
ABSTENTIONS: ABSENT:
(!)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1117_914x10.jpg]
+
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1120_4396x1358.jpg]
APPROVED THIS 20th day of August, 2024.
 
t-'-
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1123_3791x2054.jpg]
Village President
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1126_11873x10414.jpg]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1129_9305x20.jpg]
 
THE VILLAGE OF SHERMAN
 
SANGAMON COUNTY, ILLINOIS
 
 
ORDINANCE NUMBER 2024-07
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 1-7-1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TREVOR J. CLATFELTER President
MICHAEL STRATTON, VillageClerk
 
SEAN BULL PAM GRAY BRET HAHN BRIAN LONG KEVIN SCHULTZ KRISTA SHERROCK
 
Village Trustees
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the President
and Board of Trustees of the Village of Sherman on September 10, 2024
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2024-07
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 1-7-1
 
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained, by the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Sherman as follows:
 
SECTION 1  Ordinance 1-7-1 within the Village Code of Ordinances is hereby
supplemented to include the following:
 
(D)  Deputy Village Administrator. There is hereby created the position of Deputy
Village Administrator. The Deputy shall be appointed by the Village President,
with the consent of the majority of the board of trustees. The Deputy shall
serve at the President's will, and shall report directly to the President and
Village Administrator. The Village Administrator will be responsible for
directing the daily activities, and assist in all ways with the Village Administrator's tasks as assigned
by the President, including the implementation of short and long term goals;
public relations; coordination with other taxing
bodies of the Village; and oversight of the budget. The Deputy shall provide
assistance, advice, and guidance to the Administrator
to facilitate the Board's ability to plan
for the future, develop sound policies and procedures, and respond to the citizenry. Compensation for
the Deputy Village Administrator shall be set by the Village Board.
 
SECTION 2  This Ordinance is effective immediately.
 
SECTION 3  The Clerk is directed
by the corporate authorities to publish this Ordinance in pamphlet form. This
Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage and publication
in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4.
 
TOTALS:
-,
0
0
PASSED THIS 10th day of September, 2024.
 
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
 IMAGES/0-0-0-1133_1785x475.jpg]
 .·... •. I   ••   YES
 BULL    X
GRAY     X
HAHN     )(-
LONG     )(
 SCHULTZ X
SHERROCK X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
,,,,,,1111,
,.''x SHE ,,,
 
VILLAGE OF SHERMAN, IL
 
?...0. o_   (J4t.'<,·
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1138_4141x2236.jpg]
-··
:: ,q;/   <lcoRATE-.._''J'?
:::  0 /   ··•..'-</. ........
- - ._...J,' v
-\-,,..
-   -J•   O"'f"   • .,,... ,,..
??,,\ s?J\'-'/.?
:::. 7\   --   : :' =
·•.   ::"
 
,,,11,,",J,,,,,,
11 I ,,
··1···9··•·c:..q   ,,'
 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
)
COUNTY OF SANGAMON   )
 
I, the undersigned, do hereby certify that I am the duly qualified and
acting Village Clerk of the Village of Sherman, Sangamon, County, Illinois.
 
I do further certify that the ordinance attached hereto is a full, true, and
exact copy of Ordinance Number 2024-07, adopted
by the President and Board of Trustees of said Village on the 10th Day
of September 2024 said Ordinance being entitled:
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 1-7-1
 
I do further certify that prior to the making of this certificate, the said
Ordinance was
spread at length upon the permanent records of said Village, where it now appears and remains.
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1141_2308x1761.jpg]
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereby set m Village this 10th day of September 2024.
,,,,,,1111,,11
official seal of said
 
,',,' ox..s•··H····E···J?41.?
.::: <t.,,......   ···•••? ?,,.
=
... 0..-   ··.'1,?, ..........
:: :::!\   ".tlt!J)   i =
:: -<;;/   <;>ORATE\·  -::;.
..Ji cP?,:.   \'f'-::.
,..7·   1\1•   -
-:::.   .....  s$0-)...J/. ==
...............·.•.........   ....•·/ 2
,,.??,   ···ic_?,q ,,........
'111,11,,,,,,,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1144_9228x20.jpg]
THE VILLAGE OF SHERMAN
   8_,l\j\JGArv1QN COUNTY, ILLINQI§   
 
ORDINANCE NUMBER 25-02
 
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING A HOME RULE SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX WITHIN THE VILLAGE OF
SHERMAN
 
 
 
 
 
TREVOR J. CLATFELTER, Village President MICHAEL STRATTON, Acting Village Clerk
 
SEAN BULL PAM GRAY BRET HAHN BRIAN LONG KEVIN SCHULTZ
KRISTA SHERROCK
Village Trustees
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the President and Board of Trustees
of the Village of Sherman on February 18, 2025
 
Ordinance No. 2025-02
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING A HOME RULE SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX WITHIN THE VILLAGE OF
SHERMAN
 
WHEREAS,  the Village of Sherman, Sangamon County, State of Illinois, is a duly
organized and existing Village created under the provisions of the laws of the
State of Illinois, and is now operating under the provisions of the Illinois
Municipal Code and further is operating as a home-
 rule municipality pursuant to and with all powers under Article VII, Section
6, of the Constitution of the State of Illinois; and
WHEREAS,  the Village has determined that it is appropriate to impose a service
occupation tax within the corporate limits of the Village of Sherman pursuant
to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5; and
WHEREAS,  concurrently with the passage of this Ordinance, the Village is also
amending its Ordinance that adopted a home rule municipal retailer's occupation
tax as required by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1; and
 
WHEREAS,  the Village has determined that it is appropriate to increase said
home rule municipal service occupation tax by the rate of 1%; and
 
NOW THERFORE BE IT ORDAINED, by the President and Board of Trustees of
the Village of Sherman, Sangamon County, Illinois, as follows:
 
Section 1: 
The foregoing recitals shall be and are hereby incorporated into and made part
of this Ordinance as if fully set forth in this Section 1.
 
Section 2:  That pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5, a tax is imposed upon all
persons engaged in the business of making sales of service within the Village
of Sherman. The tax imposed by this section
shall be at the rate of 1.5% of the selling price of all tangible personal
property transferred by such servicemen either in the form of tangible personal
property or in the form or real estate as an incident to a sale of service.
 
The tax is not imposed on the sales of aviation fuel or food for human
consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic
beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for immediate consumption)
and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and
insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
 
Section 3:  Administration of this tax shall be conducted by the Illinois State
Department of Revenue in accord with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5 and all
other applicable statutes, rules, and regulations.
 
Section 4: All other ordinances and provisions of the Village Code of the
Village of Sherman, Illinois in conflict with this ordinance are hereby
repealed to the extent of said conflict.
 
Section 5: In the event a court of competent jurisdiction finds this ordinance
or any provision hereof to be invalid or unenforceable as applied, such finding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this ordinance and
the application thereof to the greatest extent permitted by law.
 
Section 6:  The Village Clerk is directed to publish this Ordinance in
pamphlet form immediately and said ordinance shall take effect pursuant to the
terms of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5. The Village Clerk is further directed to file a
certified copy with the Illinois Department of Revenue, as required by statute,
prior to April 1, 2025.
 
PASSED this 18th day of February 2025.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1147_4175x2049.jpg]
,,,,,,11,,,
11
i,,,,
,,',''Ox.$.•··H····•.E   ?ll1_ 1
-   v-?   •1• /J// .,,,
....... r-/-,:.:I···...   • ••.:'.Al ?.,.
::  <::(/   oR-'?oRATE .?.. ..--: -:::.
::.s;.'\   - .? ;   =
-   ....J: ,.,   ,< -
-   _!:  V   _,.o?   '\ -
-;:.   ...... $-G.f\.\,J / 0 ::
 
?   ·•..
....   :::
 
<,,,/; ··•......1...9....-;;9• ,,,-:
I I I   ,,
111111''''
 
 
           YES NO ABSENT PRESENT
BULL       V
GRAY       V
HAHN              V
LONG       ?
SCHULTZ    /
SHERROCK   ?
GLATFELTER v
TOTAL      0   C) t      0
 
ORDINANCE CERTIFICATE
 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
) ss
COUNTY OF SANGAMON   )
 
I, the undersigned, do hereby certify that I am the duly qualified and acting
Clerk of the Village of Sherman, Illinois.
I do further certify that the ordinance attached hereto is a full, true, and
exact copy of Ordinance No. 25-02 adopted by the Village on the 18th day of
February 2025, said Ordinance being entitled:
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING A HOME RULE RETAILER'S OCCUPATION TAX WITHIN THE VILLAGE
OF SHERMAN
 
I do further certify that prior to the making of this certificate, the said Ordinance was spread
at length upon the permanent records of said Village, where it now appears and
remains.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and affixed the official seal of
said
Village this 18th ?ei{'}'}"??el'>t.l)9-ry 2025.
?''' or-   €1?.11- //,,
...'. /,   .•••   ••.• "7-<1 ,,
?   ?v ?
' .... 0-V:/   •••... ,,,, ,,,
=::: <::t:!   cpORATE \·   -
= -J ! c:P?   fr   ::.
:::::,!,1·   •0$ I\,.   •i =--
 
:::.   \   cE0u /.,::::
?  •••••...?   ....··/   -?
,,////   ···xcfs0_,,·,''
111111 i\\\\'
Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1150_9247x20.jpg]
THE VILLAGE OF SHERMAN
Sj.\NGAMON COUNTY, ILLINOIS
 
ORDINANCE NUMBER 25-03
 
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING A HOME RULE RETAILER'S OCCUPATION TAX WITHIN THE VILLAGE
OF SHERMAN
 
 
 
 
 
TREVOR J. CLATFELTER, Village President MICHAEL STRATTON, Acting Village Clerk
SEAN BULL PAM GRAY BRET HAHN BRIAN LONG KEVIN SCHULTZ
KRISTA SHERROCK
Village Trustees
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the President and Board of Trustees
of the Village of Sherman on February 18, 2025
 
Ordinance No. 2025-03
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING A HOME RULE RETAILER'S OCCUPATION TAX WITHIN THE VILLAGE
OF SHERMAN
 
WHEREAS,  the Village of Sherman, Sangamon County, State of Illinois, is a duly
organized and existing Village created under the provisions of the laws of the
State of Illinois, and is now operating under the provisions of the Illinois
Municipal Code and further is operating as a home-
 rule municipality pursuant to and with all powers under Article VII, Section
6, of the Constitution of the State of Illinois; and
WHEREAS,  the Village has determined that it is appropriate to impose a
retailer's occupation tax within the corporate limits of the Village of Sherman
pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1; and
WHEREAS,  concurrently with the passage of this Ordinance, the Village is also
amending its Ordinance that adopted a home rule municipal service occupation
tax as required by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5; and
 
WHEREAS,  the Village has determined that it is appropriate to increase said
home rule municipal retailer's occupation tax by the rate of 1%; and
 
NOW THERFORE BE IT ORDAINED, by the President and Board of Trustees of
the Village of Sherman, Sangamon County, Illinois, as follows:
 
Section 1: 
The foregoing recitals shall be and are hereby incorporated into and made part
of this Ordinance as if fully set forth in this Section 1.
 
Section 2:  That pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1, a tax is imposed upon all
persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other
than items of tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency
of the State of Illinois, at retailed in the Village of Sherman,
on gross receipts from those sales made in the course of such business.
Said tax shall be imposed at a rate of 1.5% of gross receipts from such sales.
 
The tax is not imposed on the sales of aviation fuel or food for human
consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic
beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for immediate consumption)
and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and
insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
 
Section 3:  Administration of this tax shall be conducted by the Illinois State
Department of Revenue in accord with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1and all
other applicable statutes, rules, and regulations.
 
Section 4: All other ordinances and provisions
of the Village Code of the Village of Sherman, Illinois in conflict
with this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of said conflict.
 
Section 5:  In the event a court of competent jurisdiction
finds this ordinance or any provision hereof to be invalid or unenforceable
as applied, such finding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions of this ordinance and the application thereof to the greatest extent
permitted by law.
 
Section 6:  The Village Clerk is directed to publish this Ordinance
in pamphlet form immediately and said ordinance shall take effect pursuant
to the terms of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1. The Village Clerk is further directed
to file a certified copy with the Illinois Department of Revenue, as required
by statute, prior to April 1, 2025.
 
PASSED this 18th day of February 2025.
 
,,,,1111,,,
f:1r,
,,,, f   SH   111
..,.' 0v/,...o   ••.. ? 1,. ,.
::  "(' ./   ••••••'-_1 /-:.
0
:::::Jj oB-PORA;? -.._'J- ,:.
e   I
:: 31   ., ..?   iP::
% :··· SEAL./
.,.,:,,, •·................•····....   ,-2
 
11I I
1959  ,, ........
 
1111,,,,,,
Clerk
 
 
 
           YES NO ABSENT PRESENT
BULL       ?
GRAY       ?
HAHN              ?
LONG       ?
SCHULTZ    ?,
SHERROCK   ?
GLATFELTER ?
TOTAL      to  0  i      b
 
ORDINANCE CERTIFICATE
 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
) ss
COUNTY OF SANGAMON   )
 
I, the undersigned, do hereby certify that I am the duly qualified and acting
Clerk of the Village of Sherman, Illinois.
I do further certify that the ordinance attached hereto is a full, true, and
exact copy of Ordinance No. 25-03 adopted by the Village one this 18th day of
February 2025, said Ordinance being entitled:
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING A HOME RULE RETAILER'S OCCUPATION TAX WITHIN THE VILLAGE
OF SHERMAN
 
I do further certify that prior to the making of this certificate,
the said Ordinance was spread at length upon the permanent records of said
Village, where it now appears and remains.
,,,x
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and affixed the official seal
of said Village this 18thday of February 2025.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1153_4895x1650.jpg]
,,,\\1111111
$Ht: ,,/
··.'-:/,i ? ...
::?-c- ?...(-?,...•············?¾ /.,.,,
:: 3! o<?-"oRATE\;??
 
=
- [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1156_144x10.jpg] ..J,' c;
flll'"..'.-.
:·,r---
 
:;:.7\   _.-..1\1 i
-;:. \   C, :CJP-1,.,,1! •   :::
'/.,, .-···..'::!_   ....••·/   2
"/.,,,,,,1"i1§,·,s,,y,,,,/"
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE VILLAGE OF SHERMAN
 
SANGAMON COUNTY, ILLINOIS
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NUMBER 2025-14
 
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TREVOR J. CLATFELTER President
MICHAEL STRATTON, Acting VillageClerk
 
BETH FOX PAM GRAY BRET HAHN BRIAN LONG KEVIN SCHULTZ
KRISTA SHERROCK
Village Trustees
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the President
and Board of Trustees of the Village of Sherman on September 9, 2025
 
ORDINANCE NO. 25-14
 
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
 
 
WHEREAS,  the VILLAGE OF SHERMAN_pursuant to the police powers granted to by
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-
8 and 5/11-31-2), wishes to establish eligibility in the
National Flood Insurance Program and in order to do so must meet the
requirements of Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Sections 59
to 79 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, necessary for such
participation; and
WHEREAS, PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
 
VILLAGE OF SHERMAN  find it to be in the best interest of the VILLAGE
to establish rules and regulations for floodplain management throughout the
VILLAGE and superseding any less restrictive municipal rules and regulations
therein; and,
WHEREAS,  the PRESIDENT AND VILLAGE BOARD OF THE VILLAGE
 
OF SHERMAN have previously adopted Ordinances No. 2007-06, as amended from time
to time,
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED  by the PRESIDENT AND
 
VILLAGE BOARD OF THE VILLAGE OF SHERMAN, Sangamon County, Illinois,
the following measures shall be required within the corporate limits of the SHERMAN:
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
 
Section 1.
Section 2.
Section 3.
Section 4.
Section 5.
Section 6.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 7.
Section 8.
Section 9.
Section 10.
Section 11.
Section 12.
Section 13.
Section 14.
Section 15.
Purpose Definitions
Base Flood Elevation
Duties of the Responsible Official Development Permit
Protecting Buildings
A.   All Buildings
B.   Residential/Non-residential Buildings
C.   Non-Residential
D.   Manufactured Homes
E.   Travel Trailers and Recreational Vehicles
F.   Garages or Sheds and Other Accessory Structures Subdivision Requirements
Public Health and Other Standards Carrying Capacity and Notification Variances
Disclaimer of Liability Penalty
Abrogation and Greater Restrictions Severability
Effective Date
 
Section 1. PurJ!ose.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the
Sherman by the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-
2, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2). This Ordinance is adopted in order to
accomplish the following purposes:
A.   To meet the requirements of 615 ILCS 5/18(g) Rivers, Lakes and Streams
Act;
B.   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage hazards
to others;
C.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
D.   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
E.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens
from the hazards of flooding;
F.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public facilities and
utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
G.   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
H.   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program
codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended;
I.   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available by fulfilling the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program, and
J.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains
in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits, and enhance community and economic
development.
 
 
Section 2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defines below, all words used in this ordinance shall have their
common meanings. The word "shall" mean the action is mandatory.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions are adopted:
Accessory Structure A non-habitable building, used only for parking of vehicles
or storage, that is on the same parcel of property as the principal building
and which is incidental to the use of the principal building.
Agricultural Structure  A walled and roofed structure used exclusively for
agricultural purposes or uses in connection with the
production, harvesting, storage, raising, or drying of agricultural commodities
and livestock, including aquatic organisms. Structures that house tools or
equipment used in connection with these purposes or uses are also considered to
have agricultural purposes or uses.
 
Base Flood  The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is often referred to as the 100-
year flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in Section 3
of this ordinance.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE)  The height in relation to the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified) of the
crest of the base flood.
Basement   Any portion of the building, including any sunken room or
sunken portion of a room, having its floor below ground level (subgrade) on all
sides.
Building  A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank,
that is
principally above ground including manufactured homes and prefabricated buildings.
The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR)  A letter providing FEMA's comment
on a proposed project that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic
or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result
in the modification of the existing Floodway, the effective BFEs, or the SFHA.
Critical Facility  Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension
to the disaster. Damage to
these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services, can cause greater damage
to other sectors of the community, or can put special populations at risk.
Dam  All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Darns may also include weirs,
restrictive culverts, or irnpoundrnent Structures. Underground water storage
tanks are not included.
Development  means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials
This includes, but is not limited to:
1.   demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a building, or
any structural alteration to a building;
2.   substantial improvement of an existing building;
3.   installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
4.   installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
5.   redevelopment of a site, clearing of land as an adjunct of construction
6.   construction or erection of levees, darns, walls, or fences;
 
7.   drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
alterations of the ground surface;
8.   storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage tanks,
and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
Elevation Certificate A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a Building has been constructed.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision  A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed 
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA  Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-
79, as amended.
Flood  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waters, or from
the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source. Flood also includes the
collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually
high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or
by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal
surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which
results in a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters.
Flood Frin?  That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
Flood Insurance Rate Map  A map prepared
by the FEMA that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area 
(SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate
zones and may or may not depict floodways and show BFEs. A FIRM that has been made
available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
Flood Insurance Study-  An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Floodplain and Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)  These two terms are
synonymous. SFHA is the land in the flood plain within a community
subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Those
lands within the
 
jurisdiction of the community and the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the community, or that may be annexed into the community,
that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains
of the community are identified as such on panel number(s) of the countywide
FIRM prepared by the FEMA. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM.
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the flood insurance rate map, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH,
Al-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/Al-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, ARIA,  VO, or Vl-30, VE, or
V.
SFHA may also refer to areas identified by the community that are flood prone
and designated from other federal state or local sources of data including but
not limited to historical flood information reflecting high water marks,
previous flood inundation areas, and flood prone soils associated with a
watercourse.
Floodproofing  Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
Floodproofing Certificate  A form published
by the FEMA that is used to certify that a building has been designed
and constructed to be structurally dry flood proofed to the flood protection
elevation.
Flood Protection Elevation {'{'}FPE)  The elevation of the
base flood plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
In an AO Zone the FPE is the depth of the zone shown on the FIRM plus one foot 
(or a higher standard of two or three feet). In Zone AO areas
with no elevations specified on the FIRM, the structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot (or you can choose a
higher standard of two feet or three feet) above the highest adjacent natural
grade.
Floodway  Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The floodway for
the floodplains shall be as delineated on the FIRM prepared by FEMA. The floodways
for each of the remaining floodplains shall be according to the best data available from
the Federal, State, or other sources. In no case shall the designated height be
more than
0.1 foot at any point within the community.
Freeboard  An increment of elevation added to the BFE to provide a factor of
safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown
localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those
caused by ice or debris jams.
Historic Structure Any structure that is:
1.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
2.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
 
3.   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
4.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been
certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
IDNR/OWR Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water Resources.
IDNR /OWR Jurisdictional Stream IDNR/OWR has jurisdiction over any stream
serving a tributary
area of 640 acres or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of any stream
serving a tributary area of 6,400 acres or more in a rural area. Construction
on these streams requires a permit from the IDNR/OWR. (Il Admin.
Code 17 Part 3700). The IDNR/OWR may grant approval for specific
types of activities by issuance of a statewide permit which meets the standards
defined in Section 6 of this ordinance.
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA)  Official determination by FEMA that a specific
building, defined area of land, or a parcel of land, where there
has not been any alteration of the topography since the date of the first NFIP
map showing the property within the floodplain, was inadvertently included
within the floodplain and that the building, defined area of land, or a parcel
of land is removed from the floodplain.
 
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR)  Letter that revises BFEs, floodplains
or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM.
Lowest Floor  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area 
(including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered
a building's lowest floor. Provided that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of Section 6 of this ordinance.
Manufactured Home 
A building, transportable in one or more sections that is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to required utilities.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision  A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.
New Construction  Structures for which the start of construction commenced or
after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by
a community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision  A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to
be constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities,
the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
 
NFIP National Flood Insurance Program.
NAVD 88  North American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
RecreatiQ_n_al Vehicle or Travel Trailer A vehicle which is:
1.   built on a single chassis;
2.   four hundred 
(400) square feet or less in size, when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
3.   designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
4.   designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
Repetitive Loss- Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate
occasions during a ten-
year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event on the average equals or exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)  See definition of floodplain.
Start of Construction Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement
or other improvement, was within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation
or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial
improvement, actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure (see "Building") The  results of a man-
made change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including a
building, as defined in Section 2, any addition to a building; installing
utilities, construction of roads or similar projects; construction or erection
of levees, walls, fences, bridges or culverts.
Substantial Damage  of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the percentage of
damage during ten year period equals or exceeds fifty percent 
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred
regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term includes
"Repetitive Loss Buildings" (see definition).
Substantial Improvement Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, repair, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place during a ten year period in which the percentage
 
of improvements equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of
the structure before the improvement or repair is started.
The term does not include:
1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state
or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary
to assure safe living conditions, or
2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
Variance  A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a flood plain
management regulation.
Violation The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this ordinance.
Section 3. [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/IMAGES/0-0-0-1159_151x15.jpg]lbts_e
Flood Elevation.
This ordinance's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNRJOWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
A.   The BFE for the floodplains shall be as delineated on the base flood
profiles in the countywide Flood Insurance Study 
(FIS) of Sangamon prepared by the FEMA and dated August 2, 2007. Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel number
17167C0I00F, 17167C0075F, 17167C0235F, 17167C0255F, dated August 2,
2007.
B.   The BFE for each floodplain delineated
as an "AH Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on
the FIRM.
C.   The BFE for each of the remaining floodplains delineated as an "A Zone" on
the FIRM shall be according to the best data available from federal, state, or
other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine BFEs.
D.   Establishing a BFE is required in a Zone A for all new subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments 
(including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than
50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser.
E.   The BFE for the floodplains of those parts of unincorporated County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, or that may be annexed,
shall be as
delineated on the base flood profiles in the FIS and FIRM prepared by the FEMA.
Sectiof!A. Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
The village engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations
and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain
Administrator
 
shall be responsible for the general administration of this ordinance and
ensure that all development activities within the floodplains meet the
requirements of this ordinance. The Floodplain Administrator shall:
A.   Review all development permits to assure that the requirements of this ordinance
have been fully met.
B.   Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building
sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in
a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall:
 
(1)   be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy,
 
(2)   be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage,
 
(3)   be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and
 
(4)   be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are located so as to
prevent water from entering.
 
C.   Check all new development sites to determine if they are in the floodplain using the
criteria listed in Section 3, Base Flood Elevation or for critical facilities,
using the 0.2% annual chance flood elevation, if defined.
D.   Process development permits and any permit extensions in accordance with
Section 5 and ensure all development activities happen in a timely manner.
E.   Ensure that the building
protection requirements for all buildings subject to Section 6
are met and maintain a record of the "as-built" elevation of the lowest floor 
(including basement), elevation certificate, or floodproofing certificate.
F.   Review Elevation Certificates for accuracy and require incomplete or deficient
certificates to be corrected.
G.   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
Section 7 and notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have
been modified by annexation.
H.   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the Public Health
standards of Section 8.
I.   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of Section 10 are met and
maintain documentation of any variances granted.
J.   Inspect all development
projects and take any and all penalty actions outlined in Section 12 as a
necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
K.   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain development
permit
applications to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those
 
federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is
required. This includes, but is not limited to, permits pertaining to:
1.   Permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of the
Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency under Section 401 of the Clean Water Act or
permits from other Federal agencies.
2.   Permits issued for the work in an IDNR/OWR Jurisdictional Streams by IDNR/
OWR (or written documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not
required). This would include any required permits from other state agencies.
3.   Within six (6) months, notify FEMA of physical changes in the Base Flood
Elevation (increases or decreases) by submitting technical or scientific data
through the Letter of Map Change (LOMC) process, so that insurance rates and
floodplain management requirements will be based on current data.
L.   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse.
M.   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about permit procedures
and floodplain construction techniques.
N.   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this ordinance.
0. Maintain for public inspection
base flood data, floodplain maps, copies of state and federal permits, and any
other documentation of compliance for development activities subject to this
ordinance.
P.   Notify FEMA and IDNR/OWR of any proposed amendments to this ordinance.
Q.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this ordinance and make
substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain.
R.   Schedule an annual inspection of the floodplain and document the results
of the inspection.
S.   Establish, procedures for administering and documenting determinations, as
outlined below, of substantial improvement and substantial damage:
1.   Determine the market value or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal
of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the
building before the start of construction of the proposed work. In the case of
repair, the market value of the building shall be the market value before the
damage occurred and before any repairs are made.
2.   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged
building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements
and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building. Substantial
damage determinations take into account all damage sustained to the structure
regardless if the structure is repair or not.
 
3.   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial
improvement or substantial damage.
4.   Notify property owner of all determinations and responsibilities for
permitting and mitigation of the structure.
Section 5. Develon_ment Permit.
A.   Development permits
1.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by law,
shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Floodplain Administrator.
2.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body shall commence any
development of a critical facility on land below the 0.2% annual chance flood
elevation without first obtaining a Development permit from the Floodplain
Administrator.
3.   The Floodplain Administrator shall only issue a permit for development
activities, including new construction and substantial improvements, which meet
the requirements of this ordinance.
B.   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
1.   A site plan or drawings, drawn to scale using NAVD 88, showing:
a.   property lines and dimensions,
b.   existing grade elevations,
c.   all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling,
d.   description of the benchmark or source of survey elevation control
d.   sewage disposal facilities,
e.   water supply facilities,
f.   floodplain limits based on elevation or depth, as applicable;
g.   floodway limits, as applicable;
h.   the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings;
1.      the location and dimensions of all structures, including but not
limited to fences, culverts, decks, gazebos, agricultural structures, and
accessory structures;
J.   the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed
buildings subject to the requirements of Section 7 of this ordinance.
2.   Cost of project or improvements, including all materials and labor, as
estimated by a licensed engineer or architect. A signed estimate by a
contractor may also meet this requirement.
 
C.   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the Floodplain
Administrator shall compare the elevation of the site to the BFE.
1.   Any development located on land that is shown by survey elevation to be
below the current BFE is subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
2.   Any development located on land shown to be below the BFE and
hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not identified as floodplain on
the current FIRM, is subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
3.   Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to be
higher than the current BFE and which has not been filled after the date of the
site's first flood map showing the site in the floodplain, is not located in a
mapped floodway, or located in a Zone A, is not in the floodplain and
therefore not subject to the provisions of this ordinance. A LOMR-Floodway is
required before developing land inadvertently included in a mapped
floodway. Unless a LOMR is obtained, all ordinance provisions apply if the land
is located in a Zone A.
4.   Any development located on land that is above the current BFE but will be
graded to an elevation below the BFE, is subject to the provisions of this
ordinance.
5.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first FIRM identification.
6.   The Floodplain Administrator shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or
permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The
Floodplain Administrator shall not issue a permit unless all other federal,
state, and local permits have been obtained.
D.   Upon receipt of an application for a critical facility, the Floodplain
Administrator
shall compare the elevation of the site to the 0.2% annual chance flood elevation, if
available. Refer to Section 8. A. 5. for critical facility site requirements.
E.   A development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the actual
Start of Construction, as defined, for work authorized by such permit,
is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized
is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences.
All permitted work shall be completed within eighteen months after the date
of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire. Time extensions,
of not more than 180 days each, may be granted, in writing,
by the Floodplain Administrator. Time extensions shall be granted only if the original
permit is compliant
with this ordinance and the FIRM and FIS in effect at the time the extension is
granted.
F.   Certification and As-Built Documentation. The applicant is required
to submit certification by a licensed professional engineer or registered
land surveyor that the
finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with Section 6
of this ordinance. Floodproofing measures must be certified by a registered
 
professional engineer or registered architect as being compliant with
applicable floodproofing standards. FEMA Elevation Certificate and
Floodproofing Certificate forms may be required as documentation of compliance.
An as-built grading plan, prepared by a registered professional engineer may be
required to certify that any development in floodplain, such as grading or the
construction of bridges or culverts, are in substantial conformance with the
development permit.
No building, land or structure may be occupied or used in any manner until a
letter or certificate has been issued by the Floodplain Administrator stating
that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
ordinance.
The Floodplain Administrator must maintain records in perpetuity documenting
compliance with this ordinance, including the elevation to which structures and
alterations to structures are constructed or floodproofed.
G.   Application Fees and Engineering Review Fee
A non-refundable application fee of
$100.00 dollars shall be paid to the Village Clerk. An additional fee may be
charged if the Floodplain Administrator requires the assistance of a
professional engineer or other expert. The applicant will be contacted in
writing before any outside review begins with the estimated engineering or
expert review fee. The applicant must consent in writing before the outside
review begins. The engineering review fee shall be paid in full by the
applicant within 30 days after the applicant receives the bill.
Section 6. Protecting Buildings.
A.   All buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood
damage below the FPE. This building protection requirement applies to the
following situations:
1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition to an
existing building.
2.   Value of improvements equals or exceeds the market value by fifty percent
(50%)   If substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must
meet the flood protection standards of this section.
3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building.   If substantially
damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards
of this section within 24 months of the date the damage occurred.
4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on
an existing site.
5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational
vehicle on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
6.   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in Section 2.
 
7.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition to an
existing building with the low floor below BFE following a LOMR-
F
in accordance with the conditions outlined in Section 9. E. The structure must meet FEMA
Technical Bulletin (TB) 10 Reasonably Safe from Flooding Requirement for
Building on Filled Land.
B.   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building protection
requirements by one of the following methods:
1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill with the lowest floor
including basement at or above the FPE in accordance with the following
conditions.:
a.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the FPE.
b.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches before
compaction and should extend at least twenty (20) feet beyond the
foundation before sloping below the FPE in lieu of a geotechnical report.
c.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by
vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
d.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated debris or
refuse material.
e.   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary, stormwater management
techniques, such as swales or basins, shall be incorporated.
2.   The building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
a.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles, solid walls,
crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood waters.
b.   All components located below the FPE shall be constructed of materials
resistant to flood damage.
c.   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and
air conditioning equipment shall be located at or above the FPE.
d.   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the FPE shall provide for
equalization of hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters. At least two (2) walls must have a minimum of one
(1) permanent opening that is below the BFE and no more than one (1)
foot above finished grade. The openings shall provide a total net area of not
less than one (1) square inch for everyone (1) square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding below the BFE, or the design must be certified by a
Registered P.E, as providing the equivalent performance in accordance
with accepted standards of practice. Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin 1,
Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures, for additional guidance.
 
e.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored, designed, and
certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as current,
waves, ice, and floating debris.
1.      Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible
pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the FPE provided they
are waterproofed.
11.      The area below the FPE shall be used solely for parking or building
access and not later modified or occupied as habitable space.
m.      In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with these
requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect.
2.   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the FPE
provided that the following conditions and requirements of FEMA TB 11,
Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas,
which ever are more restrictive, are met:
a.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
b.   All enclosed areas below the FPE shall provide for equalization of
hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. A minimum of one (1) permanent opening shall be provided
on at least two walls that is below the BFE and no more than one (1) foot above
finished grade. The openings shall provide a total net area of not
less than one (1) square inch for everyone (1) square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding below the BFE, or the design must be certified by a
Registered P.E. as providing the equivalent performance in accordance
with accepted standards of practice. Refer to FEMA TB 1, Openings in Foundation
Walls and Walls of Enclosures, for additional guidance.
c.   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior grade of
the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four (4) feet at
any point.
d.   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time
after a flood event.
e.   The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed 5 feet per second
for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of 5 feet per second, other
foundation types should be used.
 
f.   Portions of the building below the FPE must be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage, and
g.   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the FPE.
 
C.   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of
elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
1.   Below the FPE the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood.
2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of rise,
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the impact
from debris and ice.
3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design and
operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls, and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
D.   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on site shall
be:
1.   Elevated to or above the FPE in accordance with Section 6. B, and
2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied
down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile Horne
Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.
E.   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one hundred
eighty
(180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of section 6. D unless the
following conditions are met:
1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as decks and
porches
4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel, or
seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
5.   The vehicles having a total area not exceeding four hundred (400) square
feet measured when measured at the largest horizontal projection.
6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be safe for
movement of the floodplain.
8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be quick-
disconnect.
9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or park
model, and must either:
a.   entirely be supported by jacks, or
 
b.   have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching the ground
and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to be easily
removed by used of the hitch jack.
F.   Detached accessory structures may be permitted provided the following
conditions are met:
1.   The structure must be non-habitable.
2.   The structure must be used only for the parking and storage and cannot be
modified later into another use.
3.   The structure must be located outside of the floodway or must meet all
requirements of this ordinance.
4.   The exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e.,
foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below
the BFE, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance Section 6.
5.   All utilities, mechanical, and electrical must be elevated above the FPE.
6.   The structure must have at least one permanent opening on at least two walls
not more than one (1) foot above grade with one (1) square inch of opening
for everyone (1) square foot of floor area. They shall meet the opening
requirements of Section 6(B)(2)(d);
7.   The structure must be no more than one story in height and no more than six
hundred (600) square feet in size.
8.   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation, collapse, lateral
movement. and overturning.
9.   All flammable or toxic materials 
(gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the
FPE.
10.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented, and the owner advised of
the flood insurance implications.
Section 7. Subdivision Reguirements
The Sherman Village Board shall take into account hazards, to the extent that
they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
A.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, planned
unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the
damage prevention and building protections standards of Section 6 of this
ordinance. Assure that subdivision proposals and other development will be
reasonably safe from flooding and minimize flood damage.
B.   Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and
laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural
streams and channels. Wherever
possible the floodplains should be included within parks, open space parcels, or other
public grounds.
 
C.   Any proposal for such development shall include the following data:
1.   The BFE and the boundary of the floodplain, where the BFE is not available
from an existing study, the applicant shall be responsible for calculating the
BFE.
2.   The boundary of the floodway, when applicable.
3.   A signed statement by a Licensed Professional Engineer that the proposed
plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
SectiQn 8. Public Health and Other Standards
A.   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of Section 6 of this ordinance, the
following standards apply:
1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE unless such materials are
stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and certified by a
professional
engineer or floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of
Section 6 of this ordinance.
2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
4.   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the FPE shall be watertight.
5.   Critical facilities, which are buildings, constructed or substantially
improved within the floodplain or the 0.2 percent annual chance flood elevation
when defined, shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
structurally dry floodproofed to the 0.2 percent annual chance flood elevation
or three feet above the BFE, whichever is greater. Adequate parking shall be
provided for staffing of the critical facilities at or above the BFE or 0.2
percent chance flood, when defined. Access routes to all critical facilities
should be reviewed and considered when permitting. Access routes should be
elevated to or above the level of the BFE.
Floodproofing and sealing measures may also be used to provide protection, as
described in Section 6, and must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will
not be displaced by or released into floodwaters.
Critical Facilities include emergency services facilities such as fire and police
stations, schools, hospitals, retirement homes, senior care facilities, sewage
treatment plants, water treatment plants, specific roads and bridges required
 
for evacuation, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or
electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances) of a specified size or type.
B.   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to
alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
C.   Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard/damage potential
in the event of failure. Permits for dams may be required from IDNR/
OWR. Contact IDNRJOWR to
determine if a permit is required. If a permit is required, a permit application
must be made to IDNR/OWR prior to the construction
or major modification of jurisdictional dams. All construction activity for
a dam must also meet the development requirements of this ordinance.
D.   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation.
E.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, a community may
permit
development within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase
in base flood elevations, provided that the community meets subsection (F) and
fulfills any requirements for such revisions.
F.   Letters of Map Revision. The Floodplain Administrator shall require a CLOMR prior
to issuance of a development permit for:
1.   Proposed floodway encroachments that will cause an increase in the BFE;
and
2.   Proposed development which will increase the BFE by more than 0.1 feet in
riverine area where FEMA has provided a BFE but no floodway.
Once a CLOMR has been issued by FEMA, the development permit may be issued
for site grading and structures necessary in the area of the map change
to achieve the final LOMR. Upon completion, the applicant shall submit as-built
certifications, as
required by FEMA, to achieve a final LOMR prior to the release of final development
permits.
G.   When construction of a building following a FEMA issued LOMR Based on Fill
(LOMR-F) is requested, the condition where a site in the floodplain is removed
due to the use of fill to elevate the site above the BFE, the applicant may
apply for a permit from to construct the lowest floor of a building below the
BFE in the floodplain.
The Floodplain Administrator shall not issue such a permit unless the applicant
has demonstrated that the building will be reasonable safe from flooding. The
Floodplain Administrator shall require a professional certification from a
qualified design professional that indicates the land or buildings are
reasonably safe from flooding,
 
according to the criteria established in FEMA TB 10.
Professional certification may come from a professional engineer, professional
geologist, professional soil scientist, or other design
professional qualified to make such evaluations.
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain records, available upon request
by FEMA, all supporting analysis and documentation used to make that
determination, including but not limited to, all correspondence,
professional certification, existing and proposed grading, sump pump sizing,
foundation plans, Elevation Certificates, soil testing and compaction data.
Section 9. Carrying Capacity and Notification.
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained. In addition, adjacent communities, Illinois Department of Natural
Resources and FEMA, shall be notified thirty (30) days prior to issuance of a
permit for any alteration or relocation of a watercourse.
Section 10. Variances.
A.   No variances shall be granted within a floodway if any increases in the
base flood elevation would result.
B.   Whenever the standards of this ordinance place undue hardship
on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Village
of Sherman zoning
board for a variance. That Board shall review the applicant's request for a variance
and shall submit its recommendation to the Sherman Village Board. The Sherman
Village Board may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems
necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this ordinance. The Sherman
Village Board_shall base the determination on:
1.   Technical justifications submitted by the applicant.
2.   The staff report, comments, and recommendations submitted by the floodplain
administrator.
3.   The limitations, considerations, and conditions set forth in this section.
C.   The findings of fact and conclusions of law made by the Village Board
according to Section 10. A, the notifications required by Section 10. B, and a
record of hearings and evidence considered as justification for the issuance of
all variances from this ordinance shall be maintained by the Village in
perpetuity.
D.   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates, and the
Village finds that all of the following conditions are met:
1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship by rendering the lot undevelopable.
 
3.   The variance granted is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, public safety,
destruction of beneficial stream uses and functions including, aquatic habitat,
causation of fraud on or victimization of the public, conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances, or creation of a nuisance.
5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or
relief operations, policing, lost environmental stream uses and functions,
repairs to streambeds and banks, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
6.   The circumstances of the property are unique and do not establish a pattern
inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP.
7.   Good and sufficient cause has been shown that the unique characteristics of
the size, configuration, or topography of the site renders the requirements of
this ordinance inappropriate.
8.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
E.   The Village Board shall notify an applicant in writing
that a variance from the
requirements of the building protections standards of Section 7 that would lessen the
degree of protection to a building will:
1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty-five
dollars ($25) per one hundred dollars ($100) of insurance coverage.
2.   Increase the risk to life and property.
3.   Require that the applicant proceed
with knowledge of these risks and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the
assumption of the risk and liability.
F.   Considerations for Review. In reviewing applications for variances, all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, all other portions of these regulations, and
the following shall be considered:
1.   The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands
resulting in further injury or damage.
2.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
3.   The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners.
4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the
community.
5.   The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are
not subject to flooding or erosion.
6.   The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and
anticipated development.
 
7.   The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area.
8.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
9.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
10.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets, and bridges.
 
G.   Historic Structures. Variances issued for the reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a
historic site or historic structure as defined in "Historic Structures",
may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements
of Sections 6 and 7 of this ordinances subject to the conditions that:
1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
2.      The repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.
H.   Agriculture Structures. Variances issued for the construction
or substantial
improvement of agricultural structures which do not meet the non-
residential building requirements of Sections 6. B and 6. C, provided the
requirements of Section 10. A through 10. G and the following are satisfied:
1.   A determination that the proposed agricultural structure:
a.   Is used exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting,
storage, raising, or drying of agricultural commodities, or storage of tools or
equipment used in connection with these purposes or uses, and will be
restricted to such exclusive uses.
b.   Has low damage potential (amount of physical damage, contents damage, and
loss of function).
c.   Does not increase risks and pose a danger to public health, safety, and
welfare if flooded and contents are released, including but not limited to
the effects of flooding on liquified natural gas terminals, and production and
storage of highly volatile, toxic, or water-reactive materials.
d.   Complies with the wet floodproofing construction requirements of Section
H.2.
2.   Wet floodproofing construction requirements. Wet floodproofed structures
shall:
 
a.   The exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e.,
foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below
the BFE, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with
Section 6 of this ordinance.
b.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
c.   All enclosed areas below the FPE shall provide for equalization of
hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. A minimum of one (1) permanent opening shall be provided on at
least two walls that is below the BFE and no more than one (I) foot above
finished grade. The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than
one (I) square inch for everyone (1) square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding below the BFE, or the design must be certified by a Registered P.E. as
providing the equivalent performance in accordance with accepted standards of
practice. Refer to FEMA TB 1, Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of
Enclosures, for additional guidance.
d.   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located
above the BFE or floodproofed so that they are contained within a watertight,
floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood
conditions in accordance with Section 6 of this ordinance.
e.   If located in a floodway, must be issued a state floodway permit or have a
letter of determination that a permit is not required.
f.   The building may not be used for manure storage or livestock confinement
operations.
Section 11. Disclaimer of Liabili,!y.
The degree of protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable
for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and
scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may
be increased by man-
made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that development either
inside or outside of the floodplain
will be free from flooding or damage. This ordinance does not create liability
on the part of the Village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that results from proper reliance on this ordinance or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
Section 12. Penal,!y.
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure
to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this ordinance. Upon due investigation, the Village President,
Administrator, Engineer or Attorney may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this ordinance exists. That officer
shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
 
A.   If such owner fails after ten 
(10) days from the date the written notice is issued, to correct the violation:
1.   The Village shall make application to the circuit court for an injunction
requiring conformance with this ordinance or make such other order as the court
deems necessary to secure compliance with the ordinance.
2.   Any person who violates this ordinance shall upon conviction thereof be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50) or more than seven hundred fifty ($750)
for each offense.
3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues, and
4.   The Village shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property.
B.   The Municipal Attorney shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
The Municipal Attorney is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension
of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, indicate
the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to
resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the Village Board., Written notice of such hearing shall be
served on the permittee and shall state the grounds for the complaint, reasons
for suspension or revocation, and the time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Village Board shall
determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
C.   Nothing herein shall prevent the Village_from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
Section 13. Abrogation and Grfater Restricti_onS_._
This ordinance repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Village of Sherman
to fulfill the requirements of the NFIP. However, this ordinance
does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance
adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this ordinance
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. Where this ordinance and other ordinance easements, covenants
or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
 
Section 14. Severabili,!y.
The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be deemed separable and the
invalidity of any portion of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of
the remainder.
Section 15.  Effective Date.
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, and publication as required by law.
Passed by the Village Board of the Village of Sherman, Illinois, this 9th day
of September 2025 the vote being taken by ayes and noes and entered upon the
legislative records as follows:
 
 
           YES NO ABSENT PRESENT
FOX        ?
GRAY       ?
HAHN       ?
LONG       ·/
SCHULTZ    /      ./
SHERROCK   ?
CLATFELTER
TOTAL      Yi  0  I      ·u
 
 
-r----- _...., r-rr.:;::-?:-·······
,,,,,,11,,,11
?   .......•·   '-.-:J?A ,I, ,;-
' ,,O,,X s ..\..-.\..E...R ('.1,;i '1
V
=
?  ?/SR?ci1'iE:·•;<:j- ?
<G   <:JPA   t!/0   ..,   ::
-   _.I: V   ,<l99   :\   !   -
- -- _--.-)·:·.   - -<"::- f,¾ ) : ; C- -
.- 7  ·.  C   ,,,,._ • .-  ' -
-:.,,,,,, ··:-----?-?!-?--:< ,::?
//   ·•, '.) :?- ',,
I Ir.   ·•   • • \'
'  j :   \ : \ \ \
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
)
COUNTY OF SANGAMON   )
 
I, the undersigned, do hereby certify that I am the duly qualified and acting
Village Clerk of the Village of Sherman, Sangamon, County, Illinois.
 
I do further certify that the ordinance attached hereto is a full, true, and
exact copy of Ordinance Number 2025-14, adopted by the President and Board of
Trustees of said Village on the 9th Day of September 2025. said Ordinance being
entitled:
 
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
 
I do further certify that prior to the making of this certificate, the said
Ordinance was spread at length upon the permanent records of said Village,
where it now appears and remams.
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1162_2322x1574.jpg]
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereby set my hand and ..afffx the official seal of said
Village this 9th day of September 2025.
 
,,,x,\\\\$IHll/t:// ,,,,
::.:.....0.-o····.•········..J·r··t•l.?.?. /,.,..,..
::: 0 /   ·••.'1,, ?
=
=-   -'-nt!: cPxl,.\'oRATE ··.:   ..-
 
:: :::!.\   ?-8
'-<::.
-.. c\Ei
j
 
....,..-".7,
••   --?, :; I?  .-,·._
,._..1_.-  •• -
 
',,,,;;:;;; J'if /. <C
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
SHERMAN VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the village board of trustees, this code is hereby
declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official village code of
Sherman. This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the SHERMAN
VILLAGE CODE and is hereby published by authority of the village board of
trustees and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation
of the village as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2010 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The village code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of
this state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect,
except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2010 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the village code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the
village code. (2010 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the village and shall be returned to the office of the
village clerk when directed so to do by order of the village board of trustees.
(2010 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the village passed by the president and board of
trustees prior to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as
are included in this code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Tax levy ordinances;
   B.   Appropriation ordinances;
   C.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
   D.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations;
   E.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants;
   F.   Salary ordinances;
   G.   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places;
   H.   Improvement ordinances;
   I.   Bond ordinances;
   J.   Ordinances relating to elections;
   K.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the village; and
   L.   All special ordinances. (2010 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of section
1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances with respect to such provisions only. (2010 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the village herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the village under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2010 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is, for any reason, held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof. The village board of
trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (2010 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the president and village board of trustees may
be fully carried out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be held,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other village officer to do some act or perform
some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or
other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the village of Sherman".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the
village has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to village ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2010 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: Unless otherwise indicated, the village board of trustees of
the village of Sherman.
CODE: The village code of the village of Sherman.
COUNTY: The county of Sangamon, state of Illinois.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the village, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the village.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The village of Sherman, county of Sangamon, state of Illinois.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law on any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person or, in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (2010 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the village code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (2010 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1 :
   A.   General Penalty Imposed: Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this
code or state statute, any person found to have been in violation of any of the
terms and provisions of this code shall be fined in an amount not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). No imprisonment for failure to pay such
fine, penalty or cost shall exceed six (6) months for each offense. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. A penalty
for each offense may include a requirement that the offending party perform
some reasonable public service work such as, but not limited to, picking up
litter in public parks or upon public highways or performing maintenance of
public facilities. A violation hereof may be established by a preponderance of
the evidence.
   B.   Acts Consistent With Criminal Laws Of State: If, by the terms of an
ordinance, an act that would be consistent with the criminal laws of the state
is declared to be a misdemeanor, the penalty therefor shall be for a period of
incarceration in a penal institution other than the penitentiary not to exceed
six (6) months. The matter shall be prosecuted under the rules of criminal
procedure of the state, and the village shall be required to establish guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt.
   C.   Limitation; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of subsection A of
this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that established
by state statute for the same offense. (2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/1-2-1.1.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2010 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the village board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (2010 Code)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Official Village Map
1-5-2: Procedure For Requested Information
1-5-1: OFFICIAL VILLAGE MAP:
   A.   A map of the village entitled "official map, village of Sherman,
Sangamon County, Illinois", the most current edition thereof, is hereby
declared to be the official map of the village.
   B.   The original of said map is hereby entrusted to the village clerk who
shall keep the same prominently displayed in his office and readily available
for inspection by members of the public. Copies thereof, properly certified and
dated, may be sold by the clerk at a fee of five dollars ($5.00) each, the
proceeds of which are to be deposited with the village treasurer and accounted
for in the general fund.
   C.   The village clerk is hereby empowered and directed to maintain the map
in a current condition and to record thereon any annexations or disconnections
from the village by marking the same thereon with a distinctive line showing
the boundaries of said annexations or disconnections and, in addition, a
reference to the village ordinance or court decision effectuating the same,
together with the date thereof.
   D.   The map, when certified by the village clerk, shall be prima facie
evidence of the area encompassed by the village and the boundaries thereof.
(1984 Code §
1-7-1)
1-5-2: PROCEDURE FOR REQUESTED INFORMATION:
The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure for the village in
handling requests for information, and the following conditions shall apply:
(1984 Code §
1-8-1)
   A.   All requests for information will be reasonable in nature, and ten (10)
working days will be allowed for the furnishing of said information. (1984 Code
§
1-8-1; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   All requests for information from the public records of the village
shall be directed to the village clerk, and a fee of fifty cents ($0.50) per
page for any documentation furnished will be charged and paid in advance to the
clerk at his office in the village. Should the number or nature of the requests
become extremely time consuming, the village is entitled to charge postage and
a fee for reasonable and necessary time for the assembling and mailing of said
information.
   C.   Any ordinances, resolutions or other documentation published according
to state statute and records of closed meetings of the village board of
trustees will not be furnished, and no requests for automatic mailings of
specific documents will be allowed.
   D.   All requests for information shall be a matter of public record of the
village and shall be directed to the village clerk. The village clerk shall
respond to all such requests in accordance with the Illinois freedom of
information act 1 . (1984 Code §
1-8-1)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Meetings
1-6-2: Compensation
1-6-3: Standing Committees
1-6-1: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regularly scheduled meetings of the board of trustees
shall be held at the time and date determined by said board of trustees and
posted on the village website.
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the board of trustees may be
called by the president or by any three (3) members of the board of trustees
from time to time upon not less than forty eight (48) hours' notice to all
members of the board of trustees and upon posting notice of said special
meeting at the site of the regular board of trustees meetings not less than
forty eight (48) hours prior to the time of said special meeting. (1984 Code §
1-5-1; amd. 2010 Code)
   C.   Adjourned Meetings: Adjourned meetings of the board of trustees may be
held for the purpose of completing unfinished business of the regular meetings
at such times as may be determined by the board of trustees.
   D.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the board of trustees or of any
committees, legislative, executive or administrative bodies thereof shall be
public meetings unless closed pursuant to and in compliance with the open
meetings act 1  or any other similar provision of the laws of the state. (1984
Code §
1-5-1)
   E.   Remote Attendance At Meetings:
      1.   Rules Statement: Any member of the village board may attend any open
or closed meeting of the village board via electronic means (such as by
telephone, video or internet connection) provided that such attendance is not
otherwise prohibited and is in compliance with these rules and any applicable
laws.
      2.   Prerequisites: A member of the village may attend a meeting
electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
         a.   The member must notify the clerk at least twenty four (24) hours
before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary communications
equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical
arrangements will result in denial of a request for remote attendance.
         b.   The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why
he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
            (1)   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability; or
            (2)   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or
the business of the village; or
            (3)   The member cannot attend because of a family or other
emergency.
      3.   Authorization To Participate: The clerk, after receiving the
electronic attendance request, shall inform the village of the request for
electronic attendance. After establishing that there is a quorum physically
present at a meeting where a member of the village desires to attend
electronically, the presiding officer shall state that: a) a notice was
received by a member of the village in accordance with these rules, and b) the
member will be deemed authorized to attend the meeting electronically unless a
motion objecting to the member's electronic attendance is made, seconded, and
approved by two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the village physically present
at the meeting. If no such motion is made and seconded or if any such motion
fails to achieve the required vote by the members of the village physically
present at the meeting, then the request by the member to attend the meeting
electronically shall be deemed approved by the village and the presiding
officer shall declare the requesting member present. After such declaration by
the presiding officer, the question of a member's electronic attendance may not
be reconsidered.
      4.   Adequate Equipment Required: The member participating electronically
and other members of the village must be able to communicate effectively, and
members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the meeting
site. Before allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the village shall
provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting site.
      5.   Minutes: Any member attending electronically shall be considered an
off site attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting if the
member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state
specifically whether each member is physically present or present by electronic
means.
      6.   Rights Of Remote Member: A member permitted to attend electronically
will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting and participate
in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all
general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and adhered to.
The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as
to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any member attending electronically
shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded
by the clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member
attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any
member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his or her
leaving and returning.
      7.   Committees, Boards And Commissions: These rules shall apply to all
committees, boards and commissions established by authority of the village.
      8.   Participation While Driving Prohibited: Members permitted to attend
a meeting electronically may not participate while driving. Accordingly, if a
member meets all other criteria, but the only available method to attend the
meeting is by use of a cellular phone while driving, the member may not
participate.
      9.   Costs: A member participating remotely via telephone shall be
reimbursed for the cost of the telephone call upon a valid receipt shown. Any
other costs associated with remote participation, including video conferencing
and other audio and video equipment, must be previously approved by the
village.
      10.   Limited Participation Rights: Nothing herein shall prohibit an
official who does not meet the prerequisites of subsection E2 of this section
from participating in the meeting remotely, without voting rights, if the audio
or video equipment is available and a majority of those present do not vote
against the participation. Costs in such circumstances shall not be
reimbursable. (Ord. 2011-18, 11-7-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
1-6-2: COMPENSATION:
The village president and trustees shall be paid as follows for services
rendered to the village:
   A.   President:
      1.   Base Monthly Salary: The president shall be paid a base monthly
salary of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
      2.   Additional Salary:
         a.   The president shall be paid at the rate of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each regularly scheduled meeting and each recessed meeting or
special meeting attended during each calendar month, not to exceed three (3)
meetings per month.
         b.   The president shall also be paid twenty dollars ($20.00) per hour
for each hour of work done on village business other than meetings, not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month. No working hours shall be
carried over from month to month if the president works hours in excess of
those required to reach the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      3.   Maximum Salary: In no event shall the total salary paid to the
president exceed the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month. (Ord.
2002-28, 9-17-2002; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Trustees: Trustees shall be paid a base monthly salary of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00), plus one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for
each special meeting attended during each calendar month, not to exceed one
special meeting per month. (Ord. 2010-12, 10-5-2010)
   C.   Payment Of Compensation: Fees shall be paid monthly by the village
treasurer, and meeting attendance fees shall be based upon the attendance roll
call as filed with the village clerk. Said fees shall be charged against the
general corporate fund. The village shall reimburse all expenses incurred by
any elected official which are necessary for the performance of the official's
duties as are approved in advance by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 2002-
28, 9-17-2002; amd. 2010 Code; Ord. 2010-12, 10-5-2010)
1-6-3: STANDING COMMITTEES:
There are hereby created and established the following standing committees of
the village president and board of trustees:
Executive committee
Committee on police and public safety
Committee on economic and residential development
Committee on public health and environment
Committee on operations, personnel and labor relations
Committee on building codes and final grade occupancy permits
Committee on audits
Committee on Sherman Green
Committee on parks and recreation, building and grounds
Committee on information technology, outreach and general services
Committee on budget, finance and appropriations
Committee on public works
Committee on green energy efficiency solutions
Committee on permits and fees
Committee on architectural control
Committee on infrastructure, sewer and drainage
Committee on 2010 census
Committee on public works facilities planning and construction
Committee on tax increment finance
Committee on village hall planning and construction
Committee on codification
Committee on land subdivision regulation and ordinances
(Ord. 2009-24, 6-16-2009)
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-7-1: Village Manager And Economic Development Coordinator
1-7-2: Village Attorney
1-7-3: Village Clerk
1-7-4: Village Architect
1-7-5: Other Officers And Employees
1-7-6: Social Security
1-7-1: VILLAGE MANAGER AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COORDINATOR:
   A.   Village Manager: There is hereby created the position of village
manager. The manager shall be appointed by the village president and shall
serve at the president's will. The manager shall report directly to the village
president and shall be responsible for directing the daily activities as set by
the president pertaining to the supervision of department heads, implementation
of short and long term goals, public relations, coordination with other taxing
bodies of the village, and oversight of the budget. Additionally, the manager
shall provide assistance, advice and guidance to the president and board of
trustees which shall facilitate the board's ability to plan for the future,
develop sound policies and procedures, and respond to the citizenry.
   B.   Economic Development Coordinator: There is hereby created the position
of economic development coordinator. The coordinator shall be appointed by the
village president and shall serve at the president's will. The coordinator
shall report directly to the village president and shall be responsible for
establishing and coordinating a sound economic development program through
implementation and use of the powers granted to the village under the state
municipal code and through conducting such research and inventory of resources
and preparation of industrial facts profiles to be used as presentations to
industrial prospects considering expansion or location in the Sherman area. The
economic development coordinator may assist the village president in
negotiations as per the village economic development plan.
   C.   Positions May Be Held By Same Individual; Time Management:
      1.   The positions of village manager and economic development
coordinator may and can be held by the same individual functioning in both
capacities. These position classifications can be budgeted for from various
funds from within the village treasury as set by the village president and
board of trustees. (Ord. 2008-9, 10-7-2008)
      2.   The position of village manager and economic development
coordinator, having been filled by a single qualified individual, requires
direction regarding the allocation of time to be spent on the responsibilities
and duties assigned to each position. After reviewing the respective tasks to
be undertaken by each position, it is hereby determined that no less than sixty
percent (60%) of the workday of the village manager/economic coordinator should
be spent implementing all laws pertaining to economic development and focus
(almost exclusively) on the development and redevelopment of the three (3)
designated "redevelopment project areas" as established by the village board in
accordance with the tax increment allocation redevelopment act, 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.1 et seq. (Res. 2008-13, 12-2-2008)
1-7-2: VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
There is hereby created the position of village attorney. Said attorney shall
be appointed by the president with the consent of the majority of the board of
trustees. Said attorney is authorized and empowered to represent the village in
all legal matters and to discharge such other duties as may be imposed by law,
or by motion, resolution or ordinance of the board of trustees and to employ,
within the scope of his authority, such legal or technical assistants necessary
to discharge his duties. (1984 Code §
1-6-1)
1-7-3: VILLAGE CLERK:
   A.   Appointment: The position of village clerk shall be filled by
appointment by the village president with the concurrence of a majority of
village trustees then in office as is permitted by 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3.1-25-90(a). The village clerk, once appointed, shall serve at the
pleasure of the village president. (Ord. 2010-11, 10-5-2010)
   B.   Compensation: The village clerk shall be paid the following fees for
attending meetings of the board of trustees:
      1.   Compensation Per Meeting: The compensation per meeting of the
village clerk shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) (regularly scheduled and
special), up to three (3) meetings per month.
      2.   Additional Compensation: As additional compensation, at its
discretion, the village board may employ the village clerk for additional work
on behalf of the village. The village clerk shall be paid at an hourly rate for
additional work performed on behalf of the village. Any additional compensation
paid to the village clerk under this subsection shall be upon terms and
conditions approved by the village board and in compliance with all applicable
state and federal laws. (Ord. 2002-22, 9-3-2002; amd. 2010 Code; Ord. 2010-11,
10-5-2010)
1-7-4: VILLAGE ARCHITECT:
   A.   Position Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the position of
village architect. The village architect shall be appointed by the president,
with the consent of the majority of the board of trustees.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The village architect is authorized and empowered to
represent the village in all matters and to discharge such other duties as may
be imposed by law, or by motion, resolution or ordinance of the board of
trustees, including, without limitation, the village beautification program,
any approved TIF assistance programs, internal operations, building code
implementation and inspection processes, and coordination with a designated
architectural control committee.
   C.   Assistants: The village architect is authorized to employ, within the
scope of authority designated by the president or the board of trustees, such
assistants necessary to discharge the duties of office. (Ord. 2009-19, 5-19-
2009)
1-7-5: OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
The village board shall from time to time appoint, retain or employ such other
officers or employees as it shall deem necessary to carry out the governmental
duties of the village. Rates of compensation and other matters relating to such
employment shall be established by the village board in accord with applicable
statutes and regulations of the state of Illinois and the United States Of
America. (1984 Code §
1-6-2)
1-7-6: SOCIAL SECURITY:
   A.   Policy And Purpose: It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose
of the village to extend to the eligible employees thereof, effective as of
July 1, 1974, the benefits of the federal old age, survivors and disability
insurance provisions of the federal social security act and amendments thereto.
In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the village president shall
take such action as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations.
   B.   Execution Of Agreement With State: The village president is hereby
authorized and directed to execute an agreement with the social security unit
of the state employees' retirement system of Illinois to secure coverage of
eligible employees as provided in this section.
   C.   Withholdings; Remittance: Withholdings from salaries or wages of
employees for the purpose provided in this section are hereby authorized to be
made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state
and federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency in
such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws or regulations.
   D.   Employer Contributions And Administrative Expenses: Employer
contributions and administrative expense shall be paid to the state agency in
accordance with applicable state laws and regulations from amounts appropriated
for such purposes.
   E.   Records And Reports: The village treasurer shall maintain such records
and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws
or regulations. (1984 Code §
1-6-3)
ARTICLE A. PERSONNEL CODE
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Policy Statement
1-7A-2: Definitions
1-7A-3: Position Classification, Job Description And Salary Administration Plan
1-7A-4: Attendance And Leave
1-7A-5: Appointment And Separation
1-7A-6: Probation
1-7A-7: Disciplinary Actions
1-7A-8: Outside Employment
1-7A-9: Gifts And Gratuities
1-7A-10: Resignation
1-7A-11: Records Kept
1-7A-12: Not An Employment Contract
1-7A-13: Saving Clause
1-7A-14: Opting Out Of The Illinois Paid Leave For All Workers Act
1-7A-1: POLICY STATEMENT:
   A.   Equal employment opportunity is the policy in all conditions, terms and
benefits of employment with the village.
   B.   The purpose of this statement is to clearly define the
responsibilities, functions and working relationships of employees of the
village. This statement is designed to promote understanding and efficiency,
and to provide fair and equal opportunities and evaluation to all employees.
Unless an exception is specifically made, these rules shall apply to all
employees of the village but not to elected and appointed officials, or
independent contractors hired by the village.
   C.   All changes must be approved by the village board. (Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-
1999, eff. 8-1-1999)
1-7A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply to this personnel code:
ANNIVERSARY DATE: The date upon which an employee receives his/her permanent
appointment.
APPOINTMENT: Employment with the village of Sherman.
BREAK PERIOD: That part of each day, other than mealtime, allotted an employee.
COMPENSATORY TIME: Authorized time worked in excess of the regular scheduled
workweek. Authorized vacation, sick leave, military leave, jury duty, personal
days and holidays shall not be considered as time worked for purposes of
compensatory time and overtime.
   A.   For police, depending on type of schedule, a workweek will be either
forty eight (48) hours per eight (8) days or eighty four (84) hours per
fourteen (14) days.
   B.   For police administration, a workweek will be forty (40) hours per
seven (7) days, unless needed to work the forty eight (48) hour week.
   C.   For streets, parks and sewers, a workweek will be forty (40) hours per
seven (7) days.
DEMOTION: A transfer of an employee from a position in one class to a position
of less authority and/or less responsibility.
FULL TIME EMPLOYEE: An employee working a forty eight (48) hour (police) or
forty (40) hour (streets, parks and sewers) week who has satisfactorily
completed his/her probationary period and who is eligible for benefits.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY: Husband, wife, son, daughter, father, mother, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, brother, sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, grandfather,
grandmother, or other unspecified relatives if they live in the employee's
household.
LAYOFF: A separation from the village because of a lack of operating funds,
abolishment of position, or for other reasons beyond the control of an
employee, and not reflecting unsatisfactory performance on the part of said
employee.
MILITARY LEAVE: A period of training required because of membership in a
reserve unit or active duty in the United States armed forces.
MONTH: One calendar month from the first to the last day of said month.
PART TIME EMPLOYEE: An employee working less than a forty (40) hour week who
has satisfactorily completed his/her probationary period and who is not
eligible for benefits.
PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEE: An employee who has not completed his/her trial service
period of one year.
PROMOTION: Transfer of an employee from one position to another having greater
authority and/or responsibility.
SUPERVISOR: Any person responsible to a higher divisional or department
authority directing the work or training of others.
TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE: An employee who is filling a position for a limited
duration only and is not a probationary employee, and is not entitled to
benefits of full time employees.
TYPES OF EMPLOYMENT STATUS: There are four (4) types of employee status. They
are acquired as follows:
   A.   Full Time: Acquired by an employee who has been retained in his/her
position after the completion of the probationary period as provided in this
policy.
   B.   Probationary: Acquired by an employee who has been appointed, but who
has not completed the probationary period provided in this policy.
   C.   Temporary: Acquired by an employee who has been appointed to complete a
specific project which will last for a limited period of time, and is not a
probationary employee; not to exceed nine hundred ninety nine (999) hours per
year. Example: Summer help.
   D.   Part Time: An employee hired to work less than forty (40) hours a week
and who has satisfactorily completed his/her probationary period. (Ord. 1999-
22, 6-15-1999, eff. 8-1-1999; amd. 2010 Code)
1-7A-3: POSITION CLASSIFICATION, JOB DESCRIPTION AND SALARY ADMINISTRATION
PLAN:
   A.   Maintenance And Modifications; Copies Available: The village president
and village board shall be responsible for continuous maintenance of the
personnel policies and procedures. Modifications of the personnel policies and
procedures are effective after approval by the village board. Copies of the
personnel policy will be available for public inspection.
   B.   Salaries And Pay Increases: All salaries and pay increases shall be
based upon consideration of budget figures, qualifications, ability,
efficiency, and length of service.
   C.   Contractual Service: With approval of the village board, the village
may contract with independent contractors or parties for the performance of
personal or professional services, and such contracts shall not be subject to
any policies or agreements affecting village employees nor subject to the
provisions of this personnel code.
   D.   Methods Of Payment: Pay periods and rates of payment shall be set by
the village president and village board.
   E.   Preparation Of Payrolls: Payroll sheets will be maintained to show the
name, rate and type of pay and the amount of time for which each individual
employee is paid.
   F.   Residency Of Police Employees: All nonprobationary police employees
shall live within a fifteen (15) minute response time of the village. All
addresses are required to be recorded with the department. Changes in addresses
shall be reported within fourteen (14) hours of the change. If an officer moves
out of the fifteen (15) minute response zone without express written consent of
the village board, automatic termination of employment results, unless there is
a temporary emergency approved by the chief of police. Provided however, the
village board may, for good cause shown, waive the residency requirements of
this subsection. Any such waiver shall be at the sole discretion of the village
board and upon such terms and conditions as the board may deem appropriate, and
such waiver may be withdrawn or rendered ineffective upon six (6) months'
written notice to the officer receiving such waiver.
   G.   Change In Personal Status: Employees of the village shall report all
changes in dependent status, residence, telephone number, etc., during their
next scheduled workday following. (Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-1999, eff. 8-1-1999)
1-7A-4: ATTENDANCE AND LEAVE:
   A.   Hours Of Work:
      1.   Nonpolice Personnel: Normal working hours for full time nonpolice
personnel shall be an eight (8) hour working day. Each employee shall be
entitled to a one hour lunch period to be taken approximately at midshift as
scheduled by the department head to be taken in addition to the eight (8) hour
workday. Each employee will have regularly scheduled off days, and may be
rescheduled, in case of need, subject to mutual consent. All full time
employees are subject to be on twenty four (24) hour call, when available.
      2.   Police Personnel:
         a.   Normal working hours for police supervisors and/or officers
scheduled to an eight (8) hour working day shall be entitled to a one hour
lunch period to be taken approximately at midshift. Each officer scheduled to
an eight (8) hour workday will have regularly scheduled off days. All full time
employees are subject to be on twenty four (24) hour call, when available.
         b.   Normal working hours for police personnel shall be a twelve (12)
hour working day. Each employee shall be entitled to a one hour lunch period to
be taken in his twelve (12) hour workday. Each employee shall be entitled to a
one hour paperwork period in the office during his twelve (12) hour workday.
Each employee shall be entitled to three (3) 15-minute break periods during his
twelve (12) hour workday. Each employee will have regularly scheduled off days,
and may be rescheduled in case of need. All full time employees are subject to
be on twenty four (24) hour call, when available.
   B.   Attendance: Employees shall be at their places of work in accordance
with these rules and general regulations. Departments shall maintain attendance
records of employees as necessary or as required by the village board.
   C.   Emergency Service: Whenever a condition exists that is deemed by each
individual department head or the village president to be of an emergency
nature, regular tours may be extended and/or days off, furloughs and leaves of
absence of any or all village personnel may be canceled.
   D.   Absence From Work Without Report: Every village employee who fails to
appear for duty at the date, time and place specified for so doing without the
consent of competent authority is "absent without leave". Such absences must be
reported, as soon as they are noted, to the department head or village
president.
   E.   Overtime: Full time employees shall work overtime only when authorized
by the departmental head, supervisor, and/or village president. "Overtime" is
defined as working more than forty (40) hours in a calendar week or, in the
case of police personnel, depending on type of schedule, working more than
forty eight (48) hours in an eight (8) day work period or eighty four (84)
hours in a fourteen (14) day work period. Overtime work shall be compensated
through payment at time and a half the regular hourly rate. For alternative
compensatory time, refer to subsection H of this section. (Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-
1999, eff. 8-1-1999)
   F.   Authorized Holidays:
      1.    Holidays Enumerated:
         a.   Generally:
            New Year's Day
            Good Friday
            Memorial Day
            July 4
            Labor Day
            Thanksgiving Day
            Christmas Day
         b.   Union Employees: Union employee holidays are governed by their
union contract. (2010 Code)
      2.   Policy:
         a.   Regular Full Time Employees: Regular full time employees shall
have time off, with full salary payment, on the holidays listed in subsection
F1 of this section.
         b.   Full Time Police Personnel: Full time police personnel that work
an authorized holiday shall be compensated at time and a half the regular
hourly rate. Full time police personnel that do not work shall be compensated
at the regular hourly rate.
         c.   Other Employees: All other village employees shall have the
holidays listed in subsection F1 of this section off.
      3.   Easter Sunday: Easter Sunday shall be observed on the Friday before
for all village employees other than police.
   G.   Vacation Time:
      1.   Time Established: Full time village employees will be allowed
vacation time as follows:
         a.   After successfully completing one year probation, full time
employees will then be allowed to accrue two (2) weeks of vacation time.
Thereafter, vacation time accrues on a monthly basis.
         b.   After the full time employee has worked five (5) consecutive
years for the village, said employee will accrue three (3) weeks' vacation
time.
         c.   After the full time employee has worked ten (10) consecutive
years for the village, said employee will accrue four (4) weeks' vacation time.
         d.   After the full time employee has worked twenty (20) consecutive
years for the village, said employee will accrue five (5) weeks' vacation time.
      2.   Accumulations: Full time employees will be allowed to accumulate two
(2) years' vacation time. Examples: Employees with three (3) years' service
would only be able to carry four (4) weeks into their fourth year of service;
employees with six (6) years' service would only be able to carry six (6) weeks
into their seventh year of service.
      3.   Eligibility: Employees wishing to take vacation time must request
this vacation time in writing at least one month prior to the dates the
employee wishes to take off. Requests will be approved at the discretion of the
department head. Requests for the same date will be approved by seniority
within each rank. The one month requirement may be waived by the department
head for emergency situations on a case by case basis.
      4.   Compensation For Vacation Credits Upon Termination: Salary payment
will be made in lieu of vacation leave not taken upon termination.
   H.   Compensatory Time Off: At the discretion of the supervisor, full time
employees may be granted compensatory time off equal to one and one-half (11/2)
times the number of overtime hours worked. No employee may accrue more than
eighty (80) hours of compensatory time at any one point in time. Overtime work
in excess of this limit must be compensated in cash. An employee shall be
compensated in cash for compensatory time remaining unused at the time of
termination of his employment, to be paid at a rate based upon the average rate
of pay received by the employee during the previous three (3) years, or at the
final regular rate received by the employee, whichever is higher. An employee
can utilize accrued compensatory time within a reasonable period of requesting
its use so long as the use is not unduly disruptive. Compensatory time may be
used in conjunction with vacation leave and may be taken only when scheduled
ahead of time, with approval of the department head and/or village president.
The provisions of this subsection shall be subject to the requirements of the
fair labor standards act and any other applicable state or federal law.
   I.   Leave Of Absence: "Leave of absence" is time off without pay. All such
leaves are subject to approval of the department head and village board. Leave
of absence can only be taken when all vacation and compensatory time has been
used, except in the case of employees under military orders.
   J.   Military Leave: There shall be granted up to fifteen (15) days of leave
for military training or special duty to employees who are members of a reserve
component of the United States armed forces. The village will compensate any
difference in pay if military pay is less than the regular rate of pay for that
employee. Any leave beyond this increment of time would come under subsection I
of this section. Subject to applicable federal law, the employee using military
leave shall be responsible to furnish his/her department head a copy of the
orders necessitating the military leave.
   K.   Retirement Plan: All full time employees of the village will receive
the deferred compensation plan that the village provides.
   L.   Jury Duty: Any employee who is called for jury duty shall be allowed
time away from work with pay for such purposes. In cases where there is
compensation, said employee will be paid the difference between the
compensation received and his/her regular rate of pay.
   M.   Sick Leave: All permanent full-time employees shall receive one sick
day per month, twelve (12) per year. Sick days must be used for actual illness
or injury preventing an employee from being able to work. Employees absent in
excess of three (3) consecutive days must present a physician's note or report.
Sick leave may be used in case of the illness of the immediate family of the
employee, (spouse, domestic partner, children, step-children, parents, step-
parents, in-laws, and paternal and maternal grandparents).
   N.   Personal Day: Personal days may be taken after probation, with good
cause and approval of the department head and the village president, not to
exceed three (3) days per year and not to be considered as vacation days.
   O.   Disability:
      1.   Definition: "Disability" is defined as a physical or medical
condition which prohibits the employee from acceptably performing the job
duties assigned to him/her.
      2.   Determination Of Disability: Disabilities may result from disease,
injury, congenital condition of birth, functional disorder, or pregnancy. The
ability of an employee to adequately perform the job duties assigned to him/her
shall be determined by the village board after consultation with the department
head. Before so determining, the village board shall make every reasonable
effort to accommodate the employee by job restructuring or the like without
incurring unreasonable expense or unduly disrupting the conduct of village
business.
   P.   Physical Examination: An employee who is seeking sick leave or
disability leave shall be required, if requested by the village board, to
submit himself/herself, at the expense of the village, for an examination to a
duly qualified medical practitioner or surgeon selected by the village, at any
time and place reasonably convenient for the employee, for the purpose of
determining the nature, extent and probable duration of the illness or injury
to the employee. The village will make every effort to provide a reasonable
accommodation when deemed necessary by qualified medical authority.
   Q.   Alcohol And Drug Policy: All village employees shall comply with the
laws of the United States and the state of Illinois and the ordinances of the
village with respect to alcohol and drugs and shall refrain from the abuse of
said substances. Members of the police department shall abide by the department
policy with respect to alcohol and drugs. No alcohol nor any drug which might
impair an employee's performance shall be consumed during working hours nor
shall any village employee report for work impaired by alcohol or drugs in such
a manner as to be unable to properly and efficiently perform the employee's
duties.
   R.   Performance And Development Review:
      1.   A performance and development review will be conducted at least once
annually for all full time employees of the village. The employee's supervisor
will conduct the review. The purpose of the review is to evaluate employee job
performance and development; to establish strengths and development needs of
the individual employee; and to provide information and evaluation to the
individual employee about that employee's job performance. The review will be
in writing and will be documented by the supervisor and signed by said
supervisor. The review form will provide a comments section for both the
supervisor and the employee. The document will be placed in the employee's
personnel file. The initial employee evaluations shall be completed on or
before March 1, 2005, and annually thereafter by March 1.
      2.   New employees on probation will be reviewed and evaluated thirty
(30) days prior to the expiration of their probationary period for the purposes
stated in subsection R1 of this section and for purposes of evaluating their
continued employment with the village. (Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-1999, eff. 8-1-1999;
amd. Ord. 2004-22, 6-1-2004; Ord. 2017-1, 1-10-2017)
1-7A-5: APPOINTMENT AND SEPARATION:
   A.   Medical Examination May Be Required: As a condition of any type of
employment, an employee may be required to undergo a medical examination by a
physician approved by the village and at the expense of the village.
   B.   Appointment: A personnel committee, appointed by the village board,
shall have direct responsibility for the review and recommendation to the
village board for approval of all village full time and part time employees. In
carrying out this responsibility, the personnel committee can use recognized
professional consultative employment resources and will consult with department
heads in evaluating qualifications. Employment of staff shall be upon the basis
of qualifications and demonstrated competence and skill for the specific
position to be filled and shall be in accordance with state and federal
regulations.
   C.   Bridged Service:
      1.   An employee who leaves employment with the village but returns
within a one year period may use the prior service in determining vacation
time.
      2.   An employee who leaves employment with the village and returns after
a one year period may bridge all previous service after completion of an
additional five (5) years of employment. Vacation time will then be based on
the bridged years of service.
   D.   Layoffs: The village board may lay employees off when they feel such
action is necessary because of a shortage of funds, abolishment of a position,
or for other reasons beyond the control of the concerned employee and not
reflecting discredit on said employee. (Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-1999, eff. 8-1-1999)
1-7A-6: PROBATION:
   A.   Definition: The "probationary period" is a working test period when a
newly appointed employee, or an employee whose probationary status arises out
of subsection 1-7A-7C of this article or a current employee promoted to a new
position, is required to demonstrate his/her fitness for a position by actual
performance of the duties of the appointed position.
   B.   Length Of Time: Probationary period shall be for one year or three
hundred sixty five (365) days for new employees and six (6) months for
appointments and promotions of current full time employees.
   C.   Conclusion Of Probation; Procedure: Following the conclusion of the
employee's probationary period, the department head shall either recommend the
employee for continued employment on a nonprobationary basis, or in the case of
a new employee or an employee whose probation arose out of subsection 1-7A-7C
of this article, that the employee not be retained as an employee. In the case
of an employee whose probationary status arises out of employee promotion, then
the department head shall recommend either that the employee be retained at the
new position or returned to the employee's former position. Should the
recommendation be for retention, then the employee will be employed on a
nonprobationary basis upon approval by the village board. (Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-
1999, eff. 8-1-1999)
1-7A-7: DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS:
   A.   Duty Of Employees: It shall be the duty of all employees to maintain
high standards of cooperation, efficiency and cost effectiveness in carrying
out their duties and responsibilities as a village employee and to conduct
themselves at all times in a manner so as to not bring themselves or the
village into discredit or disrepute. All employees shall abide by the terms of
the Drug and Alcohol Policy adopted by reference as if laid out herein.
Supervisory staff of the Village shall distribute the policy to all village
employees.
   B.   Working Relationships: Supervisors shall be charged with properly
instructing and organizing persons under supervision so as to create the
greatest degree of cooperation, efficiency and economy. Whenever any question
arises concerning the validity of an order given by a supervisor or other
employee of authority, the employee concerned shall carry out the instructions.
If for any reason the employee deems this work unlawful, hazardous and/or
unsafe, the employee may refuse to do it. In refusing to do the work, the
employee must file a written statement giving reasons for refusal. Also, the
employee must file a written grievance with the department head, who will then
take action by either determining applicable policy to apply to such tasks in
the future, or by referring it back to the village board for action.
   C.   Suspension And Dismissal:
      1.   Suspension:
         a.   Authority To Suspend:
            (1)   A supervisor may suspend an employee for a period of not
longer than four (4) working days for disciplinary reasons. The village board
shall be notified as soon as possible, in writing, of the suspension and shall
decide within thirty (30) days whether the suspension shall be with or without
pay.
            (2)   The village board may suspend with or without pay any village
employee for disciplinary reasons for a period of up to thirty (30) consecutive
calendar days or, if the suspension arises out of an arrest or charge of a
criminal offense, until the arrest and charge is judicially resolved.
         b.   Notice, Reply And Hearing: No suspension in excess of four (4)
working days or dismissal for disciplinary reasons shall be carried out without
approval by the village board after a hearing, prior to which the employee
shall be notified in writing of the proposed action by the village board. The
notice to the employee shall contain a description of the reasons for the
proposed discipline and of the event or actions which precipitated the request
for discipline. The notice shall also contain the time and date of the hearing,
which shall be not less than ten (10) days subsequent to the date of issuance
of the notice. An employee shall have the right to submit a written reply to
the charges for consideration by the village board and may appear at the
hearing with or without counsel to answer to the disciplinary charges.
      2.   Review Of Discipline:
         a.   Any employee disciplined by the village board shall have the
right to submit in writing to the board a request for reconsideration of the
disciplinary action, together with written reasons for said request, and such
request for reconsideration shall be acted upon by the village board within
thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the request for reconsideration.
Further hearings may be held at the discretion of the village board.
         b.   Requests for review of discipline which does not involve
suspension or discharge may be made by any aggrieved employee to the village
board by submitting a request in writing with written reasons for said request
to the village board. The village board shall act upon said request within
thirty (30) days from the date of its receipt and may, at its discretion, hold
a hearing to review the evidence and arguments of the employee and the
supervisor involved in the disciplinary action.
      3.   Types Of Discipline:
         a.   Discipline shall include the following:
            (1)   Counseling.
            (2)   Oral reprimand.
            (3)   Written reprimand.
            (4)   Suspension up to thirty (30) days in a twelve (12) month
period.
            (5)   Dismissal.
         b.   Discipline in each case shall be imposed as the facts and
circumstances of such case shall warrant and may not necessarily follow the
order of discipline sanctions set forth in subsection C3a of this section.
(Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-1999, eff. 8-1-1999)
      4.   Application Of Suspension And Dismissal Provisions: This subsection
applies to all village employees including police officers; provided, however
that police officers may be disciplined for violation of any of the matters
contained in the police department rules and regulations. Any officer or
department member guilty of violating department rules and regulations shall be
subject to discipline as set forth in said rules and regulations. (Ord. 1999-
22, 6-15-1999, eff. 8-1-1999; amd. 2010 Code)
   D.   Causes For Disciplinary Action Up To And Including Dismissal: Causes
for counseling, verbal/written reprimands, suspension or dismissal shall be,
but not necessarily restricted to:
      1.   Violation of any federal or state law, county or municipal ordinance
or department policy.
      2.   Habitual absence from or tardiness for work without following
established procedures.
      3.   Unlawful, careless, or negligent use of any weapon.
      4.   Failure to follow orders of an authorized supervisor.
      5.   Being wasteful of property, material, or work time, i.e., sleeping
on duty.
      6.   Inefficiency in assigned work.
      7.   Conduct on or off the job which is not becoming to an employee of
the village.
      8.   Unauthorized release of privileged or confidential information.
      9.   Inability to cooperate with fellow employees.
      10.   Hindering other employees in carrying out assigned work.
      11.   Accepting gratuities, nepotism, or conflict of interest.
      12.   Failure to maintain satisfactory credit rating which might cause
undue embarrassment to the village.
      13.   Unacceptable work habits, attitudes, job performance or personal
conduct.
      14.   Associating or conducting business with individuals of unsavory
reputations, criminal records or organized crime syndicate affiliations.
      15.   Publicly criticizing official actions of a superior.
      16.   Failure to notify a superior officer that an employee of the
village is guilty of violating a rule, regulation or order of the department.
      17.   Any other act or omission contrary to good order and discipline of
the village.
   E.   Review Procedure; Nondismissal Grievances: The following procedures
shall provide for consideration and adjustment of any grievance of an employee
other than a dismissal or suspension:
      1.   Employee will consult with his/her immediate supervisor.
      2.   Failing to arrive at a satisfactory settlement, the matter will then
be reviewed by all parties concerned with the immediate supervisor.
      3.   Failing to arrive at a satisfactory settlement, the matter will then
be referred to the trustee in charge of said department.
      4.   Failing to reach a settlement in conference with the trustee in
charge of said department, the employee concerned or his/her authorized agent
may then submit a written statement of grievance to the village board within
ten (10) working days from the day of the conference with the trustee in charge
of said department.
   F.   Village Board Review Of Grievance:
      1.   Upon receipt of a statement of grievance, the village board shall
set a date for a hearing to be held within ten (10) days of receipt of the
statement. The hearing shall be closed to the general public, but the affected
employee may be represented by an attorney and may present witnesses if he/she
wishes to do so. The affected employee may have the hearing transcribed by a
court reporter at his/her expense.
      2.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the village board shall make a
ruling on the grievance presented to them.
      3.   Those empowered by subsection C of this section to suspend and
initiate the dismissal of employees may not remove a full time employee from
performing his/her duties for disciplinary reasons without declaring the
employee suspended or beginning the dismissal process with regard to the
employee pursuant to subsection C of this section. (Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-1999,
eff. 8-1-1999; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 2-18-2020)
1-7A-8: OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT:
Full time employees may not carry on, concurrently with their employment by the
village, any secondary employment, private business or undertaking without
first obtaining approval by the trustee in charge of said department or the
village president. The trustee and/or village president may seek input from the
employee's supervisor before making a decision and shall not grant permission
for any secondary employment, private business or undertaking which is not
conducive to the overall image of the village. (Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-1999, eff.
8-1-1999)
1-7A-9: GIFTS AND GRATUITIES:
The village policy with respect to gifts and gratuities to village employees
shall be governed by the state officials and employees ethics act 1  and
article B of this chapter. (Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-1999, eff. 8-1-1999; amd. 2010
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.
1-7A-10: RESIGNATION:
An employee who voluntarily leaves the service of the village shall, except in
emergency circumstances, give advance notice of not less than ten (10) working
days. Notice should be given to the department head and the village president.
Exit interviews will be conducted by the village president and board member(s)
designated by the village president. (Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-1999, eff. 8-1-1999)
1-7A-11: RECORDS KEPT:
The village clerk shall maintain all records necessary to the proper
administration of the personnel program. Employee records may be disclosed as
required by the freedom of information act 1  or pursuant to lawful subpoena or
other requirement of law or statute. (Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-1999, eff. 8-1-1999)
 
Notes
1 2. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
1-7A-12: NOT AN EMPLOYMENT CONTRACT:
The village reserves the right to amend, alter, repeal or rescind any and all
provisions of this personnel code at its discretion at any time. The enactment
of this personnel code is in no way intended to nor does it create any
employment contract between the village and any employee covered by the
provisions of this personnel code. (Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-1999, eff. 8-1-1999)
1-7A-13: SAVING CLAUSE:
This personnel code shall be deemed to include any law, statute or regulation
of the United States of America and the state of Illinois applicable to
municipalities and their employees in the employment context not specifically
incorporated herein. Any such law, statute or regulation shall nevertheless be
deemed incorporated herein by reference. In the event that this personnel code
is in conflict with any law, statute or regulation of the United States of
America or the state of Illinois, the law, statute or regulation shall be
deemed controlling. In the event that any section or portion of this personnel
code shall be deemed void or unconstitutional by any court of the United States
or the state of Illinois, the remainder of the personnel code shall
nevertheless remain in full force and effect and shall be enforced and
enforceable to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 1999-22, 6-15-1999, eff. 8-1-
1999)
1-7A-14: OPTING OUT OF THE ILLINOIS PAID LEAVE FOR ALL WORKERS ACT:
   A.   The Village hereby adopts its current paid leave policy for all Village
employees as set forth in the Village's Code of Ordinances, Employee Handbook,
Annual Salary Ordinances, any collective bargaining agreements to which the
Village is a party and all other binding legislative actions governing paid
leave adopted by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village, as the
same may be amended from time to time. However, in no event shall the Village,
as an employer, provide less than one (1) day of paid leave per year to any
Village employee.
   B.   Pursuant to the Village's home rule authority, the Village hereby
declares that the Village, as an employer, is exempt from the requirements of
the Paid Leave for All Workers Act (820 ILCS 192/1 et seq.). The Village as an
employer, shall have no additional obligations with regard to mandatory paid
leave, including, without limitation, any obligations provided under the Act,
except those obligations required by federal and/or state law which validly
preempt the Village's home rule authority.
   C.   Repeal Of Conflicting Provisions: All ordinances, resolutions, and
policies or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this section are,
to the extent of the conflict, expressly repealed on the effective date of this
section.
   D.   Severability: If any provision of this section or application thereof
to any person or circumstance is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this
section that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision,
and each invalid provision or invalid application of this section is severable.
(Ord. 2023-16, 12-19-2023)
ARTICLE B. ETHICS
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Definitions
1-7B-2: Prohibited Political Activities
1-7B-3: Gift Ban
1-7B-4: Ethics Advisor
1-7B-5: Penalties
1-7B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administration action;
b) relating to collective bargaining; or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
"regular election", as defined in section 1-3 of the election code, 10 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-3.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
3 of the Illinois public labor relations act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 315/
3.
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited
to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as
a condition of his or her employment but, for purposes of this article, does
not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated
time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is
executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of
the election code, 10 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-1.4.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village, whether on a full time or part time
basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and
control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is
to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of Sherman.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or
other tangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash,
food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or
attributable to government employment or the official position of an officer or
employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment; b) service credit towards pension benefits; and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by
statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action; b) relating to collective bargaining; or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or the county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code, 10 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-3, but only
with respect to those activities that require filing with the state board of
elections or the county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
   A.   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
   B.   Soliciting contributions including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   D.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes.
   K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office, or for or against any referendum question.
   L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
   N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   A.   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer; or 2) by an employee; or
3) by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   B.   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer; or 2) with
an employee; or 3) with the officer or another employee directing that
employee;
   C.   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer; or 2) by an employee;
or 3) by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
   D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
VILLAGE: The village of Sherman, Illinois. (Ord. 2004-13, 5-4-2004; amd. 2010
Code)
1-7B-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined in section
1-7B-1 of this article. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any
property or resources of the village in connection with any prohibited
political activity.
   B.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as
part of that officer's or employee's duties; 2) as a condition of employment;
or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation, or personal
time off).
   C.   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   D.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this article.
   E.   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment; or 2) in a position, the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 2004-13, 5-4-
2004)
1-7B-3: GIFT BAN:
   A.   Gifts Prohibited: Except as permitted by this article, no officer or
employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer
or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as
defined in section
1-7B-1 of this article, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance.
No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates
this subsection.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   Subsection A of this section is not applicable to the following:
         a.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public.
         b.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse
or immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
         c.   Any:
            (1)   Contribution that is lawfully made under the election code 1
; or
            (2)   Activities associated with a fundraising event in support of
a political organization or candidate.
         d.   Educational materials and missions.
         e.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
         f.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
         g.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of a personal friendship, the recipient shall consider
the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
            (1)   The history of the relationship between the individual giving
the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
            (2)   Whether, to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
            (3)   Whether, to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the
individual who gave the gift also, at the same time, gave the same or similar
gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family
members.
         h.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00)
per person in value on a single calendar day; provided, that the food or
refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared; or 2) catered. For the purpose of this subsection B1h, "catered"
means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are
delivered by any means. (Ord. 2004-13, 5-4-2004)
         i.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee) of the
officer or employee or spouse of the officer or employee, if the benefits have
not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of
the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar
circumstances. (Ord. 2004-13, 5-4-2004; amd. 2010 Code)
         j.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of
this chapter, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
         k.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
         l.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
      2.   Each of the exceptions listed in this subsection is mutually
exclusive and independent of every other.
   C.   Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee does not violate
this article if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift
from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to
its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter
amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 2004-13, 5-4-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
1-7B-4: ETHICS ADVISOR:
The village attorney shall be the ethics advisor for the village. As such, the
village attorney shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the
village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of
this article and state ethics laws. (Ord. 2004-13, 5-4-2004)
1-7B-5: PENALTIES:
   A.   Persons violating this article shall be subject to a fine of up to
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per offense. Violations shall be
prosecuted by the village attorney at the specific request of a majority of the
board of trustees upon motion made, seconded and adopted. In any case, where a
member of the board of trustees is accused of a violation of this article, such
member shall abstain from any such vote.
   B.   In any case of an alleged violation of this article by the village
attorney or by a member of the board of trustees, the village shall obtain
separate counsel.
   C.   In a case where the board of trustees believes a criminal act has
occurred, it shall direct the village attorney to refer the matter to the
state's attorney for prosecution. (Ord. 2004-13, 5-4-2004; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 8
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
SECTION:
1-8-1: Officer Designated
1-8-2: Request For Public Record
1-8-3: Training Required
1-8-4: Record Retrieval
1-8-5: Fees
1-8-6: Denial; Appeal
1-8-7: Village Administrator Duties
1-8-1: OFFICER DESIGNATED:
The village administrator is hereby designated as the FOIA officer to whom all
initial requests for access to the records of the village are to be referred.
Such requests are to be made at the office of the village administrator at 401
St. John's Drive, Sherman, Illinois between the hours of eight thirty o'clock
(8:30) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M., Monday through Friday. The village
administrator in his/her capacity as FOIA officer may designate a deputy FOIA
officer to whom such initial requests are to be made in the absence of the FOIA
officer. The chief of police is also designated as deputy FOIA officer for all
requests that come in for police reports. Except in instances when records are
furnished immediately, the FOIA officer, the deputy FOIA officer, or his/her
designee, shall receive requests submitted to the village under the freedom of
information act, ensure that the village responds to requests in a timely
fashion, and issue responses under the act. The FOIA officer shall develop a
list of documents or categories of records that the village shall immediately
disclose upon request. (Ord. 2010-4, 1-19-2010)
1-8-2: REQUEST FOR PUBLIC RECORD:
Upon receiving a request for a public record, the FOIA officer shall:
   A.   Note the date the village receives the written request;
   B.   Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and make a
notation of that date on the written request;
   C.   Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including
all documents submitted with the request until the request has been complied
with or denied; and
   D.   Create a file for the retention of the original request, a copy of the
response, a record of written communications with the requester, and a copy of
other communications. (Ord. 2010-4, 1-19-2010)
1-8-3: TRAINING REQUIRED:
The FOIA officer and deputy FOIA officer shall, within six (6) months after
January 1, 2010, successfully complete an electronic training curriculum to be
developed by the public access counselor of the state of Illinois and
thereafter successfully complete an annual training program. Whenever a new
freedom of information officer is designated by the village, that person shall
successfully complete the electronic training curriculum within thirty (30)
days after assuming the position. (Ord. 2010-4, 1-19-2010)
1-8-4: RECORD RETRIEVAL:
Any records which are the subject of a request under the freedom of information
act shall be retrieved from such place as they are stored, by the FOIA officer,
or by an employee of the village acting under the direction of the FOIA
officer. In no event shall records be retrieved by the party requesting them or
by any person who is not employed by the village. (Ord. 2010-4, 1-19-2010)
1-8-5: FEES:
If copies of records are requested, the fees for such copies, whether certified
or not, shall be as determined from time to time by the FOIA officer pursuant
to section 6(b) of the freedom of information act. The FOIA officer shall
maintain a written schedule of current fees in the clerk's office. The fees so
charged shall reflect the actual cost of copying the records, and the cost of
certifying copies, if certification is requested. (Ord. 2010-4, 1-19-2010)
1-8-6: DENIAL; APPEAL:
In the event that a request to inspect village records is denied by the FOIA
officer, the denial may be appealed to the public access counselor of the state
of Illinois. (Ord. 2010-4, 1-19-2010)
1-8-7: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR DUTIES:
The village administrator shall prepare:
   A.   A brief description of the village, including: 1) a short summary of
its purpose, 2) a block diagram of its functional subdivisions, 3) the total
amount of its operating budget, 4) the number and location of all of its
separate offices, 5) the approximate number of full and part time employees,
and 6) the identification and membership of all boards, commissions, committees
or councils which operate in an advisory capacity relative to the operation of
the village, or which exercise control over its policies or procedures, or to
which the village is required to report and be answerable for its operations.
   B.   A brief description of the methods whereby the public may request
information and public records, a directory designating the freedom of
information officer(s), the address where requests for public records should be
directed, and any fees allowable under section 6 of the act. (Ord. 2010-4, 1-
19-2010)
CHAPTER 9
COST RECOVERY
SECTION:
1-9-1: Recoverable Costs
1-9-2: Exceptions
1-9-3: Joint And Several Responsibility; Recoverable Costs Agreement
1-9-4: Security Deposit
1-9-5: Invoice For Fees; Payment; Failure To Pay
1-9-6: Recoverable Costs A Condition To Approval
1-9-7: Denial; Revocation
1-9-1: RECOVERABLE COSTS:
Every petition or application filed and processed, except as provided in
section
1-9-2 of this chapter, pursuant to any village code, ordinance, rule, or
regulation, including, without limitation, any such petition or application
filed under title 10 of this code, being the village of Sherman zoning code or
title 11 of this code, being the village of Sherman subdivision regulations,
that requires the village to incur any fees, costs, expenses, or charges,
including, without limitation, those fees, costs, expenses, or charges
(collectively "recoverable costs") for:
   A.   Copying and other reproduction service;
   B.   Legal notice publication;
   C.   Village staff time;
   D.   Village attorney time and services;
   E.   Village engineer time and services;
   F.   Other professional and technical consultant time and services;
   G.   Document preparation, negotiation, and review;
   H.   Document recordation and filing;
   I.   Mailing, messenger, or other expedited document delivery services;
   J.   Court reporter; and
   K.   Proof of ownership title searches
shall be considered "recoverable costs" and shall be collected from the
applicant or petitioner. Recoverable costs shall be in addition to any and all
other fees, charges, or penalties established by the village under any code,
ordinance, rule, or regulation. (Ord. 2011-19, 12-6-2011)
1-9-2: EXCEPTIONS:
No petition or application, shall require the execution of a recoverable costs
agreement nor shall the recoverable costs be collected if the petition or
application will involve less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in
recoverable costs or for building permits. If a petition or application subject
to exemption herein for being under five hundred dollars ($500.00) in
recoverable costs is later determined by the village to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00), then the applicant or petitioner shall be required to enter
into a recoverable costs agreement as provided in section
1-9-3 of this chapter and the applicant or petitioner shall be responsible for
all recoverable costs. (Ord. 2011-19, 12-6-2011)
1-9-3: JOINT AND SEVERAL RESPONSIBILITY; RECOVERABLE COSTS AGREEMENT:
The owner of the property that is the subject of the petition or application
and, if different, the petitioner or applicant, shall be jointly and severally
liable for the payment of recoverable costs (individually and collectively
"responsible parties"). The responsible parties shall enter into an agreement
("recoverable costs agreement") with the village at the time of execution of
the petition or application, which agreement shall be a part of the petition or
application materials and shall also be available from the village clerk. By
executing the recoverable costs agreement, the responsible parties shall be
deemed to have agreed to pay, and to have consented to payment of recoverable
costs, plus any costs of collection, that have not been paid within thirty (30)
days following the mailing of a written demand for payment to the responsible
parties at the address set forth on the recoverable costs agreement. (Ord.
2011-19, 12-6-2011)
1-9-4: SECURITY DEPOSIT:
Every petition or application shall be accompanied by the required filing fee
plus a security deposit that shall be determined in the sole discretion of the
village administrator and shall be based on the size of the project that shall
be deposited into a recoverable cost escrow account established by the village.
No interest shall be payable to the responsible parties on any funds retained
in such escrow account. The village is specifically authorized to apply this
security to the payment of such fees, costs, and expenses in the event the
owner or petitioner fails to make payments as required in this chapter. The
responsible parties shall be obligated to continuously maintain this amount of
deposit with the village until a final determination has been made by the
corporate authorities on the petition or application. (Ord. 2011-19, 12-6-2011)
1-9-5: INVOICE FOR FEES; PAYMENT; FAILURE TO PAY:
The village shall provide a written invoice to the responsible parties
itemizing the recoverable costs and the work performed. The responsible parties
shall pay the village within thirty (30) days of the date of the invoice from
the village. If the owner or petitioner does not pay the invoice within the
thirty (30) day period, interest shall accrue on the unpaid balance at the rate
of eighteen percent (18%) per annum. The village shall also, following written
notification to the responsible parties, direct that all professional staff
cease work on the petition until the invoice is paid in full. Any permits,
licenses, or other requested relief ready to be issued may be withheld until
all fees are paid to the satisfaction of the village. (Ord. 2011-19, 12-6-2011)
1-9-6: RECOVERABLE COSTS A CONDITION TO APPROVAL:
No petition or application filed pursuant to any village code, ordinance, rule,
or regulation shall be considered complete unless and until all filing fees,
deposits, and payments due pursuant to this chapter have been paid and a fully
executed recoverable costs agreement has been filed with the village clerk.
Every approval granted and every permit or license issued pursuant to any
village code, ordinance, rule, or regulation shall, whether or not expressly so
conditioned, be deemed to be conditioned upon payment of all due and owing
recoverable costs as required by this chapter. (Ord. 2011-19, 12-6-2011)
1-9-7: DENIAL; REVOCATION:
The failure to pay in full when due any recoverable cost or deposit required
under this chapter shall be grounds for refusing to process a petition or
application and for denying or revoking any permit or license, or any approval
otherwise sought. (Ord. 2011-19, 12-6-2011)
CHAPTER 10
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
SECTION:
1-10-1:    Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-10-2: Definition Of Sexual Harassment
1-10-3: Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment
1-10-4: Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment Allegations
1-10-5: Consequences Of A Violation Of The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-10-6:    Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report
1-10-1: PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under Title VII
of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a
right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment
is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual
orientations. It is a policy of the Village of Sherman to prohibit harassment
of any person by any municipal official, municipal agent, municipal employee or
municipal agency or municipal office on the basis of sex or gender. All
municipal officials, municipal agents, municipal employees and municipal
agencies or municipal offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any
person, regardless of any employment relationship or lack thereof. (Ord. 2020-
11, 6-2-2020)
1-10-2: DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   A.   This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the
Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct
of a sexual nature when:
      1.   Submission to such conduct is made a term or condition of an
individual's employment, either explicitly or implicitly; or
      2.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
      3.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   B.   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes, but is not
limited too:
      1.   Verbal Harassment:   Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults,
humor, jokes about: sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual
propositions, threats, repeated requests for dates; or, statements of a sexual
nature about other employees, even outside of their presence.
      2.   Non-Verbal Harassment: Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling),
leering, obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls",
"smacking" or "kissing" noises.
      3.   Visual: Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
      4.   Physical Harassment: Touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing,
pinching, brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
      5.   Textual/Electronic Harassment: "Sexting" (electronically sending
messages with sexual content, including pictures or video), the use of sexually
explicit language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of
electronic communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line
postings, blogs, instant messages and posts on social network websites, like
Facebook and Twitter).
   C.   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a "reasonable person." (Ord. 2020-11, 6-2-2020)
1-10-3: PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   A.   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/
himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s)
as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to
the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not necessary
for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
   B.   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following:
      1.   Electronic/Direct Communication: If there is sexual harassment
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
      2.   Contact with Supervisory Personnel:
         a.   At the same time direct communication is undertaken, or in the
event the employee feels threatened or intimidated by the situation, the
problem must be promptly reported to the immediate supervisor of the person
making the report, a department head, a director of human resources, an ethics
officer, the city manager or administrator or the chief elected official of the
municipality.
         b.   The employee experiencing what she/he believes to be sexual
harassment must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there
are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other
responsible officer, the municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of
the harassment.
      3.   Resolution Outside Municipality: The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within three hundred (300) days
of the alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with
the EEOC must also be filed within three hundred (300) days.
   C.   Allegations of sexual harassment made against an elected official of
the governmental unit by another elected official of a governmental unit. In
addition to the methods of reporting included above, an elected official may
request an independent review of a complaint of sexual harassment by another
elected official. The request shall be made to the human resources director,
the city manager or administrator or the chief elected official of the
municipality. The official receiving the request shall take immediate action in
keeping with the procurement process of the municipality to retain a qualified
individual or entity for the independent review of the allegations of sexual
harassment in violation of this policy. The outcome of the independent review
shall be reported to the corporate authorities.
   D.   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what
was said or done, the date, the time and the location), including, but not
limited to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone
messages.
   E.   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome. (Ord. 2020-
11, 6-2-2020)
1-10-4: PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS:
   A.   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal office shall take any retaliatory action against any municipal
employee or official due to a municipal employee's or official's:
      1.   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this policy;
or
      2.   Providing information related to an investigation or testimony
before any public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any
violation of this policy; or
      3.   Assistance with or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
   B.   For purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the reprimand,
discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer or change in
the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that is taken
in retaliation for a municipal employee's or official's involvement in
protected activity pursuant to this policy.
   C.   No individual making a report will be retaliated against, even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   D.   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/15-10) provides
whistleblower protection from retaliatory action, and this policy prohibits
retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, or
denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for an employee who
does any of the following:
      1.   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy or practice of any officer, member, agency or other
employee that the employee reasonably believes is in violation of a law, rule
or regulation; or
      2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule or regulation by any officer, member, agency or other employee; or
      3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act or this policy.
   E.   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15(a)), an employer may
not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an
administrative hearing, before a legislative commission or committee or in any
other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the
information discloses a violation of a state or federal law, rule or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a state or federal law, rule or regulation. (740 ILCS 174/15(b)).
   F.   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it is a
civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to conspire to
retaliate against a person because she/he has opposed that which she/he
reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment,
because she/he has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted or
participated in an investigation, proceeding or hearing under the Illinois
Human Rights Act.
   G.   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or passed
over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may file a
retaliation charge within three hundred (300) days of the alleged retaliation.
(Ord. 2020-11, 6-2-2020)
1-10-5: CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements, any person who violates this policy or the
Prohibition on Sexual Harassment contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65, may be subject
to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per offense, applicable
disciplinary actions or discharge by the municipality and any applicable fines
and penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, state law or federal
law. Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any discipline imposed
by the municipality shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed by
an ethics commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court of law or a
state or federal agency. (Ord. 2020-11, 6-2-2020)
1-10-6: CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT:
   A.   A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser to
accomplish an outcome other than stopping sexual harassment or stopping
retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is not a report
made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the seriousness of the
consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe offense
that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who intentionally
makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this policy shall
be subject to disciplinary action or discharge pursuant to applicable municipal
policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/or
collective bargaining agreements.
   B.   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging
a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act to
an ethics commission, an inspector general, the Illinois State Police, a
State's Attorney, the Attorney General or any other law enforcement official is
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission may levy an
administrative fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any
person who intentionally makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation.
(Ord. 2020-11, 6-2-2020)
CHAPTER 11
WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION POLICY
SECTION:
1-11-1:    Purpose
1-11-2:    Definitions
1-11-3:    Duties Of An Auditing Official
1-11-4:    Duties Of An Employee
1-11-5:    Defend Trade Secrets Act Compliance
1-11-6:    Employee Acknowledgment
1-11-1: PURPOSE:
The Village of Sherman provides whistleblower protections in two important
areas: confidentiality and against retaliation. The confidentiality of a
whistleblower will be maintained to the extent allowable by law, however, an
identity may have to be disclosed to conduct a thorough investigation, to
comply with the law and to provide accused individuals their legal rights of
defense. A whistleblower may also waive confidentiality in writing. The Village
will not retaliate against a whistleblower. This includes, but is not limited
to, protection from retaliation in the form of an adverse employment action
such as termination, compensation decreases, or poor work assignments and
threats of physical harm. Any whistleblowers who believe they are being
retaliated against must submit a written report to the Auditing Official within
sixty (60) days of gaining knowledge of the retaliatory action. The right of a
whistleblower for protection against retaliation does not include immunity for
any personal wrongdoing that is alleged and investigated. (Ord. 23-11, 11-7-
2023)
1-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
AUDITING OFFICIAL: Any elected, appointed or employed individual, by whatever
name, in the Village whose duties may include: receiving, registering and
investigating complaints and information concerning misconduct, inefficiency
and waste within the Village; investigating the performance of officers,
employees, functions and programs; and, promoting economy, efficiency,
effectiveness and integrity in the administration of the programs and
operations of the Village.
   1.   The Auditing Official shall be "none appointed November 7, 2023", until
replaced by the President of the Village of Sherman.
   2.   If the Village President does not designate an Auditing Official or
position is vacant, the Auditing Official defaults to the State's Attorney of
Sangamon County.
EMPLOYEE: Anyone employed by the Village, whether in a permanent or temporary
position, including full-time, part-time and intermittent workers. Employee
also includes members of appointed boards or commissions, whether paid or
unpaid. Employee also includes persons who have been terminated because of any
report or complaint submitted under Section 4.1.
IMPROPER GOVERNMENTAL ACTION: Any action by an employee of the Village; an
appointed member of a board, commission or committee; or, an elected official
of the Village that is undertaken in violation of a federal or state law or
local ordinance; is an abuse of authority; violates the public's trust or
expectation of their conduct; is of substantial and specific danger to the
public's health or safety; or, is a gross waste of public funds. The action
need not be within the scope of the employee's, elected official's, board
member's, commission member's or committee member's official duties to be
subject to a claim of "improper governmental action." Improper governmental
action does not include the Village's personnel actions, including, but not
limited to employee grievances, complaints, appointments, promotions,
transfers, assignments, reassignments, reinstatements, restorations,
reemployment, performance evaluations, reductions in pay, dismissals,
suspensions, demotions, reprimands or violations of collective bargaining
agreements, except to the extent that the action amounts to retaliation.
RETALIATE, RETALIATION OR RETALIATORY ACTION: Any adverse change in an
employee's employment status or the terms and conditions of employment that
results from an employee's protected activity under Section 4.1. Retaliatory
action includes, but is not limited to, denial of adequate staff to perform
duties; frequent staff changes; frequent and undesirable office changes;
refusal to assign meaningful work; unsubstantiated letters of reprimand or
unsatisfactory performance evaluations; demotion; reduction in pay; denial of
promotion; transfer or reassignment; suspension or dismissal; or, other
disciplinary action made because of an employee's protected activity under
Section 4.1.
WHISTLEBLOWER: An employee, as defined in this section, of the Village who:
   1.   Reports an improper governmental action as defined under 50 ILCS 105/
4.1 (hereinafter Section 4.1);
   2.   Cooperates with an investigation by an Auditing Official related to a
report of improper governmental action; or,
   3.   Testifies in a proceeding or prosecution arising out of an improper
governmental action. (Ord. 23-11, 11-7-2023)
1-11-3: DUTIES OF AN AUDITING OFFICIAL:
Each Auditing Official shall establish written processes and procedures
consistent with the terms of this Policy and best practices for investigations
for managing complaints filed under Section 4.1. Each Auditing Official shall
investigate and dispose of reports of improper governmental action in
accordance with these processes and procedures, and all other provisions of
Section 4.1.
The Auditing Official must provide each employee a written summary or a
complete copy of Section 4.1 upon commencement of employment and at least once
each year of employment. At the same time, the employee shall also receive a
copy of the written processes and procedures for reporting improper
governmental actions from the applicable Auditing Official.
Auditing Officials may reinstate, reimburse for lost wages or expenses
incurred, promote or provide some other form of restitution.
In instances where an Auditing Official determines that restitution will not
suffice, the Auditing Official may make their investigation findings available
for the purposes of aiding in that employee's, or the employee's attorney's,
effort to make the employee whole.
Auditing Officials are responsible for reading the full context of Section 4.1
and complying with all requirements.
If no Auditing Official is designated, the State's Attorney of Sangamon County
will be the default Auditing Official. (Ord. 23-11, 11-7-2023)
1-11-4: DUTIES OF AN EMPLOYEE:
All reports of illegal and dishonest activities will be promptly submitted to
the Auditing Official who is responsible for investigating and coordinating
corrective action.
If an employee has knowledge of, or a concern of, improper governmental action,
the employee shall make a written report of the activity to the Auditing
Official. The employee must exercise sound judgment to avoid baseless
allegations. An employee who intentionally files a false report of wrongdoing
will be subject to discipline up to and including termination.
The whistleblower is not responsible for investigating the activity or for
determining fault or corrective measures; a designated Auditing Official is
charged with these responsibilities. (Ord. 23-11, 11-7-2023)
1-11-5: DEFEND TRADE SECRETS ACT COMPLIANCE:
Immunity from Liability for Confidential Disclosure of a Trade Secret to the
Government or in a Court Filing:
   A.   Immunity: An individual shall not be held criminally or civilly liable
under any federal or state trade secret law for the disclosure of a trade
secret that;
      1.   Is made: (i) in confidence to a federal, state or local government
official, either directly or indirectly, or to an attorney; and, (ii) solely
for the purpose of reporting or investigating a suspected violation of law; or
      2.   Is made in a complaint or other document filed in a lawsuit or other
proceeding, if such filing is made under seal.
   B.   Use Of Trade Secret Information In Anti-Retaliation Lawsuit: An
individual who files a lawsuit for retaliation by an employer for reporting a
suspected violation of law may disclose the trade secret to the attorney of the
individual and use the trade secret information in the court proceeding, if the
individual;
      1.   Files any document containing the trade secret under seal; and
      2.   Does not disclose the trade secret, except pursuant to court order
(18 U.S.C. § 1833). (Ord. 23-11, 11-7-2023)
1-11-6: EMPLOYEE ACKNOWLEDGMENT:
Employees are required to sign a written acknowledgment that they have
received, read and understand this policy, and to submit that acknowledgment to
the Auditing Official or other designated official of the Village of Sherman.
The form that follows below will satisfy this requirement upon receipt.
Employee Acknowledgment of Whistleblower Protection Policy
   I confirm that I have received, read and understand the "Whistleblower
Protection Policy" for employees of the VILLAGE OF SHERMAN
   I understand that as an employee, it is my responsibility to abide by this
Policy. If I have questions about the Policy, I understand it is my
responsibility to seek clarification from the proper supervisory department,
the Auditing Official or the State's Attorney of SANGAMON COUNTY.
   Print Name: _______________________________________________
   Employee Signature: ________________________________________
   Date: ____________________________________________________
(Ord. 23-11, 11-7-2023)
TITLE 2
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Statute Authority; Board Created; Membership
2-1-2: Powers And Restrictions
2-1-3: Meetings
2-1-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY; BOARD CREATED; MEMBERSHIP:
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-2-7, a board of local
improvements is hereby created, which shall consist of the village president
and six (6) village trustees. The village president shall be the president of
the board of local improvements. (Ord. 1994-13, 6-7-1994; amd. 2010 Code)
2-1-2: POWERS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The board of local improvements shall be empowered to consider and
propose special assessments within the village in accord with the requirements
of division 2 of article 9 of the municipal code of the state, 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/9-2-1 et seq.
   B.   The board of local improvements shall not receive compensation for its
services.
   C.   The board of local improvements shall not incur indebtedness for
engineering, legal or other expenses incurred with performance of its duty
without prior authorization of the village president and board of trustees.
(Ord. 1994-13, 6-7-1994)
2-1-3: MEETINGS:
   A.   Time And Place For Meetings; Notice: The board of local improvements
shall meet at such times and places as the board shall from time to time deem
necessary and appropriate. Notice of such meetings shall be posted or published
in accord with the requirements of the open meetings act 1  and other
applicable laws and statutes governing the conduct of the board of local
improvements.
   B.   Minutes And Records: In addition, the board of local improvements shall
keep minutes of its meetings and records of all its ordinances and actions,
which records shall be deposited with the village clerk and available for
public inspection in accordance with applicable statutes and procedures. (Ord.
1994-13, 6-7-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Established; Purpose
2-2-2: Membership; Terms Of Office; Vacancies
2-2-3: Volunteers
2-2-4: Expenditures
2-2-5: Reports Required
2-2-1: ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE:
There is hereby established a citizens' commission which shall be known as the
Sherman economic development commission for the purpose of structuring sound
economic development programs through implementation and use of the powers
granted to the village under the state municipal code, and through conducting
such research and inventory of resources and preparation of industrial facts
profiles to be used as presentations to industrial prospects considering
expansion or location in the Sherman area. The commission shall make its
findings and recommendations to the president and board of trustees in the
manner prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 1990-18, 7-7-1990)
2-2-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
The economic development commission shall be composed of not less than five (5)
nor more than eight (8) residents of the village, one of which shall be elected
chairperson. The appointments to this commission shall be made by the
president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, for staggered
two (2) and three (3) year terms. Vacancies in a term shall be filled by
appointment by the president, with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees. In addition to the members of the commission, the village president
shall serve as an ex officio member. (Ord. 1990-18, 7-7-1990; amd. 2010 Code)
2-2-3: VOLUNTEERS:
The Sherman economic development commission is authorized to enlist the
volunteer services of such other members of the community who will assist in
achieving the goals of sound economic growth, recognizing broad community
involvement will assure broad community support. (Ord. 1990-18, 7-7-1990)
2-2-4: EXPENDITURES:
The Sherman economic development commission shall be authorized to expend no
municipal funds other than those appropriated and approved by the village
president and the village board. (Ord. 1990-18, 7-7-1990)
2-2-5: REPORTS REQUIRED:
The Sherman economic development commission shall make periodic reports on its
progress and shall make its recommendations to the president and board of
trustees regularly. (Ord. 1990-18, 7-7-1990; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PLANNING COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-3-1: Established; Membership; Term; Vacancies
2-3-2: Organization
2-3-3: Compensation
2-3-4: Powers, Duties And Functions
2-3-5: Advisory And Referral Capacity
2-3-1: ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; TERM; VACANCIES:
There is hereby established a Sherman planning committee. The committee shall
consist of a number of members to be set by resolution of the board of trustees
from time to time and shall be appointed by the president, with the advice and
consent of the village board of trustees. The terms of office of the members of
the committee shall be four (4) years and until their successors are appointed
by the president and confirmed by the village board of trustees. A vacancy
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the
remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord. 2009-4, 1-20-2009; amd. 2010 Code)
2-3-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers:
      1.   Chair: There shall be a chair of the committee elected by the
members of the committee at its annual organizational meeting.
      2.   Secretary: The clerk shall serve as administrative secretary for the
committee and shall keep a record of all resolutions, proceedings, and actions
of the committee.
   B.   Quorum; Voting: A majority of the members of the committee shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business. A majority vote of
members present shall constitute approval of business before it.
   C.   Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the chair or by no less
than a majority of the members of the committee. Any person or that person's
duly authorized representative shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any
matter before the committee reaches a decision. (Ord. 2009-4, 1-20-2009; amd.
2010 Code)
2-3-3: COMPENSATION:
Each member of the committee shall serve without any compensation by the
village. (Ord. 2009-4, 1-20-2009; amd. 2010 Code)
2-3-4: POWERS, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS:
Without limiting the powers and duties prescribed by law and ordinance, the
planning committee shall: (Ord. 2009-4, 1-20-2009; amd. 2010 Code)
   A.   Exercise those powers and perform those functions set forth in the
Illinois municipal code to be exercised and performed by planning committees.
In addition, the committee shall exercise all those powers and perform those
functions assigned to it by the village board of trustees or in this code.
   B.   Prepare and recommend to the village board of trustees a statement of
goals and a comprehensive plan of improvements. The goals and plans shall look
to the present and future growth of the village. Such a plan, after its
adoption by the village board of trustees, shall include, but is not limited
to, requirements with reference to streets, alleys, and public grounds within
the corporate limits and contiguous territory as authorized by the Illinois
municipal code even where not included within the geographic boundaries of any
municipality.
   C.   Prepare and recommend to the village board of trustees, from time to
time, changes in the plan or any part thereof that may be deemed necessary.
   D.   Give aid to the officials of the village and others charged with the
direction of projects for improvements embraced by the official plan and to
further the making of such improvements, and generally promote the realization
of the goals and objectives of the community and the comprehensive plan.
   E.   Prepare any other plans for the improvement of the village as may be
requested of the committee from time to time in accordance with local, state,
and federal law. (Ord. 2009-4, 1-20-2009)
2-3-5: ADVISORY AND REFERRAL CAPACITY:
The committee shall serve in a general advisory capacity to the president and
the village board of trustees, and to this end, the village clerk shall furnish
the committee, for its consideration, a copy of all ordinances, resolutions,
plans, and other data requested thereby, relating to capital improvements, sale
of village owned properties, annexation, housing, urban renewal, zoning, and
other matters requiring planning consideration. The committee may report in
relation thereto if it deems a report necessary or advisable or when
specifically requested by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 2009-4, 1-20-
2009; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-4-1: Appointment And Purpose
2-4-2: Composition; Term; Compensation
2-4-3: Meetings
2-4-1: APPOINTMENT AND PURPOSE:
The president of the village board shall have the authority to appoint a parks
and recreation advisory committee. The purpose of the committee shall be
limited to policy, planning, development and recreation programs
recommendations as directed or set forth by the village president, with the
consent of the village board of trustees. (Ord. 2008-3, 6-3-2008)
2-4-2: COMPOSITION; TERM; COMPENSATION:
The composition of the committee shall be limited to a maximum seven (7)
members appointed by the village president. The committee members shall serve
at the pleasure of the village president. The committee members will not
receive financial compensation for their services, with the exception of
reimbursements for expenses which have received approval from the village
president and the village board of trustees. (Ord. 2008-3, 6-3-2008)
2-4-3: MEETINGS:
   A.   The committee shall meet a minimum of twice annually and more often
when necessary or at the call of the chair or village president. The committee
meetings are subject to the Illinois open meetings act 1 . Agendas will be
posted at the village hall and/or on the village website.
   B.   Minutes shall be recorded at each meeting and approved at the next
succeeding meeting. The committee chair shall determine the person or persons
responsible for the recording of the meeting minutes. (Ord. 2008-3, 6-3-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
TITLE 3
TAXATION AND FINANCES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Fiscal Year
3-1-2: Investment Policy
3-1-3: Payment Of Village Bills
3-1-4: Purchasing Policy
3-1-5: Cash Disbursement Policy
3-1-1: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year of the village shall begin on May 1 of each year and end on
April 30 of each succeeding year. (1984 Code §
1-3-1)
3-1-2: INVESTMENT POLICY:
The investment policy attached to the ordinance codified herein as exhibit A,
sections 1.01 through 1.17, is hereby enacted and adopted by the village to be
the investment policy of the village pursuant to the laws of the state. (Ord.
2000-16, 11-21-2000)
3-1-3: PAYMENT OF VILLAGE BILLS:
In order to facilitate the payment of certain expenses of the village, the
following procedure is hereby adopted:
   A.   For any expense under the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
the president and the clerk shall determine if that expense is within the
approved budget line item as passed by ordinance of the village board of
trustees.
   B.   The president and the clerk shall request an approval of the village
department head having the responsibility for and knowledge of the basis for
the village to incur the subject expense.
   C.   Upon receipt of the approval of the respective village department head,
the president and the clerk shall have the authority to cause the village to
issue payment for the subject expense.
   D.   The clerk shall report the expense to the board of trustees at the next
regular meeting of the board, and the board shall be requested to ratify the
payment of the expense as is the case with other payments made by the village.
(Ord. 2009-27, 8-18-2009)
3-1-4: PURCHASING POLICY:
   A.   Purchasing:
      1.   All purchases require that the appropriate funds are budgeted and
sufficient funds are available at the time of purchase.
      2.   No employee or any person shall make purchases or commit village
funds without authorization, except for the following:
         a.   Fuel purchases for village-owned vehicles and equipment.
         b.   Credit card purchases as authorized and pursuant to subsection B.
of this section.
         c.   Emergency purchases under subsection A. 5. below.
      3.   All purchases that require a check drawn on village funds shall have
an accompanying purchase order presented prior to the processing of the check.
         a.   The purchase order must contain the date of proposed purchase,
items(s) being purchased, reason for purchase, price, budget account(s) to be
charged, and signature of the authorizing individual.
         b.   Purchases made pursuant to subsection A.2.a. or subsection C. do
not require a purchase order.
      4.   The following individuals have the authority to authorize and/or
make purchases on behalf of the Village of Sherman, subject to the indicated
limits and which are not to exceed budgeted amounts:
         a.   Village Administrator - $1,500
         b.   Police Chief - $1 ,000
         c.   Deputy Chief - $500
         d.   Public Works Director - $1,000
         e.   Sewer Deparånent Coordinator - $ 1,000
         f.   Village President:
            (1)   Contingency purchases - $10,000
            (2)   All other purchases - lower of $ 10,000 or the remaining
annual line item budget
      5.   The Village Administrator is authorized to make emergency purchases
of goods and services up to $5,000 with prior approval from Village President.
The Village President is authorized to make emergency purchases of goods and
services up to $25,000. An emergency exists when the delay of seeking quotes or
Village Board approval in advance of any purchase or commitment of funds.
      6.   Expenditures greater than what the Village has budgeted within its
various line items, or expenditures from the contingency budget in excess of
$10,000, require Village Board approval in advance of any purchase or
commitment of funds.
   B.   Credit Card Policy - Corporate Card:
      1.   All credit card purchases are subject to the requirements of the
village's purchasing policy.
      2.   Cardholders cannot use the Village of Sherman corporate card for
personal purchases or expenses.
      3.   Limits: The President and Treasurer set the limits on credit card
accounts per authorized cardholder in accordance with A.4. above.
      4.   The card may not be transferred to, assigned to, or used by anyone
other than the designated cardholder.
      5.   The Village of Sherman retains the right to cancel the cardholder's
corporate credit card. Cards may be revoked for misuse or non-compliance with
procedures.
      6.   Detailed receipts or invoices must be presented with accompanying
purchase order prior to processing of payment.
      7.   Cardholders are responsible for forwarding all transactions/receipts
to the Clerk or Treasurer, upon their request.
         a.   A copy of the monthly statement will be provided to the
cardholder upon receipt of the monthly billing from the credit card company.
         b.   Upon receipt of the monthly credit card billing, each cardholder
is responsible for completing purchase order for each transaction noted on the
credit card statement and attaching all sales receipts, invoices, thereto.
         c.   The Village Purchase Order must be signed by the cardholder and
forwarded to the Village Clerk to authorize payment of the charges.
         d.   The cardholder is responsible for follow-up with the vendor on
any erroneous charges, disputed items, or returns.
      8.   The individuals authorized in subsection B.3. are considered
authorized individuals for credit card use.
   C.   Credit Card - Gas Card Policy:
      1.   The village has negotiated a favorable rate with local gasoline
provider for the purchase of gasoline for village vehicles. Employees are
required to use the local vendor and their gas card for such purchases.
      2.   Employees that drive company vehicles on a regular basis will be
issued a credit card for gas purchases with the local gasoline vendor.
         a.   Each card issued will be specific to the employee it is issued.
         b.   Employees must safeguard their card and not loan it out to
coworkers or others.
      3.   Employees are not permitted to use the gas card for personal reasons
or purchase items other than gasoline its intended use.
      4.   Process For Validating Purchases:
         a.   Upon purchase of gas by employees, the employee must obtain
receipt from the vendor.
         b.   On the back of the receipt, the employee must note "license plate
number of village vehicle" and "initial".
         c.   Employees should keep the receipts in a safe place as they will
be turned in to their supervisor at their request.
         d.   Upon monthly statement by the vendor to the Village
Administrative Office, the department supervisor will be notified to forward
all receipts for a specific period (usually on a calendar month) and provide
all receipts.
         e.   The Administrative Office will reconcile all receipts to the
statement.
            (1)   If receipt is lost or there is a discrepancy, Administrative
Office will notify the supervisor and the employee losing receipt will be
required to submit a brief statement validating the transaction did take place
and was for village purposes.
            (2)   Once reconciled, the Administrative Office will proceed to
authorize payment to the Treasurer and file the statement, receipts and/or
statements attached.
   D.   General Fiscal Policies:
      1.   All purchases must have an accompanying receipt or invoice prior to
issuance of a check.
      2.   Village Board approval is not required prior to issuing payments for
authorized purchases.
      3.   All planned expenditures above $10,000.00 must have two (2)
accompanying quotes prior to selecting a vendor. The quotation selected is the
one that provides the highest acceptable quality at the lowest price. The
requirement is waived if the expenditure is on state-contract bid list, waived
by the vote of the Village Board, or if deemed impractical by the Village
President.
      4.   All contracts above $10,000.00 require Village Board approval unless
stipulated otherwise herein.
      5.   All checks issued by the Village shall have two (2) authorized
signatures recorded on its front surface before the check is valid. Electronic
payroll and payroll tax payments shall be reviewed prior to being submitted by
the Village Clerk or Village Treasurer.
      6.   The disbursement of funds pursuant to prior Board ordinances,
resolutions or agreements are not subject to this policy, and do not require
subsequent Board approval prior to being paid.
      7.   Transfers between funds for operating purposes by direction of the
Village Treasurer are not subject to this policy.
      8.   A listing of all disbursements and transfers shall be presented for
informational purposes to the Village Board.
      9.   In the event an expenditure was not authorized according to this
procedure, the error shall be presented to the Village Board and their approval
is required prior to payment.
   E.   Vendor Selection: The village may from time to time decide in the best
interest of efficiency and cost to negotiate contract for services with a
vendor as the single provider of said service for a specific period of time but
no longer than one year. Examples include gas vendors, vehicle service centers,
office supply vendors, telephone or cell phone service providers, janitorial
supplies and services.
   F.   Conflict Of Interest:
      1.   No employee (including elected officials) will participate directly
or indirectly in a procurement when the employee knows that employee or any
member of the employee's immediate family has a financial interest in the
procurement:
         a.   When a business or organization in which the employee, or any
member of the employee's immediate family, has a financial interest pertaining
to the procurement;
         b.   Or when any other person, business, or organization with whom the
employee or any member of the employee's immediate family is negotiating or has
an arrangement concerning prospective employment is involved in the
procurement.
      2.   The Village of Sherman can enter into a contact with a vendor which
a Trustee has a conflict of interest as defined in F.1. above. In entering into
any such contract, the Trustee must not vote on the contract and must disclose
that there is a conflict of interest. (Ord. 2018-05, 5-15-2018)
3-1-5: CASH DISBURSEMENT POLICY:
   A.   Purpose/Objective: The Cash Disbursement Policy is to assure that the
Village of Sherman has proper controls to minimize the risk of theft or loss
occurring during the preparation, authorization, and distribution of checks.
This policy also covers controls related to banking, petty cash, and ACH/wire
transfers.
   B.   Check Preparation:
      1.   The Village of Sherman will use completely blank check stock and
will print their own checks using the LOCiS A/P system and MICR printers.
      2.   Checks will always be made payable to a specific payee or vendor.
Never to "cash" or "petty cash".
      3.   A designated individual, either the Clerk or the Treasurer, will
prepare the check payments based upon authorization.
      4.   All check payments must be signed by two (2) individuals. No one
person is allowed to authorize a purchase and approve a payment without another
signature.
      5.   After checks are printed, the Village Administrator, or in his/her
absence, the Village Clerk, will account for all checks printed and compare
printed checks to supporting documentation. If possible, any individual
responsible for preparing the checks should not also sign the check.
      6.   Check signing authority is limited to the Village President, Village
Clerk, and Village Treasurer except as otherwise approved by the Village Board.
Other individuals may be designated to sign for a particular fund or account as
approved by the Village Board.
      7.   The signature stamp of the Village President will be kept in a
secure location under the custody of the Village Administrator. Under
discretion of the Village President, the Village Administrator may be
authorized to affix the signature of the Village President.
      8.   Blank checks are not allowed to be signed.
      9.   The LOCiS system will be restricted to only those users that require
access, and only portions of the system will be set to VIEW only to eliminate
any unauthorized check printing. (Ord. 2018-05, 5-15-2018)
CHAPTER 2
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-2-2: Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax
3-2-3: Municipal Use Tax
3-2-1: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Imposition Of Tax: Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1,
a tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property, other than items of tangible personal property titled or
registered with an agency of the state, at retail in the village, on gross
receipts from those sales made in the course of such business. Said tax shall
be imposed at a rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of gross receipts from
such sales.
   B.   Exemptions From Tax: The tax is not imposed on the sales of food for
human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold
(other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which have been prepared
for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines,
drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and
needles used by diabetics.
   C.   Administration Of Tax: Administration of the tax shall be conducted by
the Illinois state department of revenue in accord with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1 and all other applicable statutes, rules
and regulations. (Ord. 2002-5, 3-25-2002)
3-2-2: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Imposition Of Tax: Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5,
a tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of making sales of
service within the village. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the
rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the selling price of all tangible
personal property transferred by such servicemen either in the form of tangible
personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of
service.
   B.   Exemptions From Tax: The tax is not imposed on the sales of food for
human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold
(other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which have been prepared
for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines,
drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and
needles used by diabetics.
   C.   Administration Of Tax: Administration of the tax shall be conducted by
the Illinois state department of revenue in accord with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5 and all other applicable statutes, rules
and regulations. (Ord. 2002-6, 3-25-2002)
3-2-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
   A.   Imposition Of Tax: A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the
provisions of section
8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal code upon the privilege of using in the
village any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside
Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an
agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be set at a rate of one percent
(1%) of the selling price of such tangible property with "selling price" to
have the meaning as defined in the use tax act 1 , approved July 14, 1955.
   B.   Collection Of Tax: The tax shall be collected by the Illinois
department of revenue and shall be paid before the title or certificate of
registration for the personal property is issued. (1984 Code §
3-1-3)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.
ARTICLE A. HOTEL OPERATORS' OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-2A-1: Short Title
3-2A-2: Statute Authority
3-2A-3: Definitions
3-2A-4: Imposition Of Tax; Exemptions
3-2A-5: Tax Is Additional
3-2A-6: Tax Return
3-2A-7: Payment Of Tax; Late Payment; Enforced Payment And Collection
3-2A-8: Books And Records; Inspections
3-2A-9: Refunds
3-2A-10: Disposition And Use Of Revenues
3-2A-11: Penalties
3-2A-1: SHORT TITLE:
This article shall be known and cited as the VILLAGE OF SHERMAN HOTEL
OPERATORS' OCCUPATION TAX ORDINANCE, and the tax herein imposed shall be in
addition to all other occupation or privilege taxes imposed by the state or by
the village. (Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991)
3-2A-2: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of section
8-3-14 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-3-14.
(Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991; amd. 2010 Code)
3-2A-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
HOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration,
obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term
includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses
and apartment houses.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any
room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to the use or possession
of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use
and possession of the room or rooms.
OPERATOR: Any person operating a hotel.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any room
or rooms, regardless of whether or not it is the same room or rooms, in a hotel
for at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
RENT OR RENTAL: The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits
and property or services of any kind or nature.
ROOM OR ROOMS: Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
(Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991; amd. 2010 Code)
3-2A-4: IMPOSITION OF TAX; EXEMPTIONS:
A tax is imposed upon persons engaged in the business of renting, leasing or
letting rooms in a hotel at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental
receipts from such renting, leasing or letting, excluding, however, from gross
rental receipts, the proceeds of such renting, leasing or letting to permanent
residents of that hotel and proceeds from the tax imposed under subsection (c)
of section 13 of the metropolitan pier and exposition authority act 1 . Nothing
in this article shall be construed to authorize the village to impose a tax
upon the privilege of engaging in any business which, under the constitution of
the United States, may not be made the subject of taxation by the state. In
addition, the tax is not imposed upon gross rental receipts for which the hotel
operator is prohibited from obtaining reimbursement for the tax from the
customer by reason of a federal treaty. (Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991; amd. 2010
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 70 ILCS 210/13.
3-2A-5: TAX IS ADDITIONAL:
Persons subject to the tax imposed by this article may reimburse themselves for
their tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as an
additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single
amount, with the state tax imposed under the hotel operators' occupation tax
act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 145/1 et seq. (Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991; amd.
2010 Code)
3-2A-6: TAX RETURN:
   A.   Except as provided hereinafter in this section, on or before the last
day of each calendar month, every person engaged in the business of renting,
leasing or letting rooms in a hotel in the village during the preceding
calendar month shall file a return with the village, stating:
      1.   The name of the operator.
      2.   His residence address and the address of his principal place of
business and the address of the principal place of business (if that is a
different address) from which he engages in the business of renting, leasing or
letting rooms in a hotel in the village.
      3.   Total amount of rental receipts received by him during the preceding
calendar month from renting, leasing or letting rooms during such preceding
calendar month.
      4.   Total amount of rental receipts received by him during the preceding
calendar month from renting, leasing or letting rooms to permanent residents
during such preceding calendar month.
      5.   Total amount of other exclusions from gross rental receipts allowed
by this article.
      6.   Gross rental receipts which were received by him during the
preceding calendar month and upon the basis of which the tax is imposed.
      7.   The amount of tax due.
      8.   Such other reasonable information as the village treasurer may
require. (Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   If the operator's average monthly tax liability to the village does not
exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), the village may authorize his returns to
be filed on a quarter annual basis, with the return for January, February and
March of a given year being due by April 30 of such year; with the return for
April, May and June of a given year being due by July 31 of such year; with the
return for July, August and September of a given year being due by October 31
of such year; and with the return for October, November and December of a given
year being due by January 31 of the following year. If the operator's average
monthly tax liability to the village does not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00),
the village may authorize his returns to be filed on an annual basis, with the
return for a given year being due by January 31 of the following year. Such
quarter annual and annual returns, as to form and substance, shall be subject
to the same requirements as monthly returns.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article concerning the time
within which an operator may file his return, in the case of any operator who
ceases to engage in a kind of business which makes him responsible for filing
returns under this article, such operator shall file a final return under this
article with the village not more than one month after discontinuing such
business. (Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991)
   D.   Where the same person has more than one business registered with the
Illinois department of revenue under separate registrations under the hotel
operators' occupation tax act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 145/1 et seq.,
such person shall not file each return that is due as a single return covering
all such registered businesses but shall file separate returns for each such
registered business. (Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991; amd. 2010 Code)
   E.   In his return, the operator shall determine the value of any
consideration other than money received by him in connection with the renting,
leasing or letting of rooms in the course of his business, and he shall include
such value in his return. Such determination shall be subject to review and
revision by the village treasurer in the manner hereinafter provided for the
correction of returns.
   F.   Where the operator is a corporation, the return filed on behalf of such
corporation shall be signed by the president, vice president, secretary or
treasurer or by the properly accredited agent of such corporation. (Ord. 1991-
10, 5-7-1991)
3-2A-7: PAYMENT OF TAX; LATE PAYMENT; ENFORCED PAYMENT AND COLLECTION:
   A.   Payment Of Tax; Disposition Of Revenues: The person required to file
the return herein provided for shall, at the time of filing such return, pay to
the village treasurer the amount of tax herein imposed. The operator filing the
return herein provided for shall, at the time of filing such return, pay to the
village treasurer the amount of tax imposed by this article less a discount of
2.1 percent or twenty five dollars ($25.00) per calendar year, whichever is
greater, which is allowed to reimburse the operator for the expenses incurred
in keeping records, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and
supplying data to the village treasurer on request. All monies received by the
village treasurer under the provisions of this article shall be deposited into
a special fund or funds to be utilized solely for the purposes permitted under
this article.
   B.   Late Payment Penalty: If the tax or any portion thereof is not paid
when due, a percentage of the delinquent amount per month (or portion thereof)
from the date of delinquency, as provided in subsection
3-3-10C of this title, shall be due and owing. (Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991; amd.
2010 Code)
   C.   Enforced Payment: Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as
herein provided, the village attorney shall, upon request of the board of
trustees, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said
tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord.
1991-10, 5-7-1991)
   D.   Enforced Collection: The village shall have all powers necessary to
enforce the collection of the tax imposed by this article as set forth by the
statutes and laws of the state including, but not limited to, the power of
enforcement by lien contained in section
8-3-15 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-3-15.
(Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991; amd. 2010 Code)
3-2A-8: BOOKS AND RECORDS; INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Every operator shall keep accurate, separate books or records of his
business as an operator so as to show, on a daily basis: 1) the rents and
occupancies taxable under this article separately from transactions not taxable
hereunder; and 2) the amount of taxes owed pursuant to this article. As used in
this subsection, "records" means all data maintained by the taxpayer, including
data on paper, microfilm, microfiche or any type of machine sensible data
compilation. (Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   The village treasurer, or his authorized representative, may enter the
premises of any hotel upon reasonable notice to inspect and examine such books
or records in order to effectuate the proper administration of this article and
to assure the enforcement of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any
person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the village treasurer, or his
authorized representative, in the discharge or performance of his duties. (Ord.
1991-10, 5-7-1991)
3-2A-9: REFUNDS:
If any hotel operator collects an amount (however designated) which purports to
reimburse such operator for tax under this article measured by receipts which
are not subject to tax under this article, or if any hotel operator, in
collecting an amount (however designated) which purports to reimburse such
operator for tax under this article measured by receipts which are subject to
tax under this article, collects more from the customer than the hotel
operator's tax liability in the transaction is, the customer shall have a legal
right to claim a refund of such amount from such operator. However, if such
amount is not refunded to the customer for any reason, the hotel operator is
liable to pay such amount to the village treasurer. (Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991;
amd. 2010 Code)
3-2A-10: DISPOSITION AND USE OF REVENUES:
   A.   The amounts collected by the village pursuant to this article,
including penalties, shall be expended by the village solely to promote tourism
and conventions within the village or otherwise to attract nonresident
overnight visitors to the village.
   B.   No funds received pursuant to this article shall be used to advertise
for or otherwise promote new competition in the hotel business.
   C.   The village is authorized (though not required) to enter into an
agreement with any operator pursuant to which the tax and penalties paid
hereunder by such operator are deposited by the village treasurer into a
segregated fund and utilized by the village solely as directed by such operator
(and for no other purpose); provided, that such taxes and penalties must be
spent solely for the purposes permitted hereunder. (Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991)
3-2A-11: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person found guilty of failing to pay, report and transmit the
hotel tax to the village treasurer in accordance with the terms of this article
shall, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than
three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first offense, and not less than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the
second and each subsequent offense in any one hundred eighty (180) day period;
provided, however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines only shall
be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the Illinois
civil practice law, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-101 et seq.
   B.   Repeated offenses in excess of three (3) within any one hundred eighty
(180) day period may also be punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration at
the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months under the procedures
set forth in section
1-2-1.1 of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-
1.1, and of the provisions of the Illinois code of criminal procedure, 725
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/100-1 et seq., in a separate proceeding. A
separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon
which said person shall continue any such violation or permit any such
violation to exist after notification thereof. (Ord. 1991-10, 5-7-1991; amd.
2010 Code)
CHAPTER 3
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Short Title
3-3-2: Scope; Application Of Provisions
3-3-3: Definitions
3-3-4: Notice Requirements
3-3-5: Delinquent Notices, Payments, Remittances Or Other Filings
3-3-6: Application Of Tax Payments
3-3-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
3-3-8: Audit Procedure
3-3-9: Appeals
3-3-10: Payment Required; Interest And Penalties
3-3-11: Installment Contracts
3-3-12: Statute Of Limitations
3-3-13: Voluntary Disclosure
3-3-14: Publication Of Tax Ordinances; Copies
3-3-15: Review Of Liens
3-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-
2000)
3-3-2: SCOPE; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village
procedures in connection with all of the village locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   B.   Application Of Provisions; Conflicting Provisions: This chapter shall
be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village tax
ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or
inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 2000-
18, 12-19-2000)
3-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to
them as follows:
ACT: The local government taxpayers' bill of rights act 1 .
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village president and board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village treasurer is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village, not an agency or department
of the state. The term does not include any taxes imposed upon real property
under the property tax code 2  or fees collected by the village other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and, with respect to consumer taxes, includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
VILLAGE: The village of Sherman, Illinois. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
2 1. 35 ILCS 200/1-1 et seq.
3-3-4: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to
the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the
local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator by U.S. registered or certified mail. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-2000;
amd. 2010 Code)
3-3-5: DELINQUENT NOTICES, PAYMENTS, REMITTANCES OR OTHER FILINGS:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date; or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable, U.S. postmark
dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with
adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-2000)
3-3-6: APPLICATION OF TAX PAYMENTS:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: first, to the tax due for the applicable period; second, to
the interest due for the applicable period; and third, to the penalty for the
applicable period. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-2000)
3-3-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   Written Protest Required: The village shall not refund or credit any
taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the
event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted
or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
   B.   Statute Of Limitations: The statute of limitations on a claim for
credit or refund shall be four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in
which payment in error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund
of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person
who has not paid the amounts directly to the village.
   C.   Procedure: The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as
follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund, together with a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
         d.   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within twenty one (21) days of the receipt by the local tax
administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator
shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum, based on
a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or
the grant of a credit. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-2000)
3-3-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-2000)
   A.   Information Required: Each notice of audit shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit;
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor; and
      4.   Who will be conducting the audit. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-6-2015)
   B.   Time For Conducting Audit:
      1.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours, and if
the date and time selected by the Local Tax Administrator is not agreeable to
the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer at a time
within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
      2.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the Local Tax Administrator agree to some other convenient time. In the
event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question,
the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the Local Tax Administrator.
   C.   Taxpayer's Books And Records:
      1.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given
rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by
the Village.
      2.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the Village. If the taxpayer
or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the
time provided, the Local Tax Administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the Tax Administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   D.   Overpayments: If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30)
days of the Village determination of the amount of overpayment.
   E.   Payment To Improper Entity: In the event a tax payment was submitted to
the incorrect local government entity, the Local Tax Administrator shall notify
the local government entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-2000)
3-3-9: APPEALS:
   A.   Contents Of Notice Regarding Taxes Due: The Local Tax Administrator
shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the Local Tax Administrator's
issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a
notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the
following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the Village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   B.   Request For Hearing: A taxpayer who receives written notice from the
Local Tax Administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file
with the Local Tax Administrator a written protest and petition for hearing
setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the Local Tax Administrator
within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.
   C.   Hearing Scheduled; Notice: If a timely written notice and petition for
hearing is filed, the Local Tax Administrator shall fix the time and place for
hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be
scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written
protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date
convenient to all parties.
   D.   Time Limit For Filing Hearing Request: If a written protest and
petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the
tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing
without further notice.
   E.   Reopening, Extension Of Hearing Request: Upon the showing of reasonable
cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along
with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax
administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and
petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest
and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days
after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period.
   F.   Conduct Of Hearing; Decision:
      1.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under this section, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
      2.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
      3.   At the hearing, the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
      4.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-2000)
3-3-10: PAYMENT REQUIRED; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Time For Payment: In the event a determination has been made that a tax
is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be
paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
   B.   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax to be five
percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days
and the number of days elapsed.
   C.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed, and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a
failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
   D.   Abatement Of Penalties: The local tax administrator shall have the
authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or
failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine
reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 2000-18,
12-19-2000)
3-3-11: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be cancelled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-2000)
3-3-12: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
   A.   The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice
of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   B.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-
2000)
   C.   If any tax is not filed or if, during any four (4) year period for
which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the village,
the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the
statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due or end of
the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed,
whichever occurs later. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-2000; amd. 2010 Code)
   D.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-2000)
3-3-13: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. Except for the amount of tax and interest due
under this section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application
may not be liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for any period
before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the
underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which
case, the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-
2000; amd. 2010 Code)
3-3-14: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES; COPIES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-2000)
3-3-15: REVIEW OF LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall: (Ord. 2000-18, 12-19-2000; amd.
2010 Code)
   A.   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   B.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   C.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
2000-18, 12-19-2000)
CHAPTER 4
INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY FOR TAX INCREMENT FINANCING
SECTION:
3-4-1: Registration Rules Adopted
3-4-1: REGISTRATION RULES ADOPTED:
In accordance with section 11-74.4-4.2 of the tax increment allocation
redevelopment act 1 , the village hereby adopts the registration rules attached
to the ordinance codified herein as exhibit A as registration rules for each
such interested parties registry. The board of trustees shall have the
authority to amend such registration rules from time to time as may be
necessary or desirable to comply with and carry out the purposes intended by
the act. (Ord. 2003-9, 3-18-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et seq.
TITLE 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Applications
4-1-2: Persons Subject To License
4-1-3: Forms
4-1-4: Signatures
4-1-5: Inspections Or Investigations
4-1-6: Term Of License
4-1-7: Building And Premises
4-1-8: Change Of Location
4-1-9: Nuisances
4-1-10: Posting License
4-1-11: Revocation Of License; Hearing
4-1-12: Appeal Procedure
4-1-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses required by this code shall be made in writing to
the village clerk, unless otherwise specifically provided by law. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant, the license desired, the
location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid; and each
application shall contain such additional information as may be required by the
issuing official. (2010 Code)
4-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the
requirement, if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds
himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business or occupation in the village. (2010 Code)
4-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept
on file by the village clerk. (2010 Code)
4-1-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license issued shall bear the signatures of the president and the village
clerk in absence of any provision to the contrary. (2010 Code)
4-1-5: INSPECTIONS OR INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license where laws of the village
necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such license,
the village clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer for making
such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time of such receipt.
The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection
shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after
receiving the application or a copy thereof. For the protection of health, the
building inspector shall make or cause to be made any such inspections relative
to the construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations,
except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the village police department
or by some other officer designated by the president. (2010 Code)
4-1-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
All annual licenses shall terminate on December 31, where no provision to the
contrary is made. (2010 Code)
4-1-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business if the premises and
building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements
of the village. (2010 Code)
4-1-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed
business or occupation may be changed, provided ten (10) days' notice thereof
is given to the village clerk; and further provided, the building requirements
of this code are complied with. (2010 Code)
4-1-9: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be conducted or operated as to amount to a
nuisance in fact. (2010 Code)
4-1-10: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the
village to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used
for such business at all times. (2010 Code)
4-1-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING:
Any license, for a limited time, may be revoked by the president and board of
trustees during the life of such license for the violation by the licensee of
any provision relating to the license, the subject of the license, or the
premises occupied. Such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed. The
president and board of trustees shall be authorized to summarily order the
cessation of business, the closing of the premises, and the suspension of any
business license for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days.
   A.   Hearing: Within ten (10) days after the village officials have so
acted, the president shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining
whether or not the license should be revoked.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall
be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and
the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the licensee by
certified mail at his last known address or personally served at least five (5)
days prior to the date of the hearing.
   C.   Hearing Procedures: At the hearing, the licensee shall be permitted
counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine
witnesses. The president shall preside and shall render the decision and
recommendation.
   D.   Causes For Revocation: Business licenses issued under the ordinances of
the village, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the president and
board of trustees after notice and hearing as provided in subsections B and C
of this section for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license.
      2.   Any violation by the licensee of ordinance provisions or state law
relating to the license, the subject matter of the license, or the premises
occupied.
      3.   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude.
      4.   Failure of the licensee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the
village.
      5.   Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation or any interference
with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in the performance of
his duties in making such inspections, as provided in this code. (2010 Code)
4-1-12: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the village
to issue a license or by the revocation of a license shall have the right to
appeal the village decision to the village board of trustees. Such appeal shall
be requested by submitting a written request to the president within five (5)
days of the action of the village which is appealed.
   B.   Village Board Consideration: The village board of trustees shall
consider the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting, at which time the
applicant shall be entitled to present his appeal orally or in writing. The
village board of trustees shall act on the appeal within seven (7) days of the
hearing and shall either uphold the action of the village or shall direct the
issuance of a license which the village had denied or the reissuance of a
license which the village had revoked. (2010 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
Division I. General Provisions
4-2-1: Purpose
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: Local Liquor Control Commissioner - Powers And Duties
Division II. Licensing Provisions
4-2-4: License Required
4-2-5: Classes Of Licenses - Fees
4-2-5-1: Outdoor Café Permit
4-2-6: Number Of Licenses - Limitations
4-2-7: Application - Contents
4-2-8: Applications - Investigations And Examination
4-2-9: Disposition Of License Fees
4-2-10: Persons And Locations Not Entitled To License
4-2-11: Term Of License
4-2-12: Display Of License
4-2-13: License Specific To Premises - Permission For Change Of Location
4-2-14: License - Classification Change
4-2-15: Personal Privilege Only - Transfer Of License Prohibited
4-2-16: License - Joint Tenancy
4-2-17: License - Renewal
4-2-18: Change In Management Or Ownership Of Premises - Review By Commissioner
4-2-19: Civil Rights In Licensed Premises
4-2-20: Licensee Responsible For Compliance
4-2-21: Village President To Keep Record Of Licenses
4-2-22: Selling Liquor Without License Prohibited
Division III. Sale Of Alcoholic Beverages
4-2-23: Hours During Which Sales Are Prohibited
4-2-24: Clear View Into Premises
4-2-25: Sales To Intoxicated Persons Prohibited
4-2-26: Peddling Prohibited
4-2-27: Retail Sales - Original Packages Required
4-2-28: Delivery Prohibited
4-2-29: Records
Division IV. Regulations Pertaining To Minors
4-2-30: Restrictions Applicable To Persons Under Twenty One
4-2-31: Sale Or Delivery Restrictions; Minors, Intoxicated Persons And The Like
Division V. Licensed Premises And Employees
4-2-32: Evidence Of Insurance Required
4-2-33: Sanitary Requirements
4-2-34: Employee Age Requirements
4-2-35: Health Of Employees - Certificate Required
Division VI. Violations - Renovation Or Suspension - Penalties
4-2-36: Revocation - Suspension - Complaints
4-2-37: Violations - Fines
DIVISION I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-2-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be liberally construed to the end that the health, safety,
and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village shall be protected and temperance
in the consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be featured and promoted by sound
and careful control and regulation of the sale of alcoholic liquors. (Ord.
2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified
or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of
being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
PRIVATE FUNCTION: A prearranged private party, function, or event for a
specific social or business occasion, either by invitation or reservation and
not open to the general public, where the guests in attendance are served in a
room or rooms designated and used exclusively for the private party, function,
or event.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and
regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
RETAILER: A person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, and includes and
means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent,
servant or employee. The term "sale" includes any transfer of alcoholic liquor
from a foreign importer's license to an importing distributor's license even if
both licenses are held by the same person.
SELL AT RETAIL: Sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
SPECIAL EVENT: An event conducted by an educational, fraternal, political,
civic, religious or non-profit organization.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits, or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as above defined. (Ord.
2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-3: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER - POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The Village President is designated as the Sherman Liquor Control
Commissioner and is charged with the administration of the applicable
provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act 1 , and the provisions of this
chapter, as well as such other ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic
liquor as may be enacted from time to time by the Village.
   B.   In addition to any other powers and duties as established by law, the
Liquor Control Commissioner shall have all of the following powers and duties
with respect to local liquor licenses:
      1.   To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke
for cause all local licenses issued to persons for premises within his
jurisdiction;
      2.   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by the
State Commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine
said premises of said licensee in connection therewith;
      3.   To notify the Secretary of State where a club incorporated under the
General Not for Profit Corporation Act of 1986 or a foreign corporation
functioning as a club in this State under a certificate of authority issued
under that Act has violated this chapter by selling or offering for sale at
retail alcoholic liquors without a retailer's license;
      4.   To receive complaint from any citizen within his jurisdiction that
any of the provisions of this chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted
pursuant hereto, have been or are being violated and to act upon such
complaints in the manner hereinafter provided;
      5.   To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the
Village Treasurer as the case may be;
      6.   To levy fines for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-
2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
DIVISION II. LICENSING PROVISIONS
4-2-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall sell or offer for sale at retail in the Village any alcoholic
liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-
2015)
4-2-5: CLASSES OF LICENSES - FEES:
   A.   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor in the Village shall pay an annual license fee. The licenses
shall be divided in the following classes:
      1.   Class A License: A Class A license shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises where sold. The service
of food may be incidental to the license and not more than thirty percent (30%)
of the retail sales of the establishment.
      2.   Class A-1 License: A Class A-1 license shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold as well as beer in
its original package and not for consumption on the premises where sold, which
premises shall not be located on property or in a building that is used, in
whole or in part, for residential purposes. The service of food may be
incidental to the license and not more than thirty percent (30%) of the retail
sales of the establishment.
      3.   Class B License: A Class B license shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor only in original packages and not for consumption on the
premises where sold, which premises shall not be located on property or in a
building that is used, in whole or in part, for residential purposes.
      4.   Class C License: A Class C license shall be issued only to
restaurants engaged primarily in selling and serving meals and which shall
authorize the sale of alcoholic liquors on the premises as incidental thereto.
The sale and service of alcoholic liquor must be served at tables where meals
are served, or at a bar or counter, provided that the percentage of sales
related to alcoholic liquors cannot exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total
retail sales of the restaurant; and any bar area must be specifically
identified as such in the license.
      5.   Class D License: A Class D license shall only be issued for special
public or private events sponsored by civic, fraternal, political subdivisions
or religious organizations and shall authorize the retail sale, consumption,
gift, or dispensing on the premises specified of alcoholic beverages.
      6.   Class F License: A Class F license shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the licensed premises only in connection
with scheduled special functions such as banquets, wedding receptions, and
other private party functions where meals are served and where the service of
alcoholic beverages is primarily incidental and complementary to the service of
such meals. No retail sale of alcoholic liquor shall be made at any time to the
general public (other than to those in attendance at the banquets, wedding
receptions, or other party functions). This license shall not be issued for
more than eight (8) hours. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
      7.   Class "VG" License. A Class "VG" License shall be a supplemental
license that may be issued only to holders of a Class "A", Class "A-1" or Class
"C" License. Holders of a Class "VG" License may conduct video gaming on the
premises where licensed, in addition to the service of alcohol, upon issuance
of a video gaming license from the Illinois Gaming Board and in compliance with
the Video Gaming Act and any and all other rules and regulations, including all
ordinances enacted by the Village. Prior to the issuance of a Class VG License,
an application must be filed with the Liquor Control Commissioner seeking the
license, setting forth that any legal and all legal requirements to hold the
license are met and the proposed use of video gaming within the licenses
establishment, which may be contingent on the issuance of a license from the
Illinois Gaming Board and an establishment permit by the Village. The Village
reserves the right to revoke a license if video gaming is not active on the
premises within sixty (60) days of the application and/or video gaming
otherwise ceases on the premises for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days.
The application procedures set forth elsewhere within this Chapter shall be
applicable to the issuance of a Class "VG" License. The provisions herein and
other provisions within this Chapter allowing the use of video gaming and
issuance of a Class VG License shall sunset and hereinafter all be repealed and
no longer effective on July 1, 2020 unless re-authorized by separate ordinance
of the Village Board.
   B.   The following is the schedule of fees for this section:
License Classification License Fee
License Classification License Fee
   Class A          $300.00 per year
   Class A-1        300.00 per year
   Class B          300.00 per year
   Class C          300.00 per year
   Class D          300.00 per year 1
   Class F          50.00 per event
   Class VG         500.00 per year
 
Note:
   1.    Political subdivisions shall be exempt from the license fee.
(Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015; amd. Ord. 2016-11, 6-7-2016; Ord. 2017-10, 6-6-2017;
Ord. 2018-04, 5-15-2018; Ord. 2019-04, 5-21-2019; Ord. 2020-10, 6-2-2020; Ord.
2022-06, 5-24-2022; Ord. 2023-07, 6-20-2023)
4-2-5-1: OUTDOOR CAFÉ PERMIT:
   A.   On application and payment of an investigation and processing fee as
set forth in Section
4-2-8 , the holder of a Class A, A-I or C license may be issued an outdoor café
permit.
   B.   An outdoor café permit shall, upon issuance, entitle the holder of
Class A, A-I or C licenses to sell alcoholic liquor as authorized by the
holder's primary classification, outside of the permanent structure of the
premises under the following conditions:
      1.   The holder of an outdoor café permit must conclude all sales and
clear the café area no later than 1:00 a.m.
      2.   Access into the outdoor café shall be from the permanent structure
only and no access shall be permitted from the street, sidewalk, or adjoining
property. Emergency exits as required by city ordinances must be provided.
      3.   No music of any kind may be played or broadcast from the outdoor
café or within the permanent structure which is of such a volume so as to
disturb the neighborhood in any manner. Music shall not be played or broadcast
after 10:00 p.m.
      4.   No sales or dispensing of alcoholic liquor may be made from the
outside area or permanent structure to any person upon adjoining property
public street, sidewalk or alley, and no alcoholic liquor served in an open
container may be removed from the outdoor café or permanent structure.
      5.   The permit for the outdoor café shall be displayed in accordance
with Section
4-2-12  of the Code and shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the
commission.
      6.   The foregoing requirements shall be prospectively applicable in all
instances upon the passage of this section in ordinance form. The commissioner
shall have the right to modify or waive any requirement and approve the
issuance of a permit at his discretion upon a showing of unique circumstances
by the applicant.
      7.   The annual fee for an outdoor café permit shall be $50. (Ord. 2017-
11, 7-11-2017)
4-2-6: NUMBER OF LICENSES - LIMITATIONS:
A.   The number of licenses that shall be granted within the Village shall be
limited as follows: 
License Classification Number Of Licenses Available
License Classification Number Of Licenses Available
   Class A          2
   Class A-1        3
   Class B          3
   Class C          5
   Class D          See below
   Class F          See below
   Class VG         6
 
   B.   No limit is placed under this section upon the number of Class D and F
licenses. These licenses are limited in duration and restricted as otherwise
set forth in this chapter. The Board of Trustees may further modify the number
of Class A, A-1, B, C and VG licenses available as it deems fit and in the best
interests of the Village. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-5, 5-19-2015;
Ord. 2016-8, 3-15-2016; Ord. 2019-01, 1-22-2019)
4-2-7: APPLICATION - CONTENTS:
   A.   Application for a license required by this chapter shall be made to and
filed with the Village President. It shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant if an individual or a duly authorized agent thereof if a corporation,
and verified by oath or affidavit. It shall be accompanied by a fifty dollar
($50.00) nonrefundable filing fee. However, there shall be no application fee
for Class D, Class F or Class VG liquor licenses.
   B.   The application shall be presented not less than thirty (30) days prior
to the date issuance is desired and shall contain at least the following and
other information necessary to evaluate the application:
      1.   For all applicants (including partners, stockholders, managers,
agents as set forth in this section) the full name including middle initial,
date of birth, social security number, the last two (2) home addresses and
current work address and home and work telephone numbers; in the case of a
partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case
of a corporation, the date of incorporation, the state of incorporation, and if
the state is a state other than Illinois, the date upon which the corporation
was certified as a foreign corporation entitled to conduct business in
Illinois, the name and address of the officers and directors, the names and
addresses of all stockholders if the total number of stockholders is twenty
(20) or less, or if the number of stockholders is twenty one (21) or more, only
those stockholders owning more than five percent (5%) interest in the
corporation shall be required to be listed; in all cases, the names and
additional information required in this section for any and all managers or
agents conducting the business;
      2.   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of birth, and if
a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization;
      3.   The type of business of the applicant and, in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed, plus a detailed business plan
setting forth the nature and use of the prospective licensed premises. The
Liquor Control Commissioner may, as a prerequisite to completing the review of
any application, require the applicant to supplement such detailed business
plan (including the delivery of floor plans for the prospective licensed
premises) so as to establish clear representations regarding the proposed
operations of the prospective licensed premises and the types of alcoholic
beverages and other items to be sold or served thereon. The Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be deemed to have relied on the detailed business plan in
the issuance of any license under this chapter;
      4.   The length of time that the applicant has been in business of that
character or, in case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued;
      5.   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under the license and the specific name of the
business;
      6.   A statement whether the applicant has made similar application for a
similar other license on premises other than described in this application, and
the disposition of the application;
      7.   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reasons of any matter or thing
contained in this Code, laws of this State, or the ordinances of this Village;
      8.   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or by
the Federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor;
      9.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of
the State or of the United States or any ordinances of the Village in the
conduct of his or her place of business;
      10.   A statement as to whether the premises for which a license is
sought comprises a store or other place of business where the majority of
customers are under the age of twenty one (21) years or where the principal
business transacted consists of the sale of school books, school supplies,
food, lunches, or drinks for such customers;
      11.   A statement as to whether the applicant is a permanent resident of
the Village;
      12.   A statement as to whether the applicant beneficially owns the
premises for which a license is sought or has a lease thereon for the full
period for which the license is to be issued;
      13.   A statement as to whether the applicant is the beneficial owner of
the business to be licensed;
      14.   A statement as to whether the applicant will be personally,
actively involved in the operation of the business to be licensed;
      15.   A statement as to whether the business is or will be managed by a
manager or agent and, if so, statements from every such manager or agent to the
same extent as required from every individual applicant;
      16.   A statement as to the nature of the business and the amount of
anticipated alcoholic liquor sales as a percentage of gross annual sales of the
business;
      17.   A statement that the applicant is not disqualified from receiving a
license by reason of any matter or item contained in the laws of the State of
Illinois, this chapter, or any other code or ordinance of the Village;
      18.   The Illinois Retailers Occupation Tax number currently assigned to
the business or individual and a statement that the business or individual is
not currently delinquent in payments to the Illinois Department of Revenue,
Village, or any other governmental entity;
      19.   Certifications from the appropriate County Health Department and
the Village Building and Zoning Department indicating that the proposed
licensed premises complies with the regulations and ordinances of the
departments.
   C.   Once an application for a license has been denied, either because the
applicant did not qualify or there were no liquor licenses currently available
for issuance, the application shall no longer be considered to be on file after
the applicant has received notice of the denial of the issuance of a license.
(Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-8: APPLICATIONS - INVESTIGATIONS AND EXAMINATION:
   A.   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to examine or
cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for a
renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension
has been served as provided by statute, and to examine or cause to be examined
the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and
take proof for his or her information in the performance of his or her duties,
and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of
the State. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the
Liquor Control Commissioner under this section, the Commissioner may authorize
his or her agent to act on his or her behalf as provided by statute.
   B.   By applying for a liquor license, every applicant authorizes any person
to disclose, and the Village to investigate, all information pertaining to the
applicant's application. Every applicant waives any and all claims against the
Village, and agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Village and its elected
and appointed officials, officers, boards, commissioners, attorneys, employees,
and agents from any and all claims resulting from or arising out of, or alleged
to result from or arise out of, the aforesaid activities. Every applicant will
consent to and sign any written authorization, waiver, and/or indemnification
agreement as the Village may require in connection with the aforesaid
activities. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-9: DISPOSITION OF LICENSE FEES:
All license fees shall be paid to the Liquor Control Commissioner at the time
application is made and shall be forthwith turned over to the Village
Treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied, the license fee
shall be returned to the applicant, but not the nonrefundable fifty dollar
($50.00) filing fee. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-10: PERSONS AND LOCATIONS NOT ENTITLED TO LICENSE:
   A.   No licenses required by this chapter shall be issued to:
      1.   A person who is not a resident of the Village or, if a corporation,
who does not employ a resident manager that resides within Sangamon County with
the same qualifications as provided for in this Code.
      2.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he resides.
      3.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
      4.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or
State law.
      5.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame.
      6.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
      7.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked
for cause or whose liquor license issued under State law or other Municipal
ordinance was revoked for cause.
      8.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
      9.   A co-partnership, unless all the members of such co- partnership are
qualified to obtain a license.
      10.   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license
under this chapter for any reason other than citizenship or residency except as
provided in subsection A1 of this section.
      11.   A corporation or limited liability company unless it is
incorporated or organized in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation or
foreign limited liability company which is qualified under the Business
Corporation Act of 1983 or the Limited Liability Company Act to transact
business in Illinois.
      12.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee.
      13.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or
State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this chapter or has forfeited his bond to appear
in court to answer charges for any such violation.
      14.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued.
      15.   Any law-enforcing public official, Village President, or any member
of the Village Board of Trustees or employee of the Village.
      16.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee.
      17.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense, as provided
by law.
      18.   A person or entity to whom a Federal wagering stamp has been issued
by the Federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued
a license under the Raffles Act or the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act.
      19.   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or
consumption on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor
liability insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least
equal to the maximum liability amounts set forth in this chapter.
   B.   In addition to other grounds specified in this section, the Liquor
Control Commissioner, on complaint of the State Department of Revenue, shall
refuse the issuance or renewal of a license, or suspend or revoke such license,
for any of the following violations of the "Retailers Occupation Tax Act":
      1.   Failure to make a tax return;
      2.   The filing of a fraudulent return;
      3.   Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally determined
to be due;
      4.   Failure to keep proper books and records;
      5.   Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificate of
registration;
      6.   Willful violation of any rule or regulation of the State Department
of Revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability.
   C.   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business when the majority of
customers are less than twenty one (21) years of age or when the principal
business transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches,
or drinks for such customers.
   D.   No license shall be issued for the purpose of selling or offering for
sale at retail any intoxicating liquor in any dwelling house, flat, or
apartment building.
   E.   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school other than an
institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or
for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station;
provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant
service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other
places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried
on, if such place of business so exempted shall have been established for such
purposes prior to the taking effect of this chapter, or to the renewal of a
license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within one
hundred feet (100') of any church or school where such church or school has
been established within such one hundred feet (100') since the issuance of the
original license. In the case of a church, the distance of one hundred feet
(100') shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship
services or educational programs and not to property boundaries. In all other
instances, the distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be measured from
property line to property line.
   F.   No person, establishment, or business issued a license shall allow
video gaming on the licensed premises unless the person, establishment or
business holds a VG license or is otherwise a permitted establishment not
holding a liquor license under chapter 4 of this title. Operation of a video
gaming terminal by any other license holder shall be cause for revocation of
the applicable liquor license in addition to any and all other penalties
allowed by law and this chapter. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-11: TERM OF LICENSE:
Each license issued under this chapter shall, unless terminated, revoked, or
suspended, expire on June 30th following the issuance thereof, provided,
however, that a Class F license shall be valid for not more than an eight-hour
period and shall not be valid between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon. The normal licensing period shall be from July 1st
through June 30th of each year, unless a license is issued or terminated at
some other time during the year for individual circumstances. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-
14-2015)
4-2-12: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his or her current license or licenses to be framed
and hung in plain view of the public in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-13: LICENSE SPECIFIC TO PREMISES - PERMISSION FOR CHANGE OF LOCATION:
   A.   A license issued under this chapter shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only on the premises described in the application and in the license
issued thereon (and only 1 location shall be so described in each license).
   B.   After a license has been granted for a particular premises, the Liquor
Control Commissioner, upon proper showing, may endorse upon any license
permission to abandon the premises therein described and move therefrom to
other premises approved by the Commissioner. In order to obtain such approval,
the licensee shall file with the Liquor Control Commissioner a request in
writing and a statement under oath which shall show that the proposed new
location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the
Liquor Control Act, this chapter, and all other ordinances of the Village.
(Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-14: LICENSE - CLASSIFICATION CHANGE:
Subject to the limitation on the number of licenses which may be issued and the
making of such additional payment as may be necessary to meet license fee
requirements in case of a change to a higher fee class of license, a change may
be requested and made from one class of license to another upon renewal or
reissuance of a license. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-15: PERSONAL PRIVILEGE ONLY - TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED:
   A.   A license issued under this chapter shall be a purely personal
privilege, good for a period not to exceed one year after issuance or for up to
eight (8) hours for a Class F license (unless sooner revoked or terminated as
provided in this chapter) and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be assignable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated.
   B.   Such license shall cease and terminate upon the death of the licensee,
and shall not descend by the laws of the State of intestate succession;
provided, however, that the executor or administrator of the estate of any
deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when
such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor under the order of a court of
competent jurisdiction, may exercise the privileges of the deceased or
insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such descendent, or such
insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of such license, but in no event
for a period longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of such licensee. The executor or administrator of the estate or a
business representative of any deceased owner, partner, or shareholder owning
five percent (5%) or more of a licensed business shall immediately notify in
writing the Liquor Control Commissioner of such death, and indicate what
changes in ownership and/or management will result from the death. (Ord. 2015-
4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-16: LICENSE - JOINT TENANCY:
A license may be issued to two (2) or more persons jointly and in case of the
death of one of such joint licensee, the surviving licensee shall succeed to
all the rights therein by the right of survivorship. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-17: LICENSE - RENEWAL:
   A.   Any licensee may apply for renewal of his or her license at the
expiration thereof, provided that such licensee is then qualified to receive a
license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable
for the purpose; provided further that the opportunity to apply for renewal
shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the
President and Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be
issued within the Village or to be issued within the Village within any class.
   B.   All applications for renewal and payment of the annual license fee
shall be submitted to the Village Clerk not later than June 1st of each year.
There shall be no charge for a renewal application, unless there is a material
change in the applicant's circumstances, including the designation of a new
manager.
   C.   If any licensee, except a Class D license, shall cease the operation of
the licensed premises, including the serving of liquor, under the terms of his
or her license for any period exceeding thirty (30) days without first
obtaining written approval from the Liquor Control Commissioner, then the
liquor license for that business shall be null and void. The Liquor Control
Commissioner may grant approval for a longer period of time only following
submission of evidence of good cause for the cessation of operations. The
Liquor Control Commissioner may establish a required date by which operation of
the business, including the serving of liquor, shall resume. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-
14-2015)
4-2-18: CHANGE IN MANAGEMENT OR OWNERSHIP OF PREMISES - REVIEW BY COMMISSIONER:
   A.   Any changes in partnerships, officers, directors, persons holding
directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock of a
corporation or ownership interest, or managers, of establishments licensed
under this chapter shall be reported, in writing, to the Liquor Control
Commissioner within ten (10) days after the change. All new personnel shall
meet all the standards of this chapter and shall otherwise qualify to hold a
liquor license. All such changes in personnel shall be subject to review by the
Liquor Control Commissioner.
   B.   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs, resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not
eligible to hold a liquor license, the license shall terminate immediately.
   C.   When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes
place in the management thereof or in the officers, directors, or shareholders
of more than five percent (5%) of the stock, resulting in the holding of office
or such shares of stock by one who is not eligible for a license, the license
shall terminate immediately.
   D.   When a license has been issued to an individual who becomes or is no
longer eligible for a license, the license shall terminate immediately. (Ord.
2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-19: CIVIL RIGHTS IN LICENSED PREMISES:
No licensee licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall deny or permit
his or her agents and employees to deny any person the full and equal enjoyment
of the accommodation, advantages, facilities, and privileges of any premises in
which alcoholic liquors are authorized to be sold subject only to the
conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all
citizens. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-20: LICENSEE RESPONSIBLE FOR COMPLIANCE:
The licensee and his or her agents, officers, and employees shall at all times
be personally responsible for the proper operation of the business, including
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the observation of all laws
and regulations applicable thereto. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-21: VILLAGE PRESIDENT TO KEEP RECORD OF LICENSES:
The Village President shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all
licenses issued by him or her and shall furnish the Village Clerk, the Village
Treasurer, and the Chief of Police each with a copy thereof upon the issuance
of any new license, and shall notify each of the officers in writing upon the
issuance of any new license or revocation of any old license. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-
14-2015)
4-2-22: SELLING LIQUOR WITHOUT LICENSE PROHIBITED:
A person, club, firm, or corporation not having a license shall not sell or
offer for sale any alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold
or permit the same to be consumed on the premises where sold. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-
14-2015)
DIVISION III. SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
4-2-23: HOURS DURING WHICH SALES ARE PROHIBITED:
No person licensed to sell alcoholic liquors under this chapter shall permit
such liquors to be sold, given or consumed on the licensed premises between the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of any day;
provided, however, that on January 1 of each year, no person licensed to sell
alcoholic liquors under this chapter shall permit such liquors to be sold,
given or consumed on the licensed premises between the hours of three o'clock
(3:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-24: CLEAR VIEW INTO PREMISES:
   A.   No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article, or thing shall be
permitted in the windows or upon the doors of licensed premises nor inside such
premises which prevent a clear view into the interior of the licensed premises
from the street, road, or sidewalk at all times.
   B.   All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall
be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial
white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises can be clearly
visible.
   C.   In case the view into any licensed premises required by the foregoing
provisions shall be willfully obscured by the licensee or which he or she
willfully permitted to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then the
license shall be subject to revocation in the manner herein provided. In order
to enforce the provisions of this section, the Village President shall have the
right to require the filing with him or her of plans, drawings, and photographs
of the clearance of the view as above required. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-25: SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent,
or employee of any licensee shall sell, give, or deliver any alcoholic liquor
to any person who is, or who appears to be, intoxicated.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining
alcoholic liquor, to sell, give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to an
intoxicated or apparently intoxicated person. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-26: PEDDLING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the Village. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-
2015)
4-2-27: RETAIL SALES - ORIGINAL PACKAGES REQUIRED:
No licensee shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original package of
alcoholic liquor with the same or any other kind or quality of alcoholic
liquor, and it is unlawful for any person to have in his possession for sale at
retail any bottles, casks, or other containers containing alcoholic liquor,
except in original packages. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-28: DELIVERY PROHIBITED:
No license shall allow for the delivery of any alcoholic beverage, including
beer and wine, regardless of its packaging. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-29: RECORDS:
It shall be the duty of every retail licensee to make books and records
available upon reasonable notice for the purpose of investigation and control
by the Local Liquor Commissioner. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
DIVISION IV. REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO MINORS
4-2-30: RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or officer, associate, member,
representative, agent, or employee of the licensee or for any other person to
sell, give, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person who has not yet
attained his or her 21st birthday.
   B.   1. Persons under the age of twenty one (21) shall be and are hereby
prohibited from remaining on the premises of a Class A or A-1 license liquor
holder in the area where alcoholic liquor is provided for consumption on the
premises after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
      2.   Persons under the age of twenty one (21) shall be allowed on the
premises of a Class A or A-1 liquor license holder in the area where alcoholic
liquor is provided for consumption on the premises only if accompanied by and
under the direct supervision of a parent or guardian. No person under the age
of twenty one (21), even if accompanied by a parent or guardian, shall remain
on the premises of a Class A or A-1 liquor license holder in the area where
alcoholic liquor is provided for consumption on the premises after nine o'clock
(9:00) P.M.
      3.   This section shall not prohibit persons under the age of twenty one
(21) years of age from remaining on a general area of a premises of a Class A
or A-1 liquor license holder that is primarily used for a secondary purpose,
such as bowling lanes, even though alcoholic liquor may be consumed in the
general area.
      4.   It shall be a separate offense for the Class A or A-1 liquor license
holder, bartender, or manager to allow persons under the age of twenty one (21)
to remain on the premises without a parent or guardian or after the hour of
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. as defined by this section, and for the minor to
remain on the premises without a parent or guardian or after nine o'clock (9:
00) P.M. in violation of this section. In the event of a violation of this
section, citations may be issued to the minor, the parent or guardian, or the
Class A or A-1 liquor license holder, bartender, or Class A or A-1 liquor
license holder manager. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-31: SALE OR DELIVERY RESTRICTIONS; MINORS, INTOXICATED PERSONS AND THE
LIKE:
   A.   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent,
or employee of the licensee shall sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to
any person under the age of twenty one (21) years or to any intoxicated person
or to any person known by him or her to be a habitual drunkard, a spendthrift,
insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient, or in need of mental treatment. No
person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining liquor, shall sell, give, or
deliver the alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of twenty one (21)
years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
   B.   For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any
licensee, or his or her agent, or employee may refuse to sell or serve
alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written
evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of twenty
one (21) years.
   C.   Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a
document issued by a Federal, state, county, or municipal government or
subdivision or agency thereof, including but not limited to a motor vehicle
operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal
Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the
armed forces. Proof that the defendant-licensee, or his or her employee or
agent demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in
any transaction forbidden by this section is competent evidence and may be
considered in any criminal prosecution thereof in any proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of any license based thereon.
   D.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who presents or
offers to any licensee, his or her agent, or employee any written, printed, or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not
actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to
purchase, or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure the serving of any
alcoholic beverage or who has in his or her possession any false or fraudulent
written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   E.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who has any alcoholic
beverage in his or her possession on any street or highway or in any public
place or in any place open to the public is guilty of a misdemeanor. This
section does not apply to possession by a person under the age of twenty one
(21) years making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage in pursuance of the order
of his or her parent or in pursuance of his or her employment.
   F.   Any person to whom the sale, gift, or delivery of any alcoholic liquor
is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such
alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his or her possession.
   G.   If a licensee or his or her agents or employees believes or has reason
to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of the non-age of his or her prospective recipient, he or she shall
before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of
positive identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in
the performance of his or her official duties.
   H.   No person shall transfer, alter, or deface such an identification card;
use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information. No person shall purchase or accept delivery or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this division. The consumption of alcoholic
liquor by any person under twenty one (21) years of age is forbidden. Whoever
violates any provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   I.   The possession and dispensing, or consumption by a minor of alcoholic
liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the
consumption by a minor in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this
section. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
DIVISION V. LICENSED PREMISES AND EMPLOYEES
4-2-32: EVIDENCE OF INSURANCE REQUIRED:
All licensees shall show evidence, satisfactory to the Liquor Control
Commissioner, of the issuance of a policy of liquor liability insurance (dram
shop) and insurance against liability for any injury or death on account of
acts of negligence, omission or violating the Liquor Control Act. The policy
shall carry a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person and one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for injury or death; and one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for loss of means of support. Each
licensee shall furnish the Liquor Control Commissioner a certificate of such
insurance and each such certificate of insurance shall state on its face that
the certificate is not cancelable except upon a minimum of twenty one (21)
days' notice sent to the Liquor Control Commissioner by certified mail, return
receipt requested. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-33: SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage of
liquor for sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and kept in
compliance with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws, ordinances,
regulations, rules and other provisions governing the condition of premises
used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-
2015)
4-2-34: EMPLOYEE AGE REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) to draw,
pour, deliver, mix or register the sale of alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-
14-2015)
4-2-35: HEALTH OF EMPLOYEES - CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
   A.   It is unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any
contagious, infectious, or venereal disease, and it is unlawful for any person
who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such disease, to work in or about
any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or engaged in any way
in handling, preparation, or distribution of such liquor.
   B.   Each applicant at the time of making application for a license under
this chapter shall maintain a current certificate, or certificates, from a duly
licensed physician, showing that the applicant and such of his employees or
other persons who will be engaged in the preparation and service of drinks and
food in and about the licensed premises are each free of any communicable skin
disease or any infectious or venereal contagious disease as determined by the
Sangamon County Health Department. No licensee under this chapter shall, during
the period of his or her license, engage, hire, or employ, or secure the
services of any person without first obtaining such physician's certificate.
(Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
DIVISION VI. VIOLATIONS - RENOVATION OR SUSPENSION - PENALTIES
4-2-36: REVOCATION - SUSPENSION - COMPLAINTS:
   A.   Violation Determined By Commissioner:
      1.   The Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend, for not more than
thirty (30) days, or revoke any license issued by the Liquor Control
Commissioner, and may levy a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), if
he or she determines that there has been any violation of any State law
pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor or any provision of this chapter, or
any applicable rules or regulations established by the Liquor Control
Commissioner, or the State, or for the failure to pay any license cost or fee
or any tax imposed on alcoholic liquor or the sale thereof. However, except as
provided in this section, no license shall be revoked or suspended, nor fine
levied, except after a public hearing by the Liquor Control Commissioner, to
commence no sooner than three (3) days from the date of service, personally or
by certified U.S. mail, of notice upon the licensee or his agent or any
employee thereof in charge of the licensed premises, affording the licensee an
opportunity to appear and defend, unless the right to a hearing is waived.
If the Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued
operation of any particular licensed premises will threaten the welfare of the
community, he or she may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the
reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order a licensed
premises closed for not more than seven (7) days pending a hearing on the
suspension or revocation of the license thereof. The order shall contain notice
of the date, time, and place of the hearing, which shall commence not less than
three (3) nor more than seven (7) days from the date of service, personally or
by certified United States mail, of the notice upon the licensee or his or her
agent, or any employee in charge of the licensed premises. The Liquor Control
Commissioner shall hold the hearing at the date, time, and place set forth in
the notice, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard. If the licensee is
also engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed
premises, the initial closing order shall not be applicable to the other
business or businesses.
      2.   Appeals shall be taken to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission in
the manner provided by law. All appeals to the Illinois Liquor Control
Commission shall be limited to a review of the official record of the
proceedings of the Liquor Control Commissioner.
   B.   Violation Determined By Court:
      1.   Whenever any licensee is convicted in court of any violation of
State law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, or any provision of this
chapter, or any applicable rules or regulations established by the Liquor
Control Commissioner or the State Commission, or any law or regulation
pertaining to liquor license fees or taxes, the license of the licensee may in
the discretion of the Liquor Control Commissioner, be immediately revoked. The
revocation need not be preceded by notice or a hearing for the licensee.
However, the licensee shall have a right to a public hearing by the Liquor
Control Commissioner for the purpose of showing cause for re-issuing the
revoked license by petitioning for a hearing within fifteen (15) days of the
revocation of the license. The hearing shall be held within a reasonable time
and shall allow the licensee an opportunity to be heard.
      2.   Whenever an officer, director, or manager or other employee of any
licensee under this chapter is convicted of any violation of any law,
ordinance, or provision as provided in subsection A1 of this section, while
engaged in the course of his or her employment or while on the premises
described in the license, the license may be immediately revoked in the
discretion of the Liquor Control Commissioner, subject to a subsequent hearing
as provided in subsection B1 of this section.
   C.   Complaints: Any person may file a complaint with the Liquor Control
Commissioner alleging that any licensee has been or is violating State law
pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, or the provisions of this chapter
or the rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter. The complaint
shall be in writing, in the form prescribed by the Liquor Control Commissioner,
and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The complaint
shall state the particular law, provisions, rule, or regulation believed to
have been violated and the facts in detail upon which such belief is based. If
the Liquor Control Commissioner is satisfied that the complaint substantially
charges a violation and finds probable cause to believe the same, he or she
shall set the matter for hearing and shall serve notice upon the licensee of
the time and place of the hearing and of the particular charges in the
complaint, such hearing to take place not sooner than three (3) days from the
date upon which the notice is served personally on or is mailed by certified
U.S. mail to the licensee or his or her agent or any employee in charge of the
licensed premises, affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
(Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
4-2-37: VIOLATIONS - FINES:
   A.   Fines In General: In addition to the suspension of a license issued
pursuant to this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter
may, for a first offense, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and for a second or subsequent
offense, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
in fines may be imposed under this section against any licensee during the
period of that license.
   B.   Separate Offenses: Each day on or during which any person violates or
continues to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, and each separate
act or transaction in violation of this chapter, shall constitute a separate
offense.
   C.   Vicarious Liability: Every act or omission of whatsoever nature
constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any
officer, director, manager, or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be
deemed and held to be the act of the employer or licensee, and the employer or
licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had
been done by him personally.
   D.   BASSET Course: In addition to other penalties imposed in this chapter,
a person violating any regulation of this chapter may be required to complete a
BASSET or similar training at his or her expense. (Ord. 2015-4, 4-14-2015)
CHAPTER 3
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definition; Exemptions
4-3-2: Peddling And Soliciting Prohibited
4-3-3: First Amendment Solicitations
4-3-4: Not For Profit Solicitations
4-3-5: License Required
4-3-6: Application For License
4-3-7: Form Of License; Signatures Required
4-3-8: License Fee, Term And Expiration
4-3-9: Duty To Announce Name And Identify Product
4-3-10: Failure To Leave Upon Request
4-3-11: Posted Premises; Uninvited Soliciting
4-3-12: Fraudulent And Deceptive Practices
4-3-13: Hours Permitted
4-3-14: Penalty
4-3-1: DEFINITION; EXEMPTIONS:
“Peddling and soliciting,” as used in this chapter, shall include the selling,
bartering, or exchanging, or the offering for sale, barter, or exchange, of any
tangible personal property or services, such as home improvements or termite
inspection, upon or along the streets, highways, or public places of the
village, whether at one place thereon or from place to place or by calling at
residences. “Peddling and soliciting” shall be taken to include the
solicitation of orders, business of any kind, and services, whether or not the
goods are delivered or the services performed at the time the order is taken.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to telephone solicitations, nor do
they regulate or prohibit the delivery of tangible personal property to
residents of the village where such delivery has been ordered or requested by
such resident. (Ord. 1990-24, 12-4-1990; amd. Ord. 2021-13, 7-6-2021)
4-3-2: PEDDLING AND SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
Except as provided by Sections
4-3-3 and
4-3-4 of this Chapter, peddling and soliciting are prohibited in the Village of
Sherman. (Ord. 2021-13, 7-6-2021)
4-3-3: FIRST AMENDMENT SOLICITATIONS:
Persons soliciting for causes protected by the first amendment of the United
States constitution shall procure a license without payment of a fee and shall
not be restricted as to days or hours of solicitation. (Ord. 2021-13, 7-6-2021)
4-3-4: NOT FOR PROFIT SOLICITATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sales or solicitations by
any bona fide not for profit, religious, charitable, school or governmental
organization, or any subsidiary thereof. (Ord. 2021-13, 7-6-2021)
4-3-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any solicitor of contributions or vendor of merchandise or itinerant merchant
or solicitor claiming an exemption pursuant to Section
4-3-2 or
4-3-3 above must first procure a license from the Chief of Police. No person
shall sell by peddling or soliciting any goods, wares, merchandise, perishable
agricultural commodities or services, or solicit orders, contributions, sales,
subscriptions, or business of any kind, along the streets, highways or public
places of the village, or by calling at residences within the village, without
first procuring a license to do so from the chief of police. (Ord. 2021-13, 7-
6-2021)
4-3-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE 1 :
The license application shall include the applicant's name, permanent business
address (which must include a street address), residence address of the
principal individual involved with the peddling or soliciting (and if the
applicant is a corporation, the residence addresses of its solicitors), the
location at which the applicant intends to do business, the nature of the
business the applicant intends to conduct, a copy of the applicant's
certificate of registration under the retailer's occupation tax act, a complete
inventory of the goods the applicant intends to offer for sale, and a list of
all licenses to conduct business as a transient merchant or an itinerant vendor
obtained by the applicant in the state in the twelve (12) months preceding the
date of filing of the application. (Ord. 2021-13, 7-6-2021)
 
Notes
1    35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
4-3-7: FORM OF LICENSE; SIGNATURES REQUIRED:
A license may be issued, as nearly as may be, in the following form, and shall
be signed on behalf of the village by the village clerk, chief of police, or
other party authorized and designated by the village board:
Date Sherman, Illinois
                                   , having made application in due form, and
in all other respects complied with the ordinances of the Village in this
behalf; therefore, the undersigned representative of the Village of Sherman
does hereby authorize, empower and license the said applicant to engage in
peddling or soliciting herein. Nevertheless, this license is granted upon this
express condition, that the said applicant shall observe and obey all
ordinances of this Village, which now are, or may be in force, regulating or
relating to his said business then this license shall be valid for the period
aforesaid; otherwise, as may be annulled, revoked or forfeited, at the option
of the Village Board.
Village of Sherman,
by authorized representative (Ord. 2021-13, 7-6-2021)
4-3-8: LICENSE FEE, TERM AND EXPIRATION:
There is no fee for a license for persons exempted from the prohibition on
peddling or soliciting by Section
4-3-2 and
4-3-3 above. The license shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is
issued. No license shall be granted for a longer term than one year. (Ord.
2021-13, 7-6-2021)
4-3-9: DUTY TO ANNOUNCE NAME AND IDENTIFY PRODUCT:
Any person engaged in peddling and soliciting shall, before entering any
residence, identify himself or herself to the occupant by name and state what
organization, company and/or product he or she represents. (Ord. 2021-13, 7-6-
2021)
4-3-10: FAILURE TO LEAVE UPON REQUEST:
No person shall engage in peddling or soliciting at, or remain on the premises
of: any residence after having been asked by the occupant thereof to leave said
premises or residence. (Ord. 2021-13, 7-6-2021)
4-3-11: POSTED PREMISES; UNINVITED SOLICITING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling or soliciting
upon any premises or residence located thereon if such premises or residence is
posted against solicitation by means of a notice prominently displayed upon
which is printed the legend:
NO SOLICITORS
   B.   A residence shall be deemed to be posted against peddling or soliciting
if there is exhibited, on or near the main entrance to the premises or on or
near the main door to any residence located thereon, a sign at least three
inches by four inches (3" x 4") in size, which bears the legend set out in
subsection A of this section in letters at least one-third inch ( l /3") in
height. (Ord. 2021-13, 7-6-2021)
4-3-12: FRAUDULENT AND DECEPTIVE PRACTICES:
   A.   No person who engages in peddling or soliciting shall use any plan,
scheme or ruse to make any statement which indicates or implies that the
purpose of such person's visit is other than to obtain orders for or to make
sales of goods or services, consistent with the exemption provided by Section
4-3-2 or
4-3-3.
   B.   No person who engages in solicitation shall misrepresent the right of a
buyer to rescind or cancel a sale under the provisions of the applicable law.
(Ord. 2021-13, 7-6-2021)
4-3-13: HOURS PERMITTED:
No person (including residents and itinerants) shall engage in the business of
peddling or soliciting at residences without the prior consent of the occupant
except between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M. (Ord. 2021-13, 7-6-2021)
4-3-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). The penalty for
subsequent violations shall be Seven Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($750.00). (Ord.
2021-13, 7-6-2021)
CHAPTER 4
VIDEO GAMING
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Video Gaming - Permissible Locations
4-4-3: Applications - Permits - Fees
4-4-4: Prohibitions And Violations
4-4-5: Prohibition On Gambling
4-4-6: Penalties
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
DISTRIBUTOR: An individual, partnership, corporation, or limited liability
company licensed under the Video Gaming Act to buy, sell, lease, or distribute
video gaming terminals or major components or parts of video gaming terminals
to or from terminal operators.
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT: Any licensed retail establishment holding a
supplemental Class VG liquor license issued by the Village, where alcoholic
liquor is drawn, poured, mixed, or otherwise served for consumption on the
premises and includes any such establishment that has a contractual
relationship with an inter- track wagering location licensee licensed under the
Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975, provided any contractual relationship shall
not include any transfer or offer of revenue from the operation of video gaming
under this Act to any licensee licensed under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of
1975. Provided, however, that the licensed establishment that has such a
contractual relationship with an inter-track wagering location licensee may
not, itself, be: a) an inter-track wagering location licensee, b) the corporate
parent or subsidiary of any licensee licensed under the Illinois Horse Racing
Act of 1975, or c) the corporate subsidiary of a corporation that is also the
corporate parent or subsidiary of any licensee licensed under the Illinois
Horse Racing Act of 1975. "Licensed establishment" does not include a facility
operated by an organization licensee, an inter-track wagering licensee, or an
inter-track wagering location licensee licensed under the Illinois Horse Racing
Act of 1975 or a riverboat licensed under the Riverboat Gambling Act, except as
provided in this paragraph.
LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT: The location where a qualified fraternal
organization that derives its charter from a national fraternal organization
regularly meets.
LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT: A facility: a) that is at least a 3-acre
facility with a convenience store, b) with separate diesel islands for fueling
commercial motor vehicles, c) that sells at retail more than ten thousand
(10,000) gallons of diesel or biodiesel fuel per month, and d) with parking
spaces for commercial motor vehicles. "Commercial motor vehicles" has the same
meaning as defined in section 18b-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The
requirement of item c of this definition may be met by showing that estimated
future sales or past sales average at least ten thousand (10,000) gallons per
month.
LICENSED VETERANS ESTABLISHMENT: The location where a qualified veterans
organization that derives its charter from a national veterans organization
regularly meets.
TERMINAL OPERATOR: An individual, partnership, corporation, or limited
liability company that is licensed under the Video Gaming Act and that owns,
services, and maintains video gaming terminals for placement in licensed
establishments, licensed truck stop establishments, licensed fraternal
establishments, or licensed veterans establishments.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion
of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including
but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the
Illinois Gaming Board, utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which
the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The
term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens
or is for amusement purposes only. (Ord. 2012-12, 8-21-2012)
4-4-2: VIDEO GAMING - PERMISSIBLE LOCATIONS:
Video gaming may be allowed within the Village by the following: (i) licensed
establishments holding a Class A, Class A-1 or Class C liquor license issued by
the Village in addition to a supplemental Class VG License; (ii) licensed
fraternal establishments; (iii) licensed veterans establishments; and (iv)
licensed truck stop establishments. No video gaming, however, shall be allowed
without the issuance of a permit by the Village, the payment of the permit fees
as set forth in Section
4-2-3 , and compliance with the Video Gaming Act. Further, the provisions
herein and other provisions within this Chapter allowing video gaming within
the Village shall sunset and hereinafter be repealed and no longer in effect on
July 1, 2020 unless re-authorized by separate ordinance of the Village Board.
(Ord. 2016-11, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-10, 6-6-2017; Ord. 2019-04, 5-21-2019;
Ord. 2020-10, 6-2-2020; Ord. 2022-06, 5-24-2022; Ord. 2023-07, 6-20-2023)
4-4-3: APPLICATIONS - PERMITS - FEES:
   A.   Permits Generally: In all cases, the approving authority for all
permits under this section shall be the Village President. In the event a
licensee or prospective licensee or applicant disagrees with any action taken
by the Village President, an appeal may be made directly to the Village Board
of Trustees at a regularly scheduled Village Board meeting within thirty (30)
days of written notice being given to the Village Administrator. Permits shall
be issued as is permissible by and in compliance with this chapter, the
Village's Liquor Code and all other applicable provisions of this Code and the
Illinois Video Gaming Act. All permits issued hereunder shall be valid between
July 1 and June 30 of the calendar year issued. Fees shall be due on an annual
basis at the time of issuance of the permit and shall not be prorated. Persons
who do not meet the requirements for a liquor license, who have been convicted
of any gambling offense, or who do not meet the requirements for obtaining a
license set forth in the Video Gaming Act shall not be eligible for or issued
any license or permit under this section.
   B.   Establishment Permit: Any establishment, as defined by licensed
establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, licensed truck stop
establishment or licensed veterans establishment in section
4-4-1 of this chapter entitled to utilize video gaming in accordance with this
chapter and the Illinois Video Gaming Act must hold a permit from the Village.
An application for the permit shall be developed by Village staff and at a
minimum must contain the following information: 1) the applicant's type of
establishment; 2) the applicant's authority to conduct video gaming under the
Video Gaming Act and any applicable provisions of this Code; 3) the number of
gaming terminals to be utilized; 4) the proposed terminal operator; 5) the
proposed distributor; 6) the applicant's eligibility to obtain a liquor license
and any past gambling offenses; 7) all information, including any applications
submitted to the Illinois Gaming Board; 8) any and all permits or related
documentation applicant has received from the Illinois Gaming Board; and 9) a
diagram of the premises and proposed location of the video gaming terminals.
The application shall otherwise ensure applicants meet the requirements for a
liquor license, the requirements for licensure under the Video Gaming Act and
have not been convicted of any gambling offense. The permit shall serve as the
authority to conduct video gaming at an establishment, subject to approval from
the Illinois Video Gaming Board. Upon issuance of a permit, there shall be a
registration fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per video gaming
terminal. A permit applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the registration
fee if the Illinois Gaming Board does not grant a license to the applicant to
conduct video gaming.
   C.   Terminal Operator Permit: A terminal operator who owns one or more
video gaming terminals being used within the Village must obtain a permit from
the Village and must register each video gaming terminal with the Village.
Applications for a terminal operator permit shall be developed by Village staff
to ensure applicants meet the requirements for a liquor license, the
requirements for licensure under the Video Gaming Act and have not been
convicted of any gambling offense. In addition, all applications shall set
forth the number of proposed video gaming terminals to be used within the
Village. The permit for terminal operators shall only be valid for those video
gaming terminals identified within the application and on the permit. The
permit fee shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per video gaming terminal
used within the Village per year. The application and permit may be amended at
any time to add video gaming terminals at a cost of five hundred dollars
($500.00) per video gaming terminal. No video gaming terminal may be utilized
at an authorized establishment absent the terminal operator holding a permit
from the Village.
   D.   Distributor's Permit: Any person who is a distributor within the
Village who manufactures, distributes or supplies video gaming terminals, and
who does not have a video gaming terminal operator's permit from the Village,
must obtain a distributor's permit. The permit fee for a distributor shall be
five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. Applications for a distributor's
permit shall be developed by Village staff to ensure applicants meet the
requirements for a liquor license, the requirements for licensure under the
Video Gaming Act and have not been convicted of any gambling offense. (Ord.
2012-12, 8-21-2012)
4-4-4: PROHIBITIONS AND VIOLATIONS:
   A.   No person, business, firm, corporation or similar entity shall operate
a video gaming terminal within the Village unless authorized under this chapter
and holding a valid permit as well as complying with the Video Gaming Act and
meeting all requirements under same.
   B.   No person shall allow the placement or use of any video gaming terminal
unless the terminal has been registered with the Village and a permit issued
for same.
   C.   No person, business, firm, corporation or similar entity shall own a
video gaming terminal being used within the Village without having a terminal
operator permit issued by the Village.
   D.   No person, business, firm, corporation or similar entity shall act as a
distributor within the Village without the issuance of a distributor's permit
or a terminal operator's permit.
   E.   Every person or entity permitted under this chapter shall act in
compliance with the Video Gaming Act, all rules and regulations promulgated by
the Illinois Gaming Board and all other applicable laws.
   F.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall use or play a
video gaming terminal nor shall any establishment allow same.
   G.   No riotous, disorderly, indecent, or offensive conduct of any kind
shall be allowed in or about any establishment where video gaming is permitted.
(Ord. 2012-12, 8-21-2012)
4-4-5: PROHIBITION ON GAMBLING:
No gambling, as defined by Illinois law, shall be permitted within the Village
and no gambling device shall be kept on any premises or in any establishment
except as is allowed by this chapter and as allowed by law. However, this
prohibition shall not apply to any game or gaming event for which a license or
permit has been issued by the Illinois Department of Revenue pursuant to the
Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 20/1 et seq.; the
Bingo License and Tax Act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 25/1 et seq.; or the
Charitable Games Act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 30/1 et seq.; and such
game or gaming event is conducted in compliance with all requirements of said
Acts and all rules and regulations of the Illinois Department of Revenue. (Ord.
2012-12, 8-21-2012)
4-4-6: PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section within this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day an
offense continues shall be treated as a separate offense. (Ord. 2012-12, 8-21-
2012)
TITLE 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
WEEDS, GARBAGE AND DEBRIS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Nuisances Declared; Prohibited Acts
5-1-2: Abatement Required
5-1-3: Cutting Plants And Weeds By Village; Lien Provisions
5-1-4: Penalty And Remedies
5-1-1: NUISANCES DECLARED; PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Accumulation Of Weeds, Garbage And Debris: The presence upon lands
lying within the corporate limits of the village of brush, weeds, obnoxious
growth, filth, garbage, trash and debris, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or
other ornamental plants, is hereby declared to be detrimental to public health
and a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or
plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants, to grow
to a height exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in the village. (Ord. 2007-5,
6-5-2007)
   B.   Placement Of Trash Receptacles: The placement and use of trash
receptacles and consumer and commercial trash bins in a manner inconsistent
with their intended use, such as the extended placement of a large commercial
trash receptacle on a residential property for an extended period of time,
shall constitute a nuisance.
   C.   Deposit On Public Ways: It shall be unlawful for any person to cast,
place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the jurisdiction of the village any
substance, article or thing herein referred to as "waste", in such a manner
that they or any of them may be carried or deposited, by the action of the sun,
wind, rain or snow, into or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or
other public place, or into any occupied premises within the jurisdiction of
the village. "Waste", as used in this subsection, is hereby defined as
including any materials referred to under subsection A of this section. (2010
Code)
5-1-2: ABATEMENT REQUIRED:
   A.   Any person causing a public nuisance as set forth in section
5-1-1 of this chapter, and the owner, occupant, or lessee of land on which any
nuisance exists, are required to correct the nuisance within five (5) days of
the receipt of notice from the village of the violation. It is the ultimate
responsibility of the owner of the premises on which a public nuisance exists
to correct the violation.
   B.   The person causing the public nuisance shall remove or cause to be
removed the items causing the nuisance within five (5) days of receipt of
written notice from the village president or his/her designated official. (Ord.
2011-6, 5-17-2011)
5-1-3: CUTTING PLANTS AND WEEDS BY VILLAGE; LIEN PROVISIONS:
If weeds, grass or plants are cut by the village or by someone directed to cut
them on behalf of the village, a notice of lien for the cost and expense
thereof incurred by the village shall be recorded in the following manner: The
village may file notice of lien in the office of the county recorder of deeds,
which notice of lien shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the cost and
expense is incurred, and shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth: a) a
description of the real property sufficient for identification thereof; b) the
amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service; and c) the date or dates when the cost and expense was incurred by the
village. Upon payment of the cost and expense after a notice of lien has been
filed, the lien shall be released by the village, and the release shall be sent
to the property owner for recording in the same manner as filing the notice of
lien. (Ord. 2007-5, 6-5-2007)
5-1-4: PENALTY AND REMEDIES:
A person violating this chapter shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars
($50.00) per day for so long as such person remains in violation of this
chapter. In the event such person fails to correct any violation of this
chapter, the village may, in its discretion, remove the offensive material. In
addition, the village may, in its discretion, seek any other remedy available
in law or equity to restrain or enjoin violations of this chapter. In further
addition, the village may, in its discretion, seek reimbursement of reasonable
costs and attorney fees incurred in removing the material and in enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. (2010 Code)
CHAPTER 2
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
5-2-1: Definitions
5-2-2: Days, Hours And Conditions For Burning
5-2-3: Exemptions
5-2-4: Duty To Extinguish Fires
5-2-5: Penalties
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
FIRST SATURDAY AND SUNDAY OF EACH MONTH: The first full weekend of the month in
which both the first Saturday and first Sunday occur in the same month.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Any vegetable or plant refuse, except garbage and agricultural
waste. The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds,
leaves, shrubbery and yard trimmings. The term specifically excludes grass.
PAVED STREET: Includes all public rights of way designed for motor vehicle use
with surfaces composed of oil and rock, asphalt and rock, rock or concrete,
including, but not limited to, public alleyways and streets. (Ord. 2008-6, 9-2-
2008; amd. Ord. 2010-9, 9-21-2010)
5-2-2: DAYS, HOURS AND CONDITIONS FOR BURNING:
The burning of landscape waste shall be allowed within the village of Sherman
from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. until sunset on each Wednesday and on the first
full weekend of the month in which both the first Saturday and first Sunday
occur in the same month and the third Saturday and Sunday of each month during
the time period March 1 through April 30 (inclusive) and during the time period
September 15 through November 30 (inclusive) of each calendar year subject to
the following restrictions and mandatory conditions precedent to any fire or
burning of landscape waste: (Ord. 2010-9, 9-21-2010)
   A.   Burning of landscape waste is only permitted when wind air speed is
fourteen (14) miles per hour or less. Said wind air speed shall be as reported
by the national weather service at the time of the burning.
   B.   Prior to the starting of the fire, the landscape waste to be burned
shall be dry to the touch.
   C.   The fire must be supervised at all times by a legally competent adult
until completely extinguished.
   D.   A water hose must be connected to a water source and shall be
accessible to the fire supervisor within fifteen feet (15') of the fire.
   E.   All coals and ashes must be completely extinguished before the adult
supervising the fire may leave the area.
   F.   No burning of landscape waste is permitted within twenty feet (20') of
any adjoining property owner's or renter's motor vehicle or residence.
   G.   The landscape waste shall be burned on the premises on which such
landscape waste is generated.
   H.   All burning shall be conducted when atmospheric conditions will readily
dissipate contaminants.
   I.   No burning may create a visibility hazard on paved streets or railroad
tracks.
   J.   No burning of landscape waste is permitted on paved streets, public
alleyways, public easements or drainage ditches.
   K.   No fire may be permitted to smolder after the end time for burning in
the village.
   L.   No burning shall be conducted on Veterans Day or Halloween Day.
   M.   No burning shall be conducted in burn barrels.
   N.   The village president is authorized to modify the dates set forth in
this section in the event that the president determines that it is necessary in
order to allow sufficient time for residents to comply with these restrictions.
(Ord. 2008-6, 9-2-2008)
5-2-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The restrictions regarding burning contained in this chapter shall not apply to
the following:
   A.   The village and its employees while acting within their scope of
employment including the village or any privately owned entity and property in
which there is an agreement between the village and such entity.
   B.   Outdoor grills while in use for the preparation of food.
   C.   Recreational fires built in a fire pit, fire ring or constructed of
rocks or other similar noncombustible material; except, that with respect to
recreational fires, the following restrictions and mandatory conditions
precedent to any fire or burning shall apply:
      1.   Fuel for a recreational fire shall consist of seasoned, dry firewood
and shall be ignited with paper or kindling;
      2.   No flammable or combustible liquids shall be used to start, kindle
or rekindle a recreational fire;
      3.   The recreational fire must be supervised at all times by a legally
competent adult; and
      4.   The recreational fire must be completely extinguished prior to the
supervising adult leaving the area.
   D.   Any professional eighteen (18) hole golf course conducting business
within the corporate limits of the village.
   E.   Any fire department or fire protection district serving all or any part
of the village. (Ord. 2008-6, 9-2-2008)
5-2-4: DUTY TO EXTINGUISH FIRES:
Any burning or fire which continues after weather conditions have changed so
that it is no longer appropriate for burning, including, but not limited to,
when conditions are dry such as that there is a potential fire hazard and/or
conditions threaten the safety of others, shall be extinguished promptly by the
supervising adult. (Ord. 2008-6, 9-2-2008)
5-2-5: PENALTIES:
Any person or entity violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine or penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first
violation, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation and seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the third and any subsequent violation.
Every day that such a violation is continued shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. In addition to such fine or penalty, any person violating any
provision of this chapter shall also be required to pay all costs of and
expenses incurred by the village or any other agency responding to the
violation. The village is hereby authorized to place a lien against the real
estate where the violation occurred in the amount of said costs and expenses.
(Ord. 2008-6, 9-2-2008; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Nuisance Declared
5-3-2: Determination Of Abandonment
5-3-3: Removal By Owner Or Tenant
5-3-4: Notice To Remove
5-3-5: Removal By Village; Costs
5-3-6: Penalty
5-3-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The presence upon lands lying within the corporate limits of the village of
wrecked, dismantled or abandoned automobiles, motor vehicles, campers, trailers
or mobile homes is hereby declared to be detrimental to public welfare and is
hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 1998-19, 12-15-1998)
5-3-2: DETERMINATION OF ABANDONMENT:
An abandoned automobile, motor vehicle, camper or trailer shall include one
which has no current license plates or which is in an immobile condition and
which has remained upon the land for a period of fifteen (15) days and which is
not parked in an enclosed garage or building or rear yard behind an existing
residence, as provided in section
10-9-10 of this code. A mobile home shall be deemed to be abandoned under the
provisions of this section when it has not been occupied as a residence for at
least thirty (30) days of the previous six (6) month period. (Ord. 1998-19, 12-
15-1998)
5-3-3: REMOVAL BY OWNER OR TENANT:
The owner or tenant of lands lying within the corporate limits of the village
are hereby required to remove or cause to be removed from such lands any
wrecked, dismantled or abandoned automobiles, motor vehicles, campers, trailers
or mobile homes within ten (10) days after receipt by such owner or tenant of
written notice from the president or the board of trustees or the director of
public works. (Ord. 1998-19, 12-15-1998; amd. 2010 Code)
5-3-4: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
Notice to the owner or tenant to cause the removal of the automobiles, motor
vehicles, campers, trailers or mobile homes referred to in section
5-3-3 of this chapter shall be given by the village president and board of
trustees or any such member thereof or person duly appointed. Notices may be
served upon any such owner or tenant either personally or by registered mail;
and if by the latter method, the ten (10) day period within which such removal
shall be accomplished shall be deemed to have commenced to run from the date of
delivery indicated on the return receipt of such registered mail obtained by
the postal authority for the delivery of such registered notice. Every such
notice shall, in addition to requiring the removal of the aforesaid, warn the
owner or tenant of the lands to which such notice refers that failure to
accomplish such removal within the time stated therein will result in removal
by or under the direction of the president or the board of trustees or the
director of public works; and the cost of such removal by the village shall be
charged to the owner or tenant of such lands and shall be payable to the
village within thirty (30) days after the date of submission of the charges.
Failure to pay said sum within thirty (30) days after the date of submission of
the charges shall authorize the village to place a lien upon the property from
which the automobile, motor vehicle, camper, trailer or mobile home was removed
in the amount of the costs incurred by the village in such removal, disposition
and storage of said automobile, motor vehicle, camper, trailer or mobile home.
(Ord. 1998-19, 12-15-1998; amd. 2010 Code)
5-3-5: REMOVAL BY VILLAGE; COSTS:
Whenever the owner or tenant of such lands within the village, receiving the
notice provided for by section
5-3-4 of this chapter to remove from such lands any of the automobiles, motor
vehicles, campers, trailers or mobile homes hereinbefore mentioned, shall fail
and neglect, within the time prescribed in the notice, to effect removal of
such automobiles, motor vehicles, campers, trailers or mobile homes, such
removal shall be accomplished by or under the direction of the president or the
board of trustees or the director of public works, who shall examine the
notice, and if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be
charged against the owner or tenant. (Ord. 1998-19, 12-15-1998; amd. 2010 Code)
5-3-6: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to
comply with any notice given by the president or the board of trustees or the
director of public works shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than
seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Any such penalty shall be in addition to the costs of removal and
storage of said automobiles, motor vehicles, campers, trailers or mobile homes
hereinbefore referred to upon the lands described in the notice given by the
president and board of trustees or any such member thereof or person duly
appointed. (Ord. 1998-19, 12-15-1998; amd. 2010 Code)
TITLE 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Department Created; Membership; Appointments
6-1-2: Administrative Control
6-1-3: Chief Duties
6-1-4: Rules And Regulations
6-1-5: Policy Manual Adopted
6-1-6: Auxiliary Police
6-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENTS:
There is hereby created a police department for the village which shall consist
of such personnel as may be provided by the board of trustees. The president of
the board of trustees shall, as the chief administrative officer of the
village, be the supporting authority for all personnel of said police
department subject to the consent of the board of trustees. As appointing
authority, the president of the board of trustees shall appoint a chief of
police subject to the consent of the board of trustees. (1984 Code § 9-1-1-1;
amd. 2010 Code)
6-1-2: ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROL:
The president of the board of trustees shall have administrative control over
the police department and shall appoint a chief of police in accordance with
section
6-1-1 of this chapter and in accordance with applicable state statutes. The
chief of police shall perform duties and have responsibilities as described in
this chapter and as designated by the board of trustees. This chapter shall be
amended from time to time by action of the board of trustees. (1984 Code § 9-1-
1-1)
6-1-3: CHIEF DUTIES:
The chief of police shall keep such records and make such reports concerning
the activities of his department as may be required by statute or by the board
of trustees. The chief shall be responsible for the performance by the police
department of its functions, and all persons who are members of the police
department shall serve subject to the orders of the chief of police. He shall
have custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen property recovered in the
village. (1984 Code § 9-1-1-1)
6-1-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules or regulations as he shall
deem advisable. Such rules, when approved by the board of trustees, shall be
binding on such members. Such rules and regulations may cover, besides the
conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be worn or carried, hours of
service, vacations, and all other similar matters necessary or desirable for
the better efficiency of the department. Said rules and regulations shall be
posted. (1984 Code § 9-1-1-2; amd. 2010 Code)
6-1-5: POLICY MANUAL ADOPTED:
The "Sherman Police Department Policy Manual" is hereby adopted by reference as
if fully set out at length herein. Three (3) copies of the policy manual are on
file in the office of the village clerk for public use and inspection. (2010
Code)
6-1-6: AUXILIARY POLICE:
   A.   Appointment; Supervision: The village president may, with the advice
and consent of the board, appoint auxiliary police in such number as the board
shall from time to time deem necessary. Such auxiliary police shall not be
members of the regular police department of the village and shall supplement
members of the regular police department in the performance of their normal
duties. Auxiliary police shall be under the control of the chief of police in
the performance of their duties.
   B.   Residency; Fingerprinting; Background Check: All auxiliary police shall
be residents of the village. Prior to appointment, fingerprints shall be taken,
and no person convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude shall be
appointed as an auxiliary police officer. (1984 Code § 9-1-1-9)
   C.   Duties:
      1.   Auxiliary police, when on duty, shall be conservators of the peace
and shall have the powers as specified in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.15-
25.
      2.   Auxiliary police members shall be only assigned to perform the
following duties: to aid in control of manmade or natural disasters, direct
traffic in the village and aid in case of civil disorders as directed by the
police chief.
      3.   In cases which render it impractical for members of the regular
police force to perform normal duties, the chief of police may assign auxiliary
police to such duties.
   D.   Identification; Firearms; Training: Identification symbols worn by
auxiliary police shall be different from those worn by the regular police
force. Auxiliary police will not carry firearms except with the permission of
the chief of police and while in uniform and in performance of their duties.
Before being permitted to carry a firearm however, an auxiliary police officer
must have the same course of training as required of peace officers under
section 2 of the peace officer firearm training act 1 . Auxiliary police, prior
to entering upon any duties, shall receive a course in training in the use of
weapons and police procedures, as shall be appropriate in the exercise of their
duties.
   E.   Death In Line Of Duty: The line of duty compensation act, as now or
hereafter amended 2 , shall be applicable to auxiliary police upon their death
in the line of duty described herein. (1984 Code § 9-1-1-9; amd. 2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 710/2.
2 2. 820 ILCS 315/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definitions
6-2-2: Agency Established
6-2-3: Coordinator
6-2-4: Functions
6-2-5: Oath
6-2-6: Purchases And Expenditures
6-2-7: Authority To Accept Gifts, Services, Grants Or Loans
6-2-8: Appropriation; Tax Levied
6-2-9: Testing Of Warning Devices
6-2-10: Local Disaster Emergency
6-2-11: Limitations
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
COORDINATOR: The staff assistant to the village president with the duty of
carrying out the requirements of this chapter.
DISASTER: An occurrence or threat of occurrence of widespread or severe damage,
injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or technological
cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm,
hazardous materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency
action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended
periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical
shortages of essential fuels and energy, explosion, riot, hostile military or
paramilitary action, public health emergencies or acts of domestic terrorism.
"Disaster" includes, but is not limited to, all occurrences and threats thereof
which are contemplated by the concept of "emergency services and disaster
operations".
DISASTER OPERATIONS: The functions created in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter to be performed by federal, state, county and political
subdivisions to alleviate the effects of disasters.
EMERGENCY SERVICES: The coordination of functions, other than functions for
which military forces are primarily responsible, as may be necessary or proper
to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury and damage resulting from
any natural or technological causes. These functions include, without
limitation, firefighting services, police services, emergency aviation
services, medical and health services, HAZMAT and technical rescue teams,
rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, chemical
and other special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken or
threatened areas, emergency assigned functions of plant protection, temporary
restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian
protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to
protecting life or property.
HAZMAT TEAM: A career or volunteer mobile support team that has been authorized
by the village to respond to hazardous materials emergencies and that is
primarily designed for emergency response to chemical or biological terrorism,
radiological emergencies, hazardous material spills, release, or fires, or
other contamination events.
PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY: An occurrence or imminent threat of an illness or
health condition that:
   A.   Is believed to be caused by any of the following:
      1.   Bioterrorism;
      2.   The appearance of a novel or previously controlled or eradicated
infectious agent or biological toxin;
      3.   A natural disaster;
      4.   A chemical attack or accidental release; or
      5.   A nuclear attack or accident; and
   B.   Poses a high probability of any of the following harms:
      1.   A large number of deaths in the affected population;
      2.   A large number of serious or long term disabilities in the affected
population; or
      3.   Widespread exposure to an infectious or toxic agent that poses a
significant risk of substantial future harm to a large number of people in the
affected population.
TECHNICAL RESCUE TEAM: A career or volunteer mobile support team that has been
authorized by the village to respond to building collapse, high angle rescue,
and other specialized rescue emergencies and that is primarily designated for
emergency response to technical rescue events.
UNITED STATES: The several states, the District of Columbia, and possessions
thereof.
VILLAGE: The village of Sherman, Illinois. (1984 Code §
2-2-1; amd. 2010 Code)
6-2-2: AGENCY ESTABLISHED:
   A.   There is hereby created an emergency management agency to prevent,
minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused
by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or manmade
disaster, in accordance with the Illinois emergency management agency act 1 .
(1984 Code §
2-2-1; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   The agency will supersede any civil defense or ESDA agency heretofore
authorized, and shall be known as the Sherman emergency management agency
(hereinafter EMA).
   C.   The Sherman EMA shall consist of the coordinator and other such
technical, clerical and administrative personnel as may be selected by the
coordinator and may make such expenditures within their appropriation therefor
as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
   D.   The Sherman EMA shall have jurisdiction over and serve the entire
village, village property not located within the corporate limits of the
village and, with the approval of the board of trustees, any contiguous area
which may decide to contract with the Sherman EMA for emergency services and
disaster assistance. (1984 Code §
2-2-3; amd. 2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
6-2-3: COORDINATOR:
   A.   Appointment: The coordinator of the Sherman EMA shall be appointed by
the village president, and shall become accredited by the Illinois emergency
management agency as soon as practical.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for
the organization, administration, training, and operation of the Sherman EMA as
prescribed in and by the state emergency operations plan and program and the
Sangamon County emergency preparedness plan subject to the direction and
control of the village president. He shall coordinate and direct the activities
of all organizations for emergency services and disaster operations within the
area served by the Sherman EMA and shall maintain liaison and cooperate with
the EMA and disaster agencies of Sangamon County, other counties and cities and
of the federal and state governments. (1984 Code §
2-2-4; amd. 2010 Code)
   C.   Vacancy In Office: In the event of the absence, resignation, death or
inability to serve of the coordinator, the village president shall appoint a
successor as soon as may be practical.
   D.   Chain Of Command: The village president shall inform the coordinator at
the time of his appointment and, whenever necessary, the chain of command.
(1984 Code §
2-2-4)
6-2-4: FUNCTIONS:
The functions of the Sherman EMA shall be to:
   A.   Prepare and keep current a disaster emergency plan for the village.
(1984 Code §
2-2-5; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Interrelate with business, labor, industry, agriculture, civic and
volunteer organizations and community leaders in the development of a plan.
   C.   Prepare and distribute to all appropriate officials in written form a
clear and complete statement of the emergency responsibilities of all local
departments and offices and of the disaster chain of command. (1984 Code §
2-2-5)
   D.   Cooperate with the Springfield/Sangamon County OEM, office of emergency
management, state emergency management agency and other local EMA units. (1984
Code §
2-2-5; amd. 2010 Code)
   E.   Establish, train and maintain such rescue organizations as may be
deemed proper by the village board of trustees.
   F.   Establish, train, and maintain such communications unit(s) as may be
deemed proper by the village board of trustees.
   G.   Establish, train and maintain such weather response teams as may be
deemed proper by the village board.
   H.   Establish, train and maintain such other disaster response units as may
be deemed proper by the village board.
   I.   Prepare, for issuance by the village president and board of trustees,
resolutions, proclamations and ordinances as necessary or appropriate in coping
with disaster.
   J.   Cooperate with and liaison with the federal, state and county
governments and any public or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose
of this chapter and in implementing programs for disaster prevention,
preparation, response and recovery.
   K.   Do all other things necessary, incidental or appropriate for the
implementation of this chapter. (1984 Code §
2-2-5)
6-2-5: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Sherman EMA shall,
before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the oath as set forth in the
Illinois emergency management agency act and file same with Sherman EMA and
Springfield/Sangamon County OEM. (1984 Code § 2-2-8; amd. 2010 Code)
6-2-6: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The board of trustees may, on the recommendation of the coordinator, authorize
any purchase or contracts necessary to place the village in a position to
effectively mitigate any disaster as may be encountered. (1984 Code § 2-2-7)
6-2-7: AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT GIFTS, SERVICES, GRANTS OR LOANS:
Whenever the federal, state or county government or any agency or officer
thereof or any person shall offer to the village services, equipment, supplies,
materials or funds by way of gift or grant for purposes of emergency services
and disaster operations, the coordinator acting in behalf of the village may
accept same. (1984 Code § 2-2-11)
6-2-8: APPROPRIATION; TAX LEVIED:
The board of trustees may make an appropriation for EMA purposes in the manner
provided by law, and may levy in addition, for EMA purposes only, a tax as
provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-3-16. (1984 Code § 2-2-10; amd.
2010 Code)
6-2-9: TESTING OF WARNING DEVICES:
The regular testing of outdoor warning devices shall take place as provided in
the Illinois emergency management agency act. (1984 Code § 2-2-9; amd. 2010
Code)
6-2-10: LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY:
   A.   A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the village
president. It shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven
(7) days except by or with the consent of the board of trustees. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local disaster emergency
shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with
the village clerk.
   B.   The coordinator of the Sherman EMA may, prior to contacting the village
president, activate such aspects of the local disaster emergency plan as may be
expedient to mitigate an existing or threatened disaster emergency. The
coordinator shall contact and consult with the village president as soon as is
possible after activation under this section. (1984 Code § 2-2-6; amd. 2010
Code)
   C.   The effect of a local disaster emergency is to activate the response
and recovery aspects of the Sherman disaster emergency plan and to authorize
the furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder. (1984 Code § 2-2-6)
6-2-11: LIMITATIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
   A.   Interfere with the course of a private labor dispute; except, that
actions otherwise authorized by this chapter or other laws may be taken when
necessary to forestall or mitigate imminent or existing danger to public health
or safety.
   B.   Interfere with the dissemination of news or comment of public affairs;
however, any communications facility or organization (including, but not
limited to, radio and television stations, wire services, and newspapers) may
be requested to transmit or print public service messages furnishing
information or instructions in connection with a disaster or emergency.
   C.   Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces,
firefighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States, or any
personnel thereof, when on active duty, but the village emergency preparedness
plan shall place reliance upon such forces available for performance of
disaster related emergencies.
   D.   Limit, modify, or abridge the authority of the village president or the
board of trustees vested in them under the constitution, statutes, or common
law of the state or the village, independent of or in conjunction with any
provisions of this chapter. (1984 Code §
2-2-2)
CHAPTER 3
NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
SECTION:
6-3-1: National Standards Adopted
6-3-1: NATIONAL STANDARDS ADOPTED:
The village board of trustees endorses and adopts the national incident
management system (NIMS) as the incident command standard for day to day
operations, large scale, multiagency, multidiscipline, multilocated, and
complex incidents. (Res. 2004-7, 8-17-2004)
CHAPTER 4
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
SECTION:
6-4-1: Key Lock Box System
6-4-1: KEY LOCK BOX SYSTEM:
   A.   Box Required:
      1.   The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or
near eye level and at or near the main entrance or such other location required
by the chief of the Sherman fire protection district:
         a.   Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic
alarm system or automatic suppression system, or such commerce or industrial
structures that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an
emergency;
         b.   Multi-family residential structures that have restricted access
through locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units;
         c.   Governmental structures, nursing care or rehabilitation living
facilities, and institutional living facilities which are not staffed on a
twenty four (24) hour basis and afforded accessibility to all areas of such
structures on a continuous basis; provided, that any portions of such
facilities which are not accessible on a continuous basis shall have a key lock
box installed; and
         d.   Schools, churches, and other structures in which assemblies
occur.
      2.   Beginning January 1, 2007, all newly constructed structures subject
to this section shall have the key lock box installed and operational prior to
the issuance of an occupancy permit.
      3.   All structures in existence and subject to this section are required
to have a key lock box installed and operational by January 1, 2007.
   B.   Type Of System: The chief of the Sherman fire protection district shall
designate the type of key lock box system to be implemented within the village
and shall have the authority to require all structures to use the designated
system and the manner of their location, installation, use and maintenance.
   C.   Key Required: The owner or operator of a structure required to have a
key lock box shall at all times keep a key in the lock box that will allow for
access to the structure.
   D.   Rules And Regulations: The chief of the Sherman fire protection
district shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of
the lock box system.
   E.   Penalty: Any person who owns or operates a structure subject to this
section shall be subject to a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month
that the key lock box system is not installed. (Ord. 2006-11, 5-2-2006)
ARTICLE A. FIREWORKS
SECTION:
6-4A-1: Definitions
6-4A-2: Manufacture Of Fireworks
6-4A-3: Sale Of Fireworks
6-4A-4: Permit Requirements For Displays
6-4A-5: Pyrotechnic Distributors And Operators
6-4A-6: Hours Of Display
6-4A-7: Indoor Displays
6-4A-8: Exceptions
6-4A-9: Violation; Penalty
6-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, phrases, and terms, whenever they occur in this article,
shall be interpreted as herein defined:
CHIEF: The chief of the Sherman fire protection district.
CONSUMER DISTRIBUTOR: Any person who distributes, offers for sale, sells, or
exchanges for consideration consumer fireworks in Illinois to another
distributor or directly to any retailer or person for resale.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS: Those fireworks that must comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. consumer products
safety commission as set forth in 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and classified as
fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the United States department of transportation
under 49 CFR 172.101. "Consumer fireworks" shall not include snake or glowworm
pellets; smoke devices, trick noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby
traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads", and "auto burglar
alarms"; sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which
paper or plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths (0.25) grain or less of
explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy
pistol paper or plastic caps that contain less than twenty hundredths (0.20)
grain of explosive mixture, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all
times.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS DISPLAY OR CONSUMER DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition, or
deflagration of consumer fireworks to produce a visual or audible effect.
CONSUMER OPERATOR: An adult individual who is responsible for the safety,
setup, and discharge of the consumer fireworks display and who has completed
the training required in 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/2.2.
CONSUMER RETAILER: Any person who offers for sale, sells, or exchanges for
consideration consumer fireworks in Illinois directly to any person with a
consumer display permit.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS: 1.3G or special effects fireworks or as further defined in
the pyrotechnic distributor and operator licensing act 1 .
FLAME EFFECT: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of flammable gases,
liquids, or special materials to produce a thermal, physical, visual or audible
effect before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of whether
admission is charged, in accordance with National Fire Protection Association
160 guidelines, and as may be further defined in the pyrotechnic operator
licensing act.
LEAD PYROTECHNIC OPERATOR: An individual who is responsible for the safety,
setup and discharge of the pyrotechnic display and who is licensed pursuant to
the pyrotechnic operator licensing act.
OSFM: The Illinois office of the state fire marshal.
1.3G FIREWORKS: Those fireworks used for professional outdoor displays and
classified as fireworks UN0333, UN0334, or UN0335 by the United States
department of transportation under 49 CFR 172.101.
PERMITTEE: Any person, firm or corporation, and/or agent of such person, firm
or corporation, who has been issued a permit for supervised displays of
fireworks in the village of Sherman, Illinois.
PERSON: An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, company,
consortium, joint venture, or commercial entity.
PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of display
fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of
whether admission is charged, and as may be further defined in the pyrotechnic
operator licensing act.
SPECIAL EFFECTS FIREWORKS: Pyrotechnic devices used for special effects by
professionals in the performing arts in conjunction with theatrical, musical,
or other productions that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical
compositions and construction, but are not intended for consumer use and are
not labeled as such or identified as "intended for indoor use". "Special
effects fireworks" are classified as fireworks UN0431 or UN0432 by the United
States department of transportation under 49 CFR 172.101. (Ord. 2006-17, 6-6-
2006)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 227/30 et seq.
6-4A-2: MANUFACTURE OF FIREWORKS:
The manufacture of fireworks within the village limits is prohibited except as
authorized under the laws of the state. (Ord. 2006-17, 6-6-2006)
6-4A-3: SALE OF FIREWORKS:
No person shall offer for sale, distribute, or sell at retail any type of
fireworks within the village limits. The sale of sparklers on public property
is prohibited within the village limits. All violations of this section should
be reported to local law enforcement or to the OSFM. (Ord. 2006-17, 6-6-2006)
6-4A-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR DISPLAYS:
   A.   Rules And Regulations: The village board of trustees may adopt
reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for fireworks
displays pursuant to the provisions and rules of the Illinois fireworks use
act, 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/1 et seq.
   B.   Permit Required; Restrictions: No person shall possess, store, use or
explode any pyrotechnic or consumer fireworks within the village jurisdiction
without a valid fireworks display permit. No person under the age of twenty one
(21) years shall be eligible to be issued such a display permit. The village
board of trustees will grant permits only for pyrotechnic fireworks displays.
   C.   Application For Permit: Written application for a pyrotechnic fireworks
display permit shall be filed on the form jointly approved by the chief and the
village and shall be available in the office of the village clerk. All
applications must be made at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of
the display.
   D.   Insurance Required: Each applicant must show proof of liability
insurance in a sum not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with an
insurer authorized to do business in Illinois. The permittee shall be
responsible for all damages or injuries occurring as a result of any
pyrotechnic display permitted, the amount not limited to the insurance
provided.
   E.   Proof Of Licensure: All individuals applying for a pyrotechnic
fireworks display permit must include a copy of his or her lead pyrotechnic
operator license issued by the OSFM and a copy of his or her pyrotechnic
distributor license issued by the OSFM. Alternatively, the applicant must
provide proof that the pyrotechnic display services shall be provided by a
licensed pyrotechnic distributor and that the display shall be conducted by a
licensed lead operator and that both licenses have been issued by the OSFM.
   F.   Investigation And Inspection:
      1.   The village clerk shall forward all completed application forms to
the chief within five (5) working days of receipt. The chief shall investigate
or cause to be investigated each application to determine whether the display
is of the character and so located so as not to constitute an unreasonable
hazard to any person or property and complies with all requirements for
pyrotechnic fireworks displays as contained in the Illinois fireworks use act,
425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/1 et seq.
      2.   The chief shall inspect each display site and investigate or cause
to be investigated each application to determine whether the display is of a
character and so located so as to comply with the requirements of this article.
   G.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
      1.   Following the investigation and inspection of the display site, if
the chief determines that all requirements of this article are satisfied, then
the chief or his designee shall approve and issue the pyrotechnic fireworks
display permit. A copy of each permit shall be forwarded by the office of the
village clerk to the village chief of police not less than forty eight (48)
hours before the display.
      2.   In the event that the chief or his designee does not approve the
display permit, the applicant shall be informed by the chief or his designee in
writing of the reasons thereof.
      3.   The village has the authority to refuse to issue display permits at
any time and for any reason, and reserves the authority to choose that only
certain persons may apply for and receive pyrotechnic display permits.
   H.   Compliance With Permit: The possession and use of pyrotechnic fireworks
by the permittee shall be lawful only for the purpose and display as contained
in the pyrotechnic display permit.
   I.   Nontransferability Of Permit: No permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable. Only the permittee, pyrotechnic operator and pyrotechnic
distributor named on the permit shall be authorized to possess and display the
pyrotechnic fireworks. (Ord. 2006-17, 6-6-2006)
6-4A-5: PYROTECHNIC DISTRIBUTORS AND OPERATORS:
   A.   License Required: Any person who puts on a pyrotechnic display must use
or otherwise employ a licensed pyrotechnic distributor who must employ a
licensed lead operator who is present during any pyrotechnic display and acts
as a supervisor to all display assistants. A copy of the application for a
pyrotechnic distributor's license and the lead operator's license must be
obtained from the OSFM, and both licenses must be obtained prior to the display
site inspection, issuance of permit and purchase of pyrotechnic display
fireworks. (Ord. 2006-17, 6-6-2006)
   B.   Assistants: All assistants to the lead operator must be eighteen (18)
years of age and must be registered with the OSFM. (Ord. 2006-17, 6-6-2006;
amd. 2010 Code)
6-4A-6: HOURS OF DISPLAY:
No fireworks display shall be conducted before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or
after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., except where prior approval is granted by
the chief and the village for special programs. (Ord. 2006-17, 6-6-2006)
6-4A-7: INDOOR DISPLAYS:
All indoor pyrotechnic displays shall be conducted in buildings protected by
automatic sprinkler systems. All display sites for indoor pyrotechnic displays
must be inspected prior to the issuance of a permit for such display. (Ord.
2006-17, 6-6-2006; amd. 2010 Code)
6-4A-8: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the use of fireworks by
railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination,
or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for use by
military forces of the state of Illinois, the United States, or authorized
emergency service agencies such as rescue squads or fire and police departments
of the village or other municipalities. (Ord. 2006-17, 6-6-2006)
6-4A-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class
A misdemeanor and, upon a finding of guilty, shall be punished by a fine as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code per day of violation. (Ord. 2006-17, 6-6-2006; amd. 2010
Code)
CHAPTER 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definitions
6-5-2: Enforcement Officials
6-5-3: Identification And Inoculation Of Dogs And Cats
6-5-4: Restraint Of Animals
6-5-5: Excrement Removal Required
6-5-6: Animal Houses
6-5-7: Disturbances By Animals
6-5-8: Animals That Bite
6-5-9: Vicious Animals
6-5-10: Killing, Wounding Animals
6-5-11: Cruelty To Animals
6-5-12: Animal Fights
6-5-13: Dead Animals
6-5-14: Injured Or Dead Animals On Public Ways
6-5-15: Theft Of Animals
6-5-16: Enforcement, Impoundment, Redemption And Disposition
6-5-17: Citations And Prosecutions
6-5-18: Penalty
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ALTERNATE ENCLOSURE: An area within which a dog is confined by a fence or
structure of sufficient strength. Such "alternative enclosure" shall be subject
to the approval of an animal control officer and suitable to prevent the entry
of small children.
ANIMAL: All animals, reptiles, birds or fish unless the text limits the
application to a particular species of animal.
ANIMAL CONTROL: The Sangamon County animal control division and those
designated by the village of Sherman and the chief of police.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: An employee of the Sangamon County animal control
division or those designated by the village of Sherman chief of police whose
duty it is to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
AT LARGE: Any animal not under "restraint", as defined in this section.
CAT: An animal, regardless of sex, of the feline species.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of the village of Sherman police department.
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE: The department of agriculture of the state of
Illinois.
DISTURBANCE: A disturbance caused by an animal that is distressing or loud or
unusual in nature and disturbs the peace or quiet of any place, neighborhood,
family or persons in the village, that lasts longer than fifteen (15) minutes,
and is documented by law enforcement or animal control.
DOG: All animals, regardless of sex, of the canine species.
EXCREMENT: Waste matter discharged from the body including, but not limited to,
animal feces.
INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES: The injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, of a
canine antirabies vaccine approved as provided by law.
ORDERED ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure, at least six feet (6') in height,
forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young
children, and suitable to confine a vicious animal. Such enclosure shall be
securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and
shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure.
OWNER OR KEEPER: A person having a right of property in an animal, who keeps or
harbors such animal, or who cares for or who acts as custodian or who knowingly
permits a dog to remain on any premises occupied by him or her. "Owner or
keeper" does not include a feral cat caretaker participating in a trap, spay/
neuter, return or release program.
POUND: The facility approved by the chief of police for the impoundment of
animals.
PUBLIC ENTRANCE: The entranceway of a residence or other building closest to
the public street or sidewalk or one which would be reasonably perceived by the
public to be the entrance to the dwelling available for public use.
REPETITIOUS DISTURBANCE: A disturbance that occurs on more than two (2)
occasions which takes place over a reasonably short period of time.
RESTRAINT: A. Attached to a leash held by a responsible person or, if not a
leash, in close proximity to its owner and trained such that it adheres to
voice command.
   B.   Attached to a structure or fixture or enclosed in a fenced yard,
including an operable underground "invisible" fencing system, in such a manner
that it is unable to reach beyond the limits of the owner's or keeper's
property and is unable to reach or molest servicepersons or casual visitors to
the owner's or keeper's property using the public entrance or persons placing
mail in a mailbox or delivering newspapers at the request of the owner.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any individual animal, including a vicious dog, that, when
unprovoked, inflicts bites or attacks a human being or other animal either on
public or private property. No animal shall be deemed "vicious" if it bites,
attacks or menaces a trespasser on the property of its owner or keeper or harms
or menaces anyone who has tormented or abused it.
VICIOUS DOG: A. Means the following:
      1.   An individual dog which, when either unmuzzled, unleashed, or
unattended by its owner, member of its owner's family, or keeper, in a
terrorizing or aggressive manner, approaches any person or animal in an
apparent attitude of attack upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or
places or property other than that of its owner, a member of its owner's family
or keeper.
      2.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, has killed, or seriously bitten, or
inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury by attacking a person or another
animal off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog.
   B.   A dog may not be deemed vicious if the court determines the conduct of
the dog was justified because:
      1.   The threat, injury, or death was sustained by a person who at the
time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog,
or was committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property
owned or occupied by the owner of the animal;
      2.   The injured, threatened, or killed person was abusing, assaulting,
or physically threatening the dog or its offspring, or has in the past abused,
assaulted, or physically threatened the dog or its offspring; or
      3.   The dog was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself,
its owner, custodian, member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
   C.   No dog shall be deemed vicious if it is a professionally trained dog
for law enforcement or guard duties. Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a
manner that is specific as to breed.
WORKING DAY: Any day when the office or public entity referred to was open for
the transaction of business. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-2: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
   A.   Established: Primary enforcement of this chapter shall be with the
county animal control division. The village may enforce this chapter through
the village police department. The chief of police shall oversee enforcement by
the village.
   B.   Powers And Duties: Without limiting those powers and duties prescribed
by law and ordinance, animal control officers shall:
      1.   Exercise the powers and perform the duties contained in this
chapter.
      2.   Impound animals pursuant to provisions of this chapter at the county
animal pound or other facility approved by the chief of police. (Ord. 2007-10,
12-18-2007)
6-5-3: IDENTIFICATION AND INOCULATION OF DOGS AND CATS:
   A.   Identification Required For Dogs And Cats: Every owner or keeper of a
dog or cat, regardless of the animal's age, shall cause the animal to wear a
collar or harness and shall affix thereto a metallic or other suitable tag
inscribed with the name, address, and telephone number, if any, of the owner or
keeper of the dog or cat.
   B.   Rabies Inoculation Requirements For Dogs:
      1.   Each calendar year, or at such intervals as may hereafter be
promulgated by the department of agriculture, every owner or keeper of a dog
which is four (4) months of age or older shall have each dog inoculated against
rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Every dog shall have a second rabies
vaccination within one year of the first. Such owner or keeper of such dog
shall cause a serially numbered tag evidencing such inoculation to be attached
to a collar or harness worn by the dog at all times.
      2.   The inoculation of dogs required by this chapter shall be performed
by a veterinarian, duly licensed to practice in this state or in the state
where the inoculation occurred. On performing such inoculation, such
veterinarian shall issue to the owner or keeper a certificate of such fact.
      3.   The inoculation performed under the provisions of subsection B1 of
this section shall be effective until the expiration of the calendar year in
which the vaccination was performed or the expiration of such period of time as
may be promulgated by the department of agriculture.
      4.   At any reasonable time on request of any member of the police
department or animal control officer, the owner or keeper of any dog shall
exhibit any current, valid certificate required under the provisions of this
chapter, certifying the inoculation against rabies of any dog owned or kept by
him.
      5.   If a licensed veterinarian determines in writing that a rabies
inoculation would compromise an animal's health, then the animal shall be
exempt from the rabies shot requirement, but the owner must still be
responsible for the fees. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-4: RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS:
   A.   The owner or keeper of a dog and all other animals, with the exception
of cats, shall keep the animal under "restraint", as defined in section
6-5-1 of this chapter, at all times. A dog used for law enforcement or rescue
purposes shall be exempt from this requirement.
   B.   Any person convicted of violating this section shall be fined not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation, and the fine shall
be doubled for each subsequent offense thereafter, but in no event shall the
fine exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000 00).
   C.   The provisions of this section shall be a positive duty of the owner or
keeper, and the offense described herein shall be a strict liability offense.
(Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-5: EXCREMENT REMOVAL REQUIRED:
No person shall appear with an animal upon the public ways or within public
places or upon the property of another, absent that person's consent, without
some means for the removal of excrement, nor shall any person fail to remove
any excrement deposited by such an animal. This section shall not apply to a
blind person while walking his or her guide dog. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-6: ANIMAL HOUSES:
Any pen, stable or place in which animals are housed or kept which is
unreasonably offensive to persons residing in the vicinity of the same, due to
associated debris or odors, or to persons passing along any street or alley
near the same, or which constitutes a hazard to the health of persons residing
nearby, is declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-7: DISTURBANCES BY ANIMALS:
   A.   Disturbances Prohibited: The owner or keeper shall not suffer or permit
any animal to cause a "disturbance" as defined in section
6-5-1 of this chapter.
   B.   Nuisance Declared: The repetitious disturbances of any place or
neighborhood or persons in the village is hereby declared a nuisance, and no
persons shall suffer or permit any nuisance to exist.
   C.   Citations And Impoundment:
      1.   In the event that law enforcement agents and/or animal control
officers are called to investigate a first or second disturbance, they may
issue a citation that may result in a fine.
      2.   In the event that law enforcement agents are called to investigate a
repetitious disturbance, they may contact animal control to issue a citation
for nuisance and to impound the animal.
      3.   In the event that an animal control officer is contacted about an
animal that has caused a repetitious disturbance, the animal control officer
may enter onto private property pursuant to the powers in subsection
6-5-16A of this chapter. The animal control officer may remove the animal for
placement in the county animal pound.
      4.   The animal control officer shall notify the owners or keepers of
animals impounded, if known to them, of the fact of impoundment.
      5.   Cited owners may request a hearing on this citation.
   D.   Redemption Of Impounded Animal: The impounded animal may be redeemed
under the provisions of subsection
6-5-16E of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-8: ANIMALS THAT BITE:
Any owner or keeper of an animal shall not suffer, permit, or fail to prevent
an animal from biting or attacking a person or another animal resulting in
injury to the person or animal attacked; provided, that such an attack on a
person who is or reasonably appears to be in the commission of an act made
punishable under the state criminal code is not prohibited if the animal is
acting in the defense of the owner or keeper or his family or premises and the
animal remains on its premises. For purposes of this section, it is not
necessary that the person bitten or attacked be arrested or convicted of a
criminal offense. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-9: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Declaring Animals Vicious:
      1.   Animals Generally: An animal control officer, the village attorney,
state attorney's office, or any citizen of the village may file a complaint in
the circuit court of the county in the name of the people of the state of
Illinois for a declaratory judgment that a particular described animal is
"vicious", as defined in section
6-5-1 of this chapter. Upon the court's finding that the animal is a "vicious
animal", as defined in section
6-5-1 of this chapter, the court shall enter an order consistent with this
section.
      2.   Dogs:
         a.   Animal control officers may declare a dog as vicious after
meeting all of the following requirements:
            (1)   Giving notice of the infraction that is the basis of the
investigation to the owner.
            (2)   Conducting an investigation.
            (3)   Gathering medical records, veterinary medical records or
behavioral evidence.
            (4)   Making a finding in writing that the dog is "vicious"
pursuant to this section.
            (5)   Designating the specific subsection of this section which
applies to that particular investigation.
            (6)   Giving the report to the state attorney's office and the
owner.
            (7)   Interview any witnesses, including the owner.
         b.   A declaration by an animal control officer that a dog is vicious
may be challenged.
   B.   Enclosure Required:
      1.   No person shall keep or maintain any animal which has been found,
pursuant to subsection A of this section, to be a vicious animal unless such
animal is at all times kept in an enclosure of the type described in section
6-5-1, definition of "ordered enclosure", of this chapter.
      2.   Any "vicious animal", as defined in section
6-5-1 of this chapter, may conform to the requirements of any alternate
enclosure with the approval of animal control.
   C.   Sign Requirements: All owners and/or keepers of any animal found to be
vicious shall display, in a prominent place on their premises where the vicious
animal is confined, a clearly visible sign in accordance with the following
requirements:
      1.   The sign must have the following dimensions: Eight and one- half
inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11") sign with red letters on a white background.
The first three (3) words, "Declared Vicious Animal", must be at least two
inches (2") in height, and the sign shall read as follows:
   DECLARED
   VICIOUS
   ANIMAL
   SANGAMON COUNTY
   ANIMAL CONTROL DIVISION
      2.   The sign must be displayed at the entrance of the enclosure where
the animal is kept.
      3.   In the event animal control officers find that an enclosure has more
than one entrance, the officers may require a sign at each entrance.
   D.   When Animal Allowed Out Of Enclosure: The only times that a vicious
animal may be allowed out of the enclosure is:
      1.   If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care
for the vicious animal;
      2.   In the case of an emergency or natural disaster where the animal's
life is threatened; or
      3.   To comply with the order of the circuit court of the county;
provided, that said vicious animal is securely muzzled and restrained with a
leash not exceeding six feet (6') in length, and shall be under the direct
control and supervision of the adult owner and/or keeper of the vicious animal
or muzzled in its residence.
   E.   Spaying Or Neutering And Microchipping Vicious Dogs: If a dog is found
to be a vicious dog, the dog shall be spayed or neutered within ten (10) days
of the finding at the expense of its owner and microchipped.
   F.   Impoundment: Any animal which has been found to be a vicious animal and
which is not confined to an enclosure and muzzled shall be impounded by the law
enforcement authority having jurisdiction in such area.
   G.   Euthanization: If the owner of the animal has not appealed the
impoundment order to the circuit court of the county within fifteen (15)
working days, the animal may be euthanized. Upon filing a notice of appeal, the
order of euthanasia shall be automatically stayed pending the outcome of the
appeal. The owner shall bear the burden of timely notification to animal
control in writing. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-10: KILLING, WOUNDING ANIMALS:
No person shall kill or wound or attempt to kill or wound, by the use of
firearms, slingshot, bow and arrow, BB gun, air rifle, or any other dangerous
weapon, any animal within the village limits; provided, that this section shall
not prohibit a person from defending himself or another from attack by an
animal. Police and animal control officers may use weapons to destroy animals
which are seriously injured to avoid unnecessary suffering or in self- defense
or defense of others. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-11: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   No person shall commit acts of cruelty to animals. The following acts
shall be deemed to be examples of cruelty to animals and are not intended to be
a complete list of acts which may constitute cruelty:
      1.   Overloading, overdriving, overworking, beating, torturing,
tormenting, mutilating, or killing any animal or causing or knowingly allowing
the same to be done.
      2.   Cruelly working any old, maimed, injured, sick, or disabled animal
or causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done.
      3.   Failing to provide any animal in one's charge or custody, as owner
or keeper, with proper food, drink, shelter, air, sanitation, or medical care.
      4.   Abandoning any animal without making provisions for its care and
feeding.
   B.   Doctors of veterinary medicine, in the performance of their profession,
are not subject to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-12: ANIMAL FIGHTS:
No person shall use or keep animals or be in any way connected with the
management of any place kept or used for the purpose of fighting or baiting any
dogs, cocks, or other animals or permit such place to be kept or used on
premises owned or controlled by such persons. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-13: DEAD ANIMALS:
   A.   Disposal Required: The owner or keeper of an animal shall be
responsible for the disposal of such animal's remains on its death, from
whatever cause, and regardless of the location of the remains of such animal.
   B.   Methods Of Disposal: Animal remains shall be disposed of:
      1.   By burial beneath at least eighteen inches (18") of compacted soil
on the property of the animal's owner or keeper or any other location, with the
express permission of the owner of the property;
      2.   By or through the county animal pound;
      3.   By or through a licensed veterinarian; or
      4.   By action of the county animal control division.
   C.   Notice To Dispose; Compliance Required: Animal control officers may
issue a written notice to any owner or keeper who has failed to properly
dispose of the remains of an animal as prescribed herein. Such person shall
have twenty four (24) hours from receipt of such notice to properly dispose of
such remains. The notice shall be served on the violator personally or by
leaving such notice at his usual place of abode with some person of the family
of the age of thirteen (13) years or upwards, and informing that person of the
contents thereof.
   D.   Summary Disposal: The village and animal control may dispose of any
animal remains without notice to the owner or keeper when:
      1.   Such remains are located on a public roadway.
      2.   The remains bear no owner identification tags as required by this
chapter.
      3.   The remains are located on the property of a person other than the
owner or keeper.
      4.   Service of a notice on the owner or keeper is refused, or not
readily possible within a short time.
   E.   Failure Of Owner To Dispose; Disposal By Enforcement Officials; Costs:
      1.   In any case were a disposal notice is required, in accordance with
subsection C of this section, on failure of a person served a notice to
properly dispose of such remains within the time allowed, the remains may be
disposed of by employees of the village and animal control, and all costs of
such removal shall be paid by the owner or keeper of the dead animal.
      2.   A minimum charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each hour or part of
an hour spent by animal control officers or other village employees in
disposing of the remains shall be levied against the owner or keeper when the
village disposes of the remains.
      3.   The village attorney or state's attorney is authorized to institute
legal proceedings to collect any amount owing by the owner or keeper; provided,
that such suit is filed within two (2) years of the issuance of the notice or
disposal of the remains if no notice is required. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-14: INJURED OR DEAD ANIMALS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Unidentified Animals: Any animal not wearing owner identification and/
or inoculation tags discovered injured or dead on a public way of the village
shall be removed by animal control and impounded in the county animal pound and
forthwith euthanized to avoid unnecessary suffering to the animal.
   B.   Identified Animals:
      1.   Seriously injured animals which are wearing owner identification
tags and/or inoculation tags will be taken to a doctor of veterinary medicine
engaged by animal control who shall contact the owner for treatment
instructions and who shall maintain the animal, without pain, if possible,
until instructions are received. The owner or keeper shall be responsible for
the costs of the private impoundment and treatment.
      2.   Injured animals wearing owner identification tags and/or inoculation
tags shall be removed by animal control to the county animal pound within forty
eight (48) hours if the owner cannot be contacted and treatment is completed.
No animal will be released by a veterinarian from impoundment to the owner or
keeper following treatment of an injury until a release is received from animal
control showing payment of impoundment fees. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-15: THEFT OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Determination Of Violation:
      1.   A theft, conversion, taking, leading away or secreting of any animal
shall be considered a violation of this chapter as well as any applicable
statutes relating to theft, theft by false representation, fraud or conversion.
      2.   Concealing the identity of any animal for the purpose of making the
return of an animal to the animal's owner more difficult shall be considered a
violation of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the obscuring,
altering or removing of any collar, tag, license, tatoo, or other identifying
device or mark.
   B.   Enforcement: A law enforcement agent may refer an individual who is in
violation of subsection A of this section to an animal control officer. The
animal control officer may issue a citation for theft, consistent with
subsection
6-5-17A of this chapter. A hearing for a citation for theft may be held. (Ord.
2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-16: ENFORCEMENT, IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION AND DISPOSITION:
   A.   Authority To Enforce:
      1.   It shall be the duty of animal control officers and others
specifically designated by the chief of police to enforce any of the provisions
of this chapter or statutes of the state as they pertain to animals.
      2.   The animal control officers and others designated by the chief of
police are authorized to go onto private property in order to enforce this
chapter or to take up any animal which is found at large or take up any dog
found without required inoculation, licensing, or identification tags; however,
such persons may not enter a private dwelling house for this purpose without a
valid warrant or the consent of an occupant.
   B.   Interference With Enforcement Prohibited: No person shall, in any way,
interfere with any person who is known to such person to be or who identifies
himself to be a village employee or officer enforcing provisions of this
chapter or engaged in catching or impounding any animal under the authority of
this chapter. Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this
subsection will be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   C.   Impoundment Of Animals Which Have Bitten Persons:
      1.   Any animal, whether under restraint or not, which shall have bitten
or otherwise injured any persons so as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall
be immediately taken, impounded, and kept separated from other animals for ten
(10) days. In case the animal cannot be safely taken up and impounded, it may
be killed, care being taken to preserve the head intact which shall be detached
and immediately delivered to the diagnostic laboratory of the department of
agriculture.
      2.   The victim of such bite and animal control shall notify the county
department of health of the bite within twenty four (24) hours.
      3.   If, during the ten (10) day period, such animal develops symptoms of
illness, a veterinarian shall diagnose its condition. If the symptoms disclose
or are such as to indicate the presence of rabies, the animal shall be
destroyed, however, as to preserve intact the head, which shall thereupon be
detached and immediately sent to the diagnostic laboratory of the department of
agriculture.
      4.   If, at the expiration of the period of ten (10) days, no symptoms of
rabies have developed in such animal so impounded, the same may be redeemed by
the owner or keeper upon payment of the redemption fees and charges specified
in this chapter.
      5.   After having been notified that the animal has bitten or otherwise
injured any person, the owner or keeper thereof shall not, under, any
circumstances, permit such animal to be outside of his premises except on a
leash with a responsible adult until the procedures prescribed in this
subsection have been completed. Failure of the owner or keeper of an animal
impounded or to be impounded in accordance with this subsection or comparable
section of state law, to adhere strictly to the provisions of this subsection
shall subject such owner or keeper to punishment as provided in section
6-5-18 of this chapter. The provision of this subsection shall be a positive
duty of the owner or keeper, and the offense described herein shall be a strict
liability offense.
   D.   Notice Of Impoundment: The county animal pound shall notify the owners
or keepers of animals impounded pursuant to this chapter, if known to them, of
the fact of impoundment.
   E.   Redemption Of Impounded Animals:
      1.   Any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter, except
any that may have bitten any person, shall, unless sooner redeemed, be held
until said animal may be disposed of pursuant to subsection F of this section
in order to afford opportunity to the owner or keeper thereof to redeem the
same.
      2.   Any owner or keeper desiring to redeem an impounded animal shall pay
an impounding fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per animal, payable to county
animal control center in the form of cash, cashier's check or money order and,
in addition, to the county the cost of keeping such animal while impounded. The
impounding fee shall be paid by the owner or keeper at the county animal
control center. The fees for the cost of keeping the animal, plus any
additional fee for inoculation, shall be paid at the county animal pound.
      3.   In case any dog has not been inoculated against rabies for the
current calendar year, the owner shall also advance the fee required to have
such dog inoculated by the duly licensed veterinarian, and the administrator of
the pound shall forthwith cause the dog to be inoculated for the current
calendar year, or in accordance with the requirements of the department of
agriculture.
      4.   The impounding fees for each animal that is impounded within a two
(2) year period shall be as follows:
 
First offense                      $ 50.00
Second offense                     75.00
Third offense                      100.00
Fourth and each subsequent offense 150.00
 
   F.   Disposition Of Unredeemed Animals:
      1.   Any dog or other animal, except animals bearing owner identification
or inoculation tags, impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which
shall not be redeemed within three (3) working days shall be humanely destroyed
or otherwise disposed of by the director of the county animal pound.
      2.   Any dog validly licensed or with owner identification tags and
impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which shall not be
redeemed within seven (7) working days shall be humanely destroyed or otherwise
disposed of by the director of the county animal pound.
      3.   Any "vicious animal", as defined in section
6-5-1 of this chapter, shall not be destroyed unless impounded under any
provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-17: CITATIONS AND PROSECUTIONS:
   A.   Issuance Of Citations: Animal control officers and police officers are
authorized to issue citations on a reasonable belief that any person has
violated any provisions of this chapter. Said citations shall be issued in
forms approved by the chief of police. Citations shall be issued personally to
the violator, left with a responsible family member of at least thirteen (13)
years of age at the home of the violator, or mailed to the residence of the
violator. Persons issuing citations shall ensure that a copy of the citation is
filed with the village clerk on the same day that the citation is issued or as
soon as practical after issuance of such citation.
   B.   Payment To Avoid Prosecution: On receipt of a citation alleging a
violation of any section of this chapter, the minimum fine provided in this
chapter may be paid to the village clerk or at the county animal control
center; provided, that the amount is paid within ten (10) working days of
issuance of the citation.
   C.   Prosecution Of Violations: After ten (10) working days have elapsed
from the date of the issuance of a citation authorized by this chapter, action
may be taken by the village attorney or state attorney's office to file a
complaint and prosecute the alleged violation in the circuit court or other
appropriate administrative tribunal. (Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
6-5-18: PENALTY:
Any person found in violation of any sections of this chapter shall be fined in
accordance with the following schedule:
 
First offense           $100.00  
Second offense          200.00   
Third offense           400.00   
Fourth offense          750.00   
Each subsequent offense 200.00  multiplied by the number of offenses
 
(Ord. 2007-10, 12-18-2007)
CHAPTER 6
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Firearms
6-6-2: Obscenity
6-6-1: FIREARMS:
   A.   Discharge Prohibited; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any person
to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, air rifle, pellet gun, or other firearm
within the village; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to
police officers, special commissioned officers or other persons acting under
their supervision and control, in the proper performance of their lawful
duties.
   B.   Minors: It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of any child
under the age of eighteen (18) years to permit, suffer or allow any such child
to handle or to have in his possession within the village any cannon, gun,
pistol, firearm or any toy gun, toy cannon, toy pistol, air gun or any similar
weapon which, if discharged, shall be of sufficient force or power to inflict
bodily injury.
   C.   Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00). (1984 Code §
9-3-1)
6-6-2: OBSCENITY:
   A.   Definition: Any material or performance is "obscene" if:
      1.   The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards,
would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest; and
      2.   The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards,
would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, ultimate
sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual
or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the
genitals; and
      3.   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value. (1984 Code §
9-3-2; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Elements Of The Offense: A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
he:
      1.   Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or
provide, any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene; or
      2.   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or
      3.   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
or
      4.   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his body for gain; or
      5.   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with
intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal laws or
regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      6.   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or
held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   C.   Interpretation Of Evidence:
      1.   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults; except;
that, it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to
such an audience. (1984 Code § 9-3-2)
      2.   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is lacking in serious, literary, artistic, political
or scientific value. (1984 Code § 9-3-2; amd. 2010 Code)
      3.   In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence shall
be admissible to show:
         a.   The character of the audience for which the material was designed
or to which it was directed.
         b.   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary
adults or a special audience, and what effect if any, it would probably have on
the behavior of such people.
         c.   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits
of the material, or absence thereof. (1984 Code § 9-3-2)
         d.   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in the
village. (1984 Code §
9-3-2; amd. 2010 Code)
         e.   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising
or other promotion of the material.
         f.   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.
   D.   Prima Facie Evidence: The creation, purchase, procurement or possession
of a mold, engraved plate or other embodiment of obscenity specially adapted
for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more than three (3)
copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to
disseminate.
   E.   Affirmative Defenses: It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity
that the dissemination:
      1.   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material. (1984 Code §
9-3-2)
   F.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, or in the event such person shall fail to
pay any fine, penalty or cost assessed under this section, by imprisonment in
the county jail for a period of not more than six (6) months. (1984 Code §
9-3-2; amd. 2010 Code)
TITLE 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: State Vehicle Code Adopted
7-1-2: Motor Vehicle Defined
7-1-3: Traffic Control Signs And Signals
7-1-4: Speed Limit Established
7-1-5: Stop Intersections
7-1-6: Weight Limits
7-1-1: STATE VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100
et seq., as amended, are hereby adopted by the village. Any and all violations
thereof shall be considered violations of this title, and each such violation
shall subject the violator thereof to penalty provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code. (2010 Code)
7-1-2: MOTOR VEHICLE DEFINED:
The term "motor vehicle", as used in this title, shall mean every vehicle which
is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power
obtained from overhead wires, but not operated upon rails, including, but not
limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, motorscooters, motorbikes, snowmobiles or
any self- propelled vehicle used for transporting persons or property except
for vehicles moved solely by human power, motorized wheelchairs, low speed
electric bicycles and low speed gas bicycles. (1984 Code § 10-1-1; amd. 2010
Code)
7-1-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
   A.   Specifications:
      1.   All signs and signals established by direction of the village
president and board of trustees shall conform to the state manual of uniform
traffic control devices for streets and highways as published by the state
department of transportation.
      2.   All traffic signs and signals now in place within the village which
conform to the state manual of uniform traffic control devices for streets and
highways as published by the state department of transportation or may in the
future be placed in compliance with the state manual of uniform traffic control
devices for streets and highways as published by the state department of
transportation shall have full force and effect upon the effective date hereof,
or at such time any sign or signal may be placed in compliance with said
manual, whichever occurs later.
   B.   Obedience Required: It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle
to disobey the instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by
authority of the president and board of trustees or in accordance with the laws
of the state, excepting upon direction of a police officer. (1984 Code § 10-1-
4)
   C.   Penalty And Bail: Any person convicted of the offense of violating any
traffic signs or signals placed in compliance with this section shall be
convicted of a "petty offense", as defined in the criminal code of the state,
and shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of
this section shall be released upon proper bail being furnished as required by
law. (1984 Code § 10-1-4; amd. 2010 Code)
7-1-4: SPEED LIMIT ESTABLISHED:
   A.   General Speed Limit: Pursuant to the provisions of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-604, the board of trustees finds, upon the basis of an
ongoing traffic study of the speed limits existing within the village limits
and of the adjoining and surrounding areas, that a reasonable and safe maximum
speed limit may not exceed thirty (30) miles per hour. Accordingly, no "motor
vehicle", as defined in section
7-1-2 of this chapter, shall be driven on any public street, road or alley in
the village at a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour.
   B.   Penalties; Bail: Any person convicted of the offense of speeding less
than ten (10) miles per hour in excess of the speed limit shall be punished by
a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) per mile of excess speed over the
speed limit nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and any person
convicted of speeding ten (10) miles per hour or more in excess of the speed
limit shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Any person arrested for a
violation of any provision of this section shall be released upon proper bail
being furnished as required by law. (1984 Code § 10-1-2; amd. 2010 Code)
7-1-5: STOP INTERSECTIONS:
By resolution, motion or ordinance, the village board of trustees may designate
certain streets as stop streets. Signs shall be posted at the appropriate
locations indicating said stop streets. (2010 Code)
7-1-6: WEIGHT LIMITS:
   A.   Statute Authority: Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-80-
2 and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-316(c), the village is authorized to
limit all trucks and commercial vehicle traffic upon certain streets in the
village. (Ord. 1991-8, 5-7-1991; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Specific Weight Limit Streets:
      1.   The following streets in the village are restricted to the following
weight limits:
 
Street/Location                                           Weight Limit Ord. No.
Old Tipton School Road, from its intersection with Andrew
Road on the north to its intersection with Business I-55  8 tons       1996-12
on the south
Sebring Road, west of Old Tipton School                   10 tons      1991-8
 
      2.   Signs shall be posted at the appropriate locations indicating the
above weight limits. (2010 Code)
   C.   Exemptions: The terms and provisions of this section shall not apply to
farm equipment and vehicles, moving vans, service vehicles and trucks belonging
to the village, school buses, garbage trucks, fire trucks or emergency vehicles
providing services for residents or nonresidents of the village occupying
property abutting the streets enumerated in subsection B of this section or
whose sole access to a public road is limited to said streets. (Ord. 1991-8, 5-
7-1991)
   D.   Permit For Use Required; Fee: Permits allowing the use of streets
enumerated in subsection B of this section by trucks and commercial vehicles
with weight in excess of that indicated in subsection B of this section may be
granted by the village board or such person as the board may designate in
accordance with the standards contained in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-
301(a), (b), (c) and (e). The village clerk shall have available, application
forms requiring the information set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
15-301(b). No permit granted under this subsection shall be good for more than
thirty (30) days nor shall it authorize more than three (3) round trips within
such period. No more than three (3) such permits shall be granted to any single
person or entity within any twelve (12) month period without express board
action and approval. No permits for continuous operation shall be issued to any
person or entity except as allowed under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-
301(e). The fee for each permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall be
twenty five dollars ($25.00), said sum being necessary to defray the cost of
administering and monitoring the issuance of said permits.
   E.   Liability For Damages: Any person or entity owning or operating any
vehicle in excess of the weight limits specified in subsection B of this
section shall be liable for the cost of repairing any street damage. Said owner
or operator shall be liable whether or not a permit has been obtained, and the
measure of liability shall be as set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
15-318(a). 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-318(b) and 5/15-318(c) shall
also apply with respect to liability for damages.
   F.   Penalty: Any person or entity owning or operating any vehicle in excess
of the weight limits specified in subsection B of this section and who shall do
so without obtaining a permit as set forth in subsection D of this section,
shall, in addition to any liability for damages under subsection E of this
section, be liable for a fine as set forth in the schedule contained in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-113(a). In the event that any court of law
shall rule the schedule of fines set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
15-113(a) inapplicable to any case, then any person or entity violating this
section shall be liable for a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation of the gross weight limits set forth
herein, as authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1.
   G.   Statutes Adopted By Reference: The texts of the following portions of
the Illinois Compiled Statutes are incorporated herein by reference:
      1.   625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301(a), (b), (c) and (e).
      2.   625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-318(a), (b) and (c).
      3.   625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-113(a) and (b).
      4.   65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1. (Ord. 1991-8, 5-7-1991; amd.
2010 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Parking Prohibited On Certain Streets
7-2-2: Trucks, Buses, Farm Equipment And Recreational Vehicles
7-2-3: Snow Routes
7-2-1: PARKING PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
By resolution, motion or ordinance, the Village Board of Trustees may designate
certain streets, or portions thereof, to be "No Parking On Street" Zones which
shall be subject to the requirements of this title. Signs shall be posted
indicating the appropriate no parking places. (2010 Code)
7-2-2: TRUCKS, BUSES, FARM EQUIPMENT AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Trucks: It shall be unlawful to park trucks weighing nine (9) tons or
more, including semitrucks, whether connected to a trailer or otherwise, loaded
or empty, on streets of the Village except for the purpose of loading or
unloading. (Ord. 2006-27, 11-7-2006)
   B.   Buses, Farm Equipment, Recreational Vehicles And Trailers 1 : It shall
be unlawful to park a bus having a rated seating capacity of twenty (20) or
more passengers, farm equipment, construction equipment, recreational vehicles,
motor homes, campers, boats, or detached trailers of any description or use on
any public street or public place except for purposes of delivering or
collecting goods and merchandise or for emergency purposes. It shall further be
unlawful to park, place or locate any of the above-referenced vehicles,
equipment or trailers, on or across a sidewalk within the Village.
   C.   Penalty: Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall
be fined a minimum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and a maximum of
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day the violation continues.
(Ord. 2012-20, 12-4-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  10-9-10A of this Code.
7-2-3: SNOW ROUTES:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    STREET: Any public street, avenue, parkway, boulevard, drive, lane, circle,
alley, court, place or any other public highway within the Village.
   VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
   B.   Declaration Of Emergency: Whenever in the opinion of one of the
following: the Chair of the Streets and Alleys Committee of the Village Board,
the Engineer for the Village or the Village President, an emergency exists or
is imminently forecast in the Village, or in a section or sections thereof,
because of snow, freezing rain, sleet, ice, snowdrifts or other natural
phenomena which create hazardous road conditions impeding or likely to impede
the free movement of fire, health, police, emergency or other vehicular
traffic; the cleanup of snow, freezing rain, sleet, ice, snowdrifts and other
natural phenomena; or the safety and welfare of the community, any two (2) of
the aforesaid officers may declare a snow emergency to exist for a period of
seventy two (72) hours. Said declaration of emergency shall be released to the
public information media prior to its becoming effective. (1984 Code §
10-3-2)
   C.   Designation Of Snow Emergency Routes: By resolution, motion or
ordinance, the Village Board of Trustees may designate certain streets, or
portions thereof, as snow emergency routes, and all such streets shall be
posted with suitable signs or markers at intervals not exceeding five hundred
feet (500'), which signs or markers shall bear the words "Snow Emergency" and
also indicate where parking would otherwise exist and that parking is
prohibited during a snow emergency.
   D.   Placement And Maintenance Of Signs: The Trustee of Public Works shall
place and maintain all snow emergency signs or markers required under this
section.
   E.   Parking Prohibited On Snow Emergency Routes Or Other Designated
Streets:
      1.   Upon the declaration of a state of emergency, the Trustee of Public
Works, the Engineer for the Village or the Village President may prohibit
during the emergency the parking, standing, or leaving of any vehicles upon any
or all the snow emergency streets designated herein. The emergency declaration
provided for in this section may be extended to streets other than those
designated as snow emergency routes. (1984 Code §
10-3-2; amd. 2010 Code)
      2.   Parking may be resumed on individual streets upon termination of the
emergency weather condition as soon as final plowing, as announced, has been
completed on that street.
   F.   Penalty: If any vehicle is parked, abandoned, or left standing in
violation of the terms of this section, the same shall be considered a hazard
and may be removed and impounded. The owner of such vehicle shall be liable for
all costs, fees, and charges arising from such impounding. (1984 Code §
10-3-2)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Trees And Shrubs In Rights-Of-Way
8-1-2: Excavations
8-1-3: Blocking Sidewalks
8-1-4: Street Cuts And Directional Boring For Utility Installation And Repair
8-1-1: TREES AND SHRUBS IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Definition: For purposes of this section, "right-of-way" shall be
defined as the legally designated Village property or ten feet (10') from the
edge of the roadway improvements, whichever is less.
   B.   Planting Prohibited: The planting of trees, shrubs and other plants
within a Village right-of-way is hereby prohibited.
   C.   Penalty And Remedies: A person violating this section shall be subject
to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for so long as such person remains
in violation of this section. In the event such person fails to correct any
violation of this section, the Village may, in its discretion, remove any and
all trees, shrubs and/or other plants planted in violation of this section. In
addition, the Village may, in its discretion, seek any other remedy available
in law or equity to restrain or enjoin violations of this section. In further
addition, the Village may, in its discretion, seek reimbursement for reasonable
costs and attorney fees incurred in enforcing the provisions of this section.
   D.   Existing Trees And Shrubs: All trees, shrubs and/or other plants
existing within a Village right-of-way at the effective date hereof shall not
be subject to subsections B and C of this section. However, if the Village
determines, in its sole discretion, that an existing tree, shrub, and/or other
plant interferes with a Village right-of-way, the Village may, in its
discretion, send written notice to the landowner of such interference. Such
notice shall seek rectification of the interference and delineate what
reasonable actions the Village expects the landowner to take. The landowner's
failure to reasonably rectify the interference within ten (10) days of receipt
of notice from the Village shall subject such landowner to a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per day until such interference is corrected. In the event the
landowner fails to correct such interference within ten (10) days of receipt of
notice from the Village, the Village may, in its discretion, correct the
interference and/or remove the tree, shrub and/or other plants at issue and
seek reimbursement from the landowner for such costs. For purposes of this
section only, notice shall be deemed given upon personal delivery to the
landowner, or four (4) days after such notice is mailed by the Village. (Ord.
2006-6, 2-21-2006)
8-1-2: EXCAVATIONS:
   A.   Permission To Open: No street openings shall be permitted for the
installation, maintenance, or repair of sewer or water lines or services in any
street, alley, boulevard, or other public way without a permit having first
been issued authorizing said opening. Street opening permits shall be issued
only upon application and upon payment of the fee of ten dollars ($10) in
advance.
   B.   Applications For Permits: All applications for permits shall be made to
the Village Clerk. Each application shall describe the location of the intended
excavation, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person, firm, or
corporation doing the actual excavating work, and the name of the person, firm,
or corporation for whom or which the work is being done. The application shall
also contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances
and laws relating to the work to be done.
   C.   Duty Of Permit Holder: All street openings shall be made and closed by
the permit holder according to the standards and specifications required by the
Village Engineer for the particular opening authorized by the permit. The
street shall be relaid or repaved by the permit holder at the permit holder's
expense and said permit holder shall restore the surface and subsurface of the
street to as good a condition as when opened.
   D.   Proof Of Insurance Or Bond: Prior to the issuance of any permit by the
Village, the applicants for the permit shall make satisfactory proof to the
Village Engineer that the applicant, his agents, and employees are fully
protected by insurance or bond covering public liability, property damage, and
Worker's Compensation claims arising out of the issuance of such permit.
   E.   Jurisdiction: With respect to Village streets under the jurisdiction of
the Department of Transportation of the state, no provision herein shall be
applicable when the provision is contrary to the statutes of the state or
regulations of the Department of Transportation.
   F.   Inspection: The Village Engineer or his designated representative shall
from time to time inspect any excavations being made in or under any public
street, alley, or public way in the village to see to the enforcement of the
provisions of this subchapter. Notice shall be given by the permit holder to
the Village Engineer at least four (4) hours before the work of refilling any
excavation commences.
   G.   Openings To Be Guarded: Any person, firm, or corporation making or
maintaining any excavation in any street, alley, or other public way shall keep
the excavation adequately guarded by barricades and lights to protect persons,
vehicles, and property from injury; and shall indemnify and save harmless,
protect, and defend the village from any suit, claim, demand, liability, or
expense of any land or nature whatsoever arising by, through, or on account of
the permit holder's activities.
   H.   Rules For Excavation:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to make any excavation not in conformity with
the terms of the permit issued therefor. Proper bracing shall be maintained at
all times to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground; and no excavation shall
have a subsurface width or length beyond that of the opening made at the
surface.
      2.   No injury or damage shall be done to any pipes, cables, or conduits
in the making of the excavation. Notice shall be given to the owners or
operators of the pipes, cables, or conduits or to any village department or
officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or
affected by the making of any excavation before such pipes, cables, or conduits
shall be disturbed. The holder of the permit shall be responsible for and
repair all damage to the pipes, cables, or conduits. No unnecessary damage or
injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or the roots thereof. (Ord. 2017-4,
3-21-2017)
8-1-3: BLOCKING SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or locate boats, recreation
vehicles and trailers, on or across a sidewalk within the Village. The penalty
for violating this section shall be not less than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day. (Ord.
2012-20, 12-4-2012)
8-1-4: STREET CUTS AND DIRECTIONAL BORING FOR UTILITY INSTALLATION AND REPAIR:
   A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation
to cut, dig, trench, excavate, grade, tunnel, bore, or in any way disturb any
road, street, alley, sidewalk, curb, roadside ditch, right-of-way, or other
public place for any purpose whatsoever without:
      1.   Filing and obtaining a written street cut and bore permit with the
Village of Sherman;
      2.   Executing a bond to cover all damages occasioned by such work; and
      3.   Restoration of the area in good condition and in the manner provided
for by the terms of this section.
   B.   Emergencies: In the case of an emergency, cutting and excavation may
proceed without delay on condition that within twenty four (24) hours after the
commencement of such cutting or excavation, a bond shall be posted, notice of
such work shall be given, and a street cut permit shall be applied for and
obtained from the Village.
   C.   Permit Exemptions: Street cut and boring permits will not be required
for excavations made under contract with or by order of the Village of Sherman
through its proper officials, nor to construction of any private entrances,
driveways, or approaches in connection with any street in the Village street
system or the installation or replacement of sidewalks, or for the installation
of landscaping.
   D.   Bond And Fee Exemptions: The provisions of this section which pertain
to bonds and fees shall not apply to work being done by any city, town,
municipal corporation, or any agency of the State, or by any special taxing or
service district established by law, provided that such entities shall give the
Village at least twenty four (24) hours notice of such work and shall comply
with all other applicable provisions of this section.
   E.   Utility Poles Along Right-Of-Way: The provisions of this section
pertaining to permits, bonds and fees shall not apply to the setting and
maintaining of utility poles and their appurtenances along Village street
right-of-way by a public utility.
   F.   Street Cut Permit: Any person, firm or corporation desiring to cut,
dig, trench, excavate, grade, tunnel, bore, or install any pole or disturb any
road, street, alley, sidewalk, curb, roadside ditch, right-of-way, or other
public place, shall make application for a street cut permit. Application shall
be submitted with all fees at least three (3) days prior to beginning the work.
Permit fees for the said work shall be set at three hundred dollars ($300.00)
per location. The application shall include the following information:
      1.   Location and purpose of the proposed work.
      2.   Estimated time or dates when the work will be performed.
      3.   Estimated length, width, and depth of the proposed work.
      4.   Type and dimensions of existing pavement or sidewalk to be cut.
      5.   Name, address, and contact information of contractor performing the
work.
      6.   Scalable plan drawing showing proposed work and all existing
features within the work area including pavement, utilities, mailboxes,
driveways, and other features.
   G.   Applicant Compliance: Applicant for permit shall agree to the
following:
      1.   Village Engineer shall have the right to prescribe the method of the
proposed cut, dig, trench, excavation, grade, tunnel, bore, and the location
and the time the proposed work will be performed.
      2.   Applicant will maintain the road surface, which has been disturbed,
in a smooth and uniform condition for a period of one year after the traffic is
again permitted to pass over such filled trench or maintain the area cut
outside the pavement surface but within the right-of-way to the condition
similar to the immediate surrounding area for a period of one year. The
maintenance is to meet the approval of the Village Engineer.
      3.   Applicant will erect and maintain all necessary barricades, detour
signs, warning signals, and lights by night in accordance to the Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (latest edition). A flagman shall be provided
by the permittee at any location where traffic is limited to one lane.
      4.   Applicant shall take all responsibility for any injury or damage
resulting to persons or property because of such work.
      5.   Applicant shall conspicuously display the name and telephone number
of the project foreman at the site of the work, for the duration of the
project.
   H.   Bond: Whenever such application is approved, the applicant shall be
required to provide a bond to the Village of Sherman, with surety to be
approved by the Village Engineer. Said bond shall guarantee that the place
where said work is to be done shall be restored to a condition and in the
manner provided by the provisions of this section.
      1.   Such bond shall be in the sum of:
         a.   Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each separate crossing of
any public right-of-way where the area of pavement removed and replaced is less
than or equal to forty (40) square feet in area. Should the area of pavement
removal and replacement exceed forty (40) square feet, the bond shall be
increased by the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per square foot.
         b.   Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each separate crossing of
any public right-of-way by directional bore.
         c.   Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per block or parts thereof, for
each separate cut or bore which parallels or crosses any public right- of-way
for distance of one Village block.
      2.   Such bond shall provide for the surety to guarantee that the
principal of said bond shall faithfully perform all duties imposed upon said
principal for each and every utility crossing according to the requirements of
this section. Such bond shall remain in full force for a period of three (3)
years from the date of the completion of the permittee's work to assure that no
hidden damage to pavement or infrastructure occurs. No permit shall be issued
until such bond has been filed with and approved by the Village Engineer.
      3.   A cashier's check or certified check payable to the Village of
Sherman, in the same sum as designated herein for such bond, or a letter of
credit issued by a financial institution approved by the Village of Sherman in
the same sum designated for the bond may be filed in lieu of a surety bond.
Public utilities may submit an indemnifying agreement acceptable to the Village
Engineer in lieu of a bond, cashier's check, certified check, or letter of
credit.
   I.   Time Limit: The holder of any permit issued which grants permission to
cut, dig, trench, grade, excavate, tunnel, or bore in any right-of-way as
provided by this section shall complete all work and make all repairs within
ninety (90) days from the issuance of the permit. The Village Engineer may
extend the time for the completion of the work for which the permit was
granted. Any work requiring removal of roadway or street pavement shall be
completed within fourteen (14) calendar days after beginning work in the
roadway at that location.
   J.   Temporary Repairs: If weather conditions do not allow permanent repairs
to be completed, the permittee shall make temporary pavement repairs. Said
temporary repairs shall be made with asphalt cold mix and shall be maintained
by the permittee until permanent repairs can be made.
   K.   Open Cut And Boring Requirements: All work and repair described herein
shall be done in accordance with the following specifications:
      1.   Open Cuts: Any open cuts through sidewalk, curb and gutter,
pavement, or other hard surface shall be made by sawcutting for the full depth
of the hard surface. Sawcut lines shall be neat and straight.
      2.   Inspection: After excavation and utility installation or connection
is complete, the permittee shall contact the Village Engineer for an inspection
of the installation prior to backfilling. Any damage to the existing utility or
adjacent pavement, curb, or gutter resulting from the permittee's operations
shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer at the
permittee's expense.
      3.   Backfilling: All backfilling of open cuts in streets or roadways
shall be made from the bottom of the excavation to the bottom of the pavement
using a flowable fill or controlled low strength material (CLSM). The material
and construction methods shall be as specified in section 593 of the latest
edition of the IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
      4.   Restoration: Street and roadway pavements shall be restored in
accordance with the applicable sections of the latest IDOT Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction as follows:
         a.   Asphalt Pavements:
            (1)   Granular base course, CA6 having minimum thickness of eight
inches (8") or the existing base course thickness whichever is thicker.
            (2)   Hot-mix asphalt surface course mix "C", N50 having minimum
thickness of three inches (3") or the existing pavement thickness whichever is
thicker.
         b.   Concrete Pavements:
            (1)   Granular base course, CA6 having minimum thickness of eight
inches (8") or the existing base course thickness whichever is thicker.
            (2)   Portland cement concrete pavement of the type and thickness
of the existing pavement.
         c.   Curb, Gutter, Sidewalk:
            (1)   Match existing in type, material, and dimension.
      5.   Directional Bore Requirements:
         a.   All directional bored utilities shall have a minimum of four feet
(4') of cover between the utility and the road surface. Directionally bored
utilities shall have a minimum of three feet (3') of cover between the utility
and ditch bottoms.
         b.   Directional bore pits shall be located, at least, ten feet (10')
off the edge of road pavement in rural sections and six feet (6') behind the
back of curb in urban sections.
         c.   The applicant shall be responsible for correction of any
distortion caused by his operation of any road or street. The method of
correction shall be approved by Village Engineer.
         d.   Pipe materials for directions drilling shall be either:
            (1)   Class 350 ductile iron pipe.
            (2)   High density polyethylene pipe (HDPE).
            (3)   Restrained joint PVC pipe.
      6.   Tracer Wire: A tracer wire shall be installed with the pipe
regardless of pipe material. Tracer wire shall be 10-gage or larger solid hard
drawn insulated copper wire.
   L.   Violation: Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision
of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) and not to be lower than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each
day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the
penalties set forth herein, any person, firm or corporation who violates any
provision of this section shall be liable for actual damages and restitution
caused by work performed without the proper bonding or permit. (Ord. 2013-7, 7-
2-2013)
CHAPTER 2
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-2-1: Approved Water System; Required Use; Exceptions
8-2-2: Water Conservation
8-2-1: APPROVED WATER SYSTEM; REQUIRED USE; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The Village of Williamsville water system is and shall be the only
approved water system for distribution of water for human consumption or for
commercial or industrial use within the Village. (1984 Code §
7-1-1; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   The sale, use or distribution of water from unapproved sources for
human consumption or involving the production, servicing or repair of tangible
personal property is hereby prohibited. Owners and users of water from approved
wells in existence on August 8, 1972, located upon property occupied as a
residence and actually being used for home consumption are hereby exempted.
(1984 Code §§
7-1-1,
7-1-2)
   C.   Any violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per day for every day such violation continues in effect. Such
penalty shall be in addition to any other legal remedies available. (1984 Code
§
7-1-3)
8-2-2: WATER CONSERVATION:
The following mandatory water conservation regulations, which shall be
applicable to all retail water service customers of the Village are hereby
adopted, to be in full force and effect until such time as the City of
Springfield determines that the water level of Lake Springfield has
sufficiently recovered to no longer warrant mandatory water conservation
measures.
   A.   Definitions:
    LANDSCAPE: For purposes of this section the term "landscape" shall include
sodded and seeded lawns, gardens, trees, shrubs, and other living plants.
   B.   Landscape Irrigation Restrictions: The use of water from the Village's
water supply for landscape irrigation by retail water service customers is
hereby prohibited except for the following:
      1.   Designated Irrigation Days: Irrigation utilizing individual
sprinkler systems for landscape is permitted during the following times:
 
Street Address Designated Day              Permitted Hours Of Water Use
Odd number     Monday, Wednesday, Friday   12:00 midnight - 8:00 A.M. and 7:00
                                           P.M. - 11:59 P.M.
Even number    Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday 12:00 midnight - 8:00 A.M. and 7:00
                                           P.M. - 11:59 P.M.
 
A large parcel of property having a single watering system for several even and
odd numbered address buildings may be irrigated on Tuesday, Thursday and
Saturday only.
Notwithstanding the above, irrigation of lawns, gardens, landscaped areas,
trees, shrubs, or other plants is permitted at anytime except on Sundays if:
         a.   A hand-held hose is used; or
         b.   A hand-held, faucet-filled bucket of five (5) gallons or less is
used; or
         c.   A drip-irrigation system is used, which is a soaker-type hose
that when in use does not result in an aerial dissipation of water.
      2.   Landscape Permits: Upon issuance of a permit by the Village Clerk
the following uses of water shall be permitted, except on Sundays:
         a.   The watering of new landscape at any hour between twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. to
eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., for no more than twenty one (21) consecutive days.
Thereafter, watering is permitted for three (3) days each week on the same
schedule as all other retail water service customers. The permit fee shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00). One permit per site shall be allowed. The
watering of sod on the initial day of installation of the sod shall be
permitted without restriction to hours of the day.
         b.   The watering of landscape when required for chemical application
for no more than three (3) consecutive days during permitted hours of water
use. The permit fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). One permit per site
shall be allowed.
   C.   Washing Vehicles: The use of water from the Village's water supply for
washing vehicles including automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, and other
types of mobile equipment by retail water service customers is hereby
prohibited except for the following:
      1.   Washing Vehicles On Designated Days: The washing of vehicles and
other types of mobile equipment on Saturdays and Sundays; provided that such
washing shall be done with a hand-held, faucet-filled bucket or a hand-held
hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses.
      2.   Commercial Or Health Exceptions: The use of water is permitted at
the following establishments:
         a.   A commercial car wash.
         b.   A new or used motor vehicle dealership for the purpose of
preparing vehicles for sale.
         c.   A commercial motor vehicle body repair or paint shop for the
purpose of preparing vehicles or pursuant to a customer repair order.
         d.   Commercial aircraft maintenance not to exceed thirty (30) minutes
of water usage for each aircraft.
         e.   The Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of
Aeronautics during maintenance activities.
         f.   Commercial establishments for washing vehicles or equipment.
      3.   Fundraisers: An organization may conduct one fundraising car wash
event per year for one day with a permit issued by the Village Clerk. No fee
will be charged for the permit. The event shall be conducted in such a manner
to minimize water used.
   D.   Other Water Uses:
      1.   Where possible, and except where protection of the public health and
safety require otherwise, sewage effluent will be used to the extent it is
available and practical for street sweeping and routine sewer and inlet
cleaning.
      2.   All restaurants shall be requested to serve water to customers only
when specifically requested by the customer.
      3.   Users of water for consolidation of backfill, dust control,
resealing parking lots or other nonessential uses associated with the
construction shall be requested to use suitable allowances if any so exist.
   E.   Waste Of Water Prohibited: The following uses of water are defined as
"waste" of water and are prohibited:
      1.   Allowing water to run off to a street, gutter, ditch, or drain
during irrigation.
      2.   Failure to repair a controllable leak within a customer's property.
      3.   Operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making
similar use of water, except when used in connection with an aquatic landscape
installation that supports flora or fauna. The use of treated water to fill,
refill or maintain a level of any fountain is prohibited. Aquatic landscapes
described above can only be refilled or have water added on designated
irrigation days during permitted hours of water use.
   F.   Penalties:
      1.   Any retail water service customer who violates any provision of this
section regulating the use of water shall be subject to the following penalty:
         a.   First offense: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per occurrence.
         b.   Second offense: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per occurrence.
         c.   Third offense: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence and
service termination for two (2) days.
Payment of said penalty shall be made to the Village within ten (10) days of
receipt of the notice of violation. If no payment is made within ten (10) days
then the violator shall be subject to enforcement by ordinance violation
proceedings in the Circuit Court of the Seventh Judicial Circuit, Sangamon
County, Illinois.
      2.   Any retail water service customer to the Village who violates the
provisions of this section and fails to pay the appropriate penalty within ten
(10) days of receipt of the notice of violation shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 2012-9, 8-1-2012)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-3-3: Private Sewage Disposal Systems
8-3-4: Building Sewers And Connections
8-3-5: Discharges Into Public System
8-3-6: Interceptors
8-3-7: Wastewater Drainage
8-3-8: Sump Pump Drainage
8-3-9: Damage To, Obstruction Of System
8-3-10: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
8-3-11: Violation; Penalties
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as set out in this section. The term "shall" is
mandatory; the term "may" is permissible.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
Administrator: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection agency.
Federal Act: The federal clean water act, 33 USC 466 et seq., as amended (Pub.
L. 95-217).
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
Approving Authority: The village board of the village of Sherman.
SMSD: The Springfield metro sanitary district.
Village: The village of Sherman.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
administrator, or, where appropriated by the director, after enactment of the
federal clean water act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
section 402 of the federal act.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer,
including the connections therewith, or other place of disposal.
Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater,
stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
Grinder Pump System: The system of grinder pumps and pressure piping required
to move wastewater from building sewers to a gravity system manhole. The system
includes all electrical service, control panels, grinder pumps, basins,
pressure piping, valves, air release valves, and cleanouts required to operate
the system.
Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village. The term shall also include sewers within or outside the village
boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the
village sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with village funds.
Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater
or polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries stormwater, surface water and groundwater
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
Stormwater Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into the
sewers.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
Director: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
State Act: The Illinois anti-pollution bond act of 1970 1 .
State Grant: The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the "Build Illinois Program"
and for making such grants as filed with the secretary of state of the state of
Illinois.
TREATMENT:
Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
Wastewater Facilities: The structures, equipment, and process required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge; sometimes used as
synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or
"pollution control plant".
TYPES OF CHARGES:
Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the wastewater
facilities.
Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of
interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.) outstanding.
Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories,
or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were
designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
"replacement".
SMSD Charges: The charges established by the Springfield metro sanitary
district for providing wastewater treatment and permitting services to the
village. These charges include:
      Tap fee
      Service charge
      Treatment fee
      Tax levy
Sewerage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received
in the operation of the sewerage system.
Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated.
User Charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
Wastewater Service Charge: The charge per month levied on all users of the
wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in
section
8-3A-1 of this chapter and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge
and the debt service charge.
USER TYPES:
Commercial User: Shall include transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are
discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the village
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
Industrial User: Shall include establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or
substances into products.
Institutional/Governmental User: Shall include schools, churches, penal
institutions, and users associated with federal, state, and local governments.
Residential User: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments,
and permanent multi-family dwellings.
User Class: The type of user, "residential", "institutional/governmental",
"commercial", or "industrial" as defined in this section.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams
per liter.
Effluent Criteria: Are as defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
Fats, Oil Or Grease (FOG): Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes,
oils, and any other material that is extracted by trichlorotrifluoroethane
solvent.
Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted
to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any
natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand milliliters
(1,000 ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per
million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of
water and wastewater analysis.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA division of
laboratories manual of laboratory methods.
Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One "population equivalent" is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pound of BOD and 0.20
pound of suspended solids.
Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
Sewage: Is used interchangeably with "wastewater".
Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
Suspended Solids (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of "suspended solids"
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA division of
laboratories manual of laboratory methods.
Unpolluted Water: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria
in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality
standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and
wastewater treatment facilities provided.
Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it
may be a combination of the liquid carried and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together
with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present.
Water Quality Standards: Are as defined in the water pollution regulations of
Illinois.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body
of surface water or groundwater.
Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently. (1984 Code § 7-4-9)
 
Notes
1 1. 30 ILCS 405/1 et seq.
8-3-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Discharge Of Human And Animal Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the village or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the village, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
   B.   Discharges Into Natural Outlets: It shall be unlawful to discharge to
any natural outlet within the village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the village, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Private Systems: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful
to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   D.   Connection To Sewer System Required: The owner of all the houses,
buildings, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or
other purposes situated within the village is hereby required at his expense to
connect such structure or facility directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after
date of official notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within
seven hundred fifty feet (750') of the property line 1 . This requirement shall
not apply to existing residences on parcels of real estate of five (5) acres or
more. (1984 Code § 7-4-1)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 11-3C-3G1 and section
  11-5-8 of this code.
8-3-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
   A.   Private Systems Permitted: Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available under the provisions of subsection
8-3-2D of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. (1984
Code § 7-4-2)
   B.   Permit Required; Application; Fee: Before commencement of construction
of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a building
permit signed by the village. The application for such permit shall be made on
a form furnished by the village (reference appendix 2 attached to ordinance 88-
4 on file with the village clerk) which the applicant shall supplement with any
plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary by the village. A
permit and inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the
village at the time the application is filed. (1984 Code § 7-4-2; amd. 2010
Code)
   C.   Inspection And Approval By Village: A permit for a private sewage
disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed
to the satisfaction of the Illinois department of public health (IDPH), which
shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any
event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the IDPH when the work is
ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
(1984 Code § 7-4-2)
   D.   Specifications: The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private
sewage disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the state private
sewage disposal licensing act and code 1  and with the state environmental
protection agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural
outlet. (1984 Code § 7-4-2; amd. 2010 Code)
   E.   Connection To Public Sewer When Available: At such time as a public
sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal
system, as provided in subsection
8-3-2D of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
   F.   Operation Of Private System: The owner shall operate and maintain the
private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no
expense to the village.
   G.   Additional State Requirements: No statement contained in this section
shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be
imposed by the Illinois department of public health. (1984 Code § 7-4-2)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.
8-3-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit To Connect:
      1.   Permit Required: No person shall uncover, make any connections with
or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Springfield metro
sanitary district (SMSD) and the village.
      2.   Classes Of Permits; Applications: There shall be two (2) classes of
building sewer permits: a) for residential wastewater service; and b) for
commercial, institutional/governmental or industrial wastewater service. In
either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the SMSD (reference appendix 2 attached to ordinance 88-4 on file
with the village clerk).
   B.   Bond: Where any installation of sewer service, sewer lines, laterals,
etc., is to occur in any existing right of way or easement of the village, the
village, at its discretion, may require a performance bond or other adequate
assurance that the costs of construction will be paid and that the right of way
or easement will be restored to its original condition after completion of
construction.
   C.   Excavations: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
village. (1984 Code § 7-4-3)
   D.   Extension Of Sewer Line: The village shall not be obligated to extend
sewer lines or service to properties not served by the village sewer system on
January 1, 1988, unless the property owners shall pay the cost of installing
said sewer lines or service. Said installation shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications, plans and special provisions as used in the
construction of the village wastewater collection system, rules and regulations
of the SMSD or as subsequently directed by the village public works department.
   E.   Responsibility For Costs:
      1.   The village public works department shall be responsible for the
cost of all required maintenance on the village wastewater disposal system
owned by the village including all main line sewer pipes, manholes, valves,
service laterals and grinder pump systems located on public property or
easements attained for maintenance of the system. (1984 Code § 7-4-3; amd. 2010
Code)
      2.   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain
sewer service lines on private property which connect to village owned gravity
service laterals or grinder pump basins.
   F.   Discharges Into System: All disposal by any person into the sewer
system is unlawful except those discharges in compliance with federal standards
promulgated pursuant to the federal act, more stringent state standards and
limits of the SMSD ordinances.
   G.   Rules And Regulations: The village will follow the applicable
ordinances, rules and regulations of the Springfield metro sanitary district
with respect to matters over which the sanitary district has jurisdiction
including, but not limited to, the establishment and collection of connection
charges and fees, the issuance of connection permits, the establishment of
programs and charges for pretreatment of sewage, and the establishment and
collection of charges for treatment and related matters. (1984 Code § 7-4-3)
8-3-5: DISCHARGES INTO PUBLIC SYSTEM:
   A.   Stormwater And Surface Water Runoff:
      1.   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.
      2.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the village. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged, on approval of the village, to a storm sewer or
natural outlet.
   B.   Prohibited Discharges:
      1.   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation
or performance of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) or will pass
through the POTW.
      2.   No user shall contribute or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, any of the following described substances into a village sewer or
otherwise to the facilities of the SMSD:
         a.   Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction, to cause
fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the operation of the
POTW.
         b.   Solids or viscous substances, including fats, oil or grease,
which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
interference with the operation of the POTW.
         c.   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or an extreme base
condition or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the system.
         d.   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any
wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or
exceed the limitation set forth in national categorical pretreatment standards
promulgated by the USEPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act.
         e.   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either
singly or by interaction, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard
to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the district sewers for their
maintenance and repair.
         f.   Any substance which may cause the SMSD effluent or treatment
residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to
interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged
to the SMSD cause the SMSD to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal
criteria; the SMSD IEPA sludge disposal operating permit, guidelines or
regulations developed under section 405 of the act; or any criteria,
guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant
to the solid waste disposal act, the clean air act, the toxic substances
control act, or state standards applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
         g.   Any substance which will cause the SMSD to violate its NPDES
permit and/or other IEPA sludge disposal operating permits.
         h.   Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions.
         i.   Any wastewater having a temperature at the point of discharge to
the POTW which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant
resulting in interference. In no case shall wastewater be introduced to the
district facilities which exceeds sixty five degrees centigrade (65°C) (140°F)
at the SMSD treatment plant.
         j.   Any slug load.
         k.   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half life or concentration as exceeds limits established by the SMSD in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
         l.   Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
   C.   Industrial Discharges: Industrial users must comply with all applicable
ordinances of the SMSD. In addition, industrial wastes must be handled in a
manner which will create no local hazards or nuisances for workers or village
inhabitants. (1984 Code § 7-4-4)
8-3-6: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the SMSD, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the SMSD, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (1984 Code § 7-4-4)
8-3-7: WASTEWATER DRAINAGE:
   A.   Approval Required: No person or entity shall be permitted to discharge
drain water or wastewater from inside a residence or other structure by means
of an aboveground or belowground pipe except by discharge through an approved
water drainage system. Approvals will be granted by the village board or
designated official. Any person or entity who fails to comply with this
subsection shall be deemed guilty of a breach of this subsection and shall be
fined one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day of noncompliance constitutes a
separate breach.
   B.   Construction Permit Required; Conditions; Fee:
      1.   Permits for the construction of drainage systems designed to carry
the effluent from wastewater treatment systems will be approved, provided the
following conditions are met:
         a.   Effluent is discharged from a treatment system which has been
approved by the Illinois department of public health. Evidence of approval
shall be by letter from the department to the village board.
         b.   All effluent from private sewage disposal systems shall comply
with all applicable effluent standards of chapter 3, "Water Pollution", of the
regulations of the pollution control board, state environmental protection
agency.
         c.   All effluent discharged to the ground surface or to a watercourse
must be disinfected with chlorine or other disinfectant as approved by the
department of public health. A disinfectant residual between 0.2 and 0.75
milligrams per liter shall remain following a thirty (30) minute contact
period.
         d.   Plans for the drainage system shall be provided to the village
board for approval before construction begins.
         e.   The plans will be reviewed by the engineer for the village and
approved by the village board based on the following criteria:
            (1)   If possible, effluent will be drained in an underground
system to the nearest existing storm sewer catch basin.
            (2)   Surface drainage will utilize existing drainage easements and
be designed with respect for the rights of adjacent property and to minimize
adverse effects on the neighborhood.
            (3)   The system shall provide ready access for collecting effluent
samples for periodic testing.
            (4)   Trenches for drainage pipe within three feet (3') of the back
of street curbs shall be backfilled with sand.
            (5)   All material selected for use in the drainage system shall be
of sufficient strength and quality so as to limit maintenance.
            (6)   All public and private property and drainage easements shall
be restored to their condition prior to construction, or better.
         f.   The property owner accepts responsibility for the maintenance of
the wastewater drainage system.
      2.   To partially defray the cost of administering this subsection, a fee
of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be collected by the village board for
each wastewater drainage system permit issued. (1984 Code § 7-3-1)
8-3-8: SUMP PUMP DRAINAGE 1 :
   A.   Approval Required: No person or entity shall be permitted to discharge
sump pump waters from inside a residence or other structure, construction of
which commenced after January 6, 1980, by means of an aboveground or
belowground pipe except by discharge through an approved water drainage system.
Approvals shall be granted by the village board or designated official. Any
person or entity who fails to comply with this subsection shall be deemed
guilty of a breach of this subsection and shall be fined one hundred dollars
($100.00). Each day of noncompliance constitutes a separate breach.
   B.   Construction Permit Required; Conditions; Fee:
      1.   Permits for the construction of drainage systems designed to carry
discharge from sump pumps will be approved, provided the following conditions
are met:
         a.   The sump pump is designed to remove groundwater only from around
the foundation of the building to reduce hydraulic pressure on the foundation.
         b.   Plans for the drainage system shall be provided to the village
board for approval before construction begins.
         c.   The plans will be reviewed by the engineer for the village and
approved by the board based on the following criteria:
            (1)   No wastewater drains may be connected to the sump pump.
            (2)   Sump discharge pipe must be designed so surface water cannot
backflow into a basement if the pump fails.
            (3)   A hand hole must be provided at the property line to allow
periodic sampling of the sump discharge.
            (4)   Drainage must be accomplished by means of an underground
system which carries the sump discharge to the nearest existing storm sewer
catch basin.
            (5)   Trenches for drainage pipe within three feet (3') of the back
of street curbs shall be backfilled with sand.
            (6)   All material selected for use in the drainage system shall be
of sufficient strength and quality so as to limit maintenance.
            (7)   All public and private property and drainage easements shall
be restored to their condition prior to construction, or better.
         d.   The property owner accepts responsibility for the maintenance of
the sump water drainage system. (1984 Code § 7-3-2)
      2.   When the sump pump and discharge piping is installed with work under
another permit, no permit or fee will be required. When the sump pump or
discharge piping is added or modified on an existing property, a fee of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) shall be collected by the village. (1984 Code § 7-3-2;
amd. 2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  11-5-5A5 of this code.
8-3-9: DAMAGE TO, OBSTRUCTION OF SYSTEM:
   A.   No person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a
part of the sewage works.
   B.   The grinder pump pressure sewer system facilities located on private
property belong to the village and are not to be opened or tampered with in any
way without written approval of the village. These facilities include:
      1.   The grinder pump basin and all equipment contained therein.
      2.   The control panel and all equipment contained therein.
      3.   The electrical service panel located within privately or publicly
owned buildings.
      4.   Electrical service lines and conduits which are a part of the
system.
      5.   Pressure piping and valves located on private property. (1984 Code §
7-4-5)
8-3-10: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   Officials of the village and other duly authorized employees of the
village, the Springfield metro sanitary district, the Illinois environmental
protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection A of this section, officials of the village or duly authorized
employees of the village, the Springfield metro sanitary district, the Illinois
environmental protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
village employees, and the village shall indemnify the company against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company.
   C.   Officials of the village and other duly authorized employees of the
village, and the SMSD, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds an
easement or operates its sewer system for the purpose of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with
the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved or the
rights of the village and SMSD under the statutes and laws of the state. (1984
Code § 7-4-6)
8-3-11: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation; Time For Compliance: Any person found to be
violating any provision of this chapter, except section
8-3-9, shall be notified by the village with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit of not less than fifteen
(15) days for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within
the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: The village may revoke any permit for sewage
disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter. Notice
shall be deemed to have been given under this section when mailed to the
property owner, postage prepaid, at the address of the property where the
violation has allegedly occurred. (1984 Code § 7-4-7)
   C.   Penalty: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided for in subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each day in
which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(1984 Code § 7-4-7; amd. 2010 Code)
   D.   Liability For Violations: Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be liable to the village by reason of such violation for any
damages suffered by the village as a result of such violation. (1984 Code § 7-
4-7)
ARTICLE A. WASTEWATER SERVICE FEES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
8-3A-1: Charges And Fees Established
8-3A-2: Bills For Service; Liability For Charges; Late Payments
8-3A-3: Lien Provisions
8-3A-4: Disposition Of Revenues
8-3A-5: Accounts And Reports
8-3A-6: Access To Records
8-3A-7: Bankruptcies
8-3A-1: CHARGES AND FEES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Basis For Wastewater Service Charges:
      1.   The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service
supplied by the wastewater facilities of the Village shall consist of a basic
user charge for operation and maintenance, plus replacement and capital cost
charge composed of a debt service charge.
      2.   The debt service charge is computed by dividing the annual debt
service of all outstanding bonds by the number of users. Through further
divisions, the monthly debt service charges can be computed. Reasonable charges
for administering debt service costs may be added to the debt service charge.
      3.   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters. It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs, plus
replacement, and shall be computed as follows:
         a.   Estimate wastewater volume.
         b.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund for the year,
for all works categories.
         c.   Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance and replacement
(OM&R) costs to each user class by volume.
         d.   Proportion the estimated OM&R costs to wastewater facility
categories by volume.
         e.   Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal sewage
strength.
      4.   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed, not
less often than annually, by certified public accountants for the Village in
their annual audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised
periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or a change in
operation and maintenance costs including replacement costs.
      5.   The users of wastewater treatment services will be notified
annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of
the user charges which is attributable to the wastewater treatment operation,
maintenance and replacement.
   B.   Measurement Of Flow:
      1.   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges shall be
the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of one
thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof.
      2.   If the customer discharging wastes into the public sewers procures
any part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by
the Village for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from
these other sources.
      3.   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the Village if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered
water consumption records.
      4.   Metering devices, if necessary, for determining the volume of waste
shall be installed, owned, and maintained by the customer. Following approval
and installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is cancelled,
without the consent of the Village.
   C.   Local Capital Cost Charge Composed Of Debt Service Charge: A variable
debt service charge will be based on the annual debt service and costs for
administration of debt service. (1984 Code § 7-4-8-1)
   D.   User Rates And Charges: The following rates and charges are hereby
established for customers of the sewer system of the Village, in accordance
with the user charge system established by the engineers for the Village in
cooperation and compliance with the regulations of the Environmental Protection
Agency:
      1.   Minimum User Charge: Each customer shall pay a minimum user charge
of twenty dollars fifty four cents ($20.54) per month for the first two
thousand (2,000) gallons. For each additional one thousand (1,000) gallons or
fraction thereof, the customer shall pay an additional sum of six dollars
twenty seven cents ($6.27).
      2.   Charges Are Additional: Charges established by this subsection shall
be in addition to any charges or taxes levied by the Springfield Metropolitan
Sanitary District (SMSD), or any other governmental body. Rates shall be
reviewed on at least an annual basis and adjusted, if necessary, to adequately
cover the costs of operation of the Village sewer system including necessary
maintenance and reserve funds and costs necessary for the payment of all bond
indebtedness. (Ord. 2016-15, 8-16-2016, eff. 8-16-2016)
   E.   Computation Of Charges:
      1.   The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following
formula:
CW = CD + CM + (Vu-X) CU
Where:
CW = Amount of waste service charge ($) per billing period.
CD = Debt service charge (subsection C of this section) if applicable.
CM = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection D of
     this section).
Vu = Wastewater volume for the billing period.
X  = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge (subsection D of
     this section).
CU = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection D
     of this section).
 
      2.   The calculations and resulting charges for debt service, minimum
user rate, and basic user rate are shown in appendix 3 attached to ordinance
88-4 on file with the Village Clerk. These charges shall be updated
periodically as described in subsection A of this section.
   F.   Tap-On Fees And Charges:
      1.   New Subdivisions: In all new subdivisions and in existing
subdivisions where the developer has provided sewer service, the following
shall be applicable:
         a.   Builders or property owners will provide SMSD tap fee and
installation cost of sewer service as part of building cost.
         b.   Owner will pay charges for operation, maintenance and replacement
as set forth in subsection D of this section.
         c.   The debt service charge set forth in subsection C of this section
will not apply to these sewer system customers connecting under this subsection
F1. (1984 Code § 7-4-8-1)
         d.   All sewer construction provided by the builder or owner in
providing sewer service will be done according to the specifications, plans and
special provisions as used in construction of the Village wastewater collection
system, the rules and regulations of the SMSD or as subsequently directed by
the Village Public Works Department. (1984 Code § 7-4-8-1; amd. 2010 Code)
      2.   Existing Lots And Subdivisions: In existing lots and subdivisions
served by extensions to the sewer system provided by the Village, the following
shall be applicable:
         a.   On the gravity portion of the sewer system, the Village will make
a service lateral or connection site available to the property owner or builder
adjacent to the owner's property. The builder or owner shall be responsible for
the installation of the remainder of the sewer service to the property at the
builder's or owner's expense and in accord with the provisions of subsection
F2f of this section.
         b.   If a grinder pump is required for service which is not in place,
the village will install and pay for the costs of installation of the grinder
pump, basin, control panel, electrical service, pressure line, service
connection to the main sewer, and electric lines and conduits. The builder or
owner shall give the village all permanent or temporary easements necessary for
the installation, operation and maintenance of said grinder pump station. The
builder or owner shall be responsible for any other costs of installation and
maintenance not specifically undertaken by the village.
         c.   In all cases, the builder or owner will pay the SMSD tap fee and
the cost of installation of sewer service from the building to either the sewer
lateral at the property line or the grinder pump basin as part of building
cost. Proof of this payment shall be presented to the village at the time of
application for the building permit.
         d.   Owner will pay the charge for operation, maintenance, and
replacement as set forth in subsection D of this section.
         e.   The debt service charge set forth in subsection C of this section
shall apply to these sewer system customers connecting under this subsection
F2. (1984 Code § 7-4-8-1)
         f.   All sewer construction provided by the builder or owner in
providing sewer service will be done according to the specifications, plans and
special provisions as used in construction of the village wastewater collection
system, the rules and regulations of the SMSD, or as subsequently directed by
the village public works department.
      3.   Payment Of Fees And Bond Required: No occupancy permit will be
issued by the village unless and until all fees required by this section shall
be paid and collected by the village, or the SMSD as required, and any
performance bond or other assurances of performance have been duly furnished to
the village. (1984 Code § 7-4-8-1; amd. 2010 Code)
      4.   Rights Reserved: Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to
limit the rights of bond holders with respect to bonds issued by the village or
the right of the village to levy taxes or other charges to pay the costs of
outstanding indebtedness with respect to revenue bonds or general obligation
bonds issued or to be issued to finance construction, maintenance and operation
of the village sewer system. (1984 Code § 7-4-8-1)
   G.   Appeals: The method for computation of rates and service charges
established for user charges in subsections C, D, E and F of this section shall
be made available to a user within ten (10) days of receipt of a written
request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or in the computations
thereof shall be reviewed by the village within thirty (30) days after
notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies. Notice
shall be addressed to the village clerk at the Village Hall, 401 St. John's
Drive, Sherman, IL 62684. (1984 Code § 7-4-8-4)
8-3A-2: BILLS FOR SERVICE; LIABILITY FOR CHARGES; LATE PAYMENTS:
   A.   The rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly or quarterly
depending on the classification of service for which bills are rendered. The
owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall
be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises, and
the service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition
that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly
and severally liable therefor to the village.
   B.   Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the village of
Williamsville at the same time as monthly water bills are sent out by the
village of Williamsville. All sewer bills are due and payable at the same time
as said water bills. Penalties and charges will be added to past due sewer
bills and charges in the same amounts and at the same rates as penalties and
charges are added to past due water bills and charges. (1984 Code § 7-4-8-2)
8-3A-3: LIEN PROVISIONS:
Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for forty five (45) days after
it has been rendered, the village may file with the county recorder of deeds a
statement of lien claim. This statement shall comply with the requirements for
liens for sewer service set forth in the Illinois municipal code and subject to
foreclosure in accordance with applicable statutes of the state. (1984 Code §
7-4-8-2)
8-3A-4: DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
   A.   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund. All
such revenues and monies shall be held by the Village Treasurer separate and
apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the
Village, and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be
delivered to the Village Treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of
the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be
directed by the President and Board of Trustees.
   B.   The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage
system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system
as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the
fund designated as the "Sewerage Fund of the Village of Sherman". The Treasurer
shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by the
Statutes of the State. (1984 Code § 7-4-8-2)
8-3A-5: ACCOUNTS AND REPORTS:
   A.   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and
at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
   B.   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be
recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons of water used for the current fiscal
year.
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
      3.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      4.   Number of users connected to the system.
      5.   A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial wastes and
volume of waste discharged. (1984 Code § 7-4-8-2)
8-3A-6: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers and records of the Village which are applicable to the
Village system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination,
excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the
State grant. (1984 Code § 7-4-8-2)
8-3A-7: BANKRUPTCIES:
Sewer service shall not be discontinued to any customer who becomes a debtor
under the United States Bankruptcy Code solely on the basis of a debt owed by
any customer for service rendered prior to the entry of any order for relief
under the provisions of the Bankruptcy Code; provided, however, that continued
service shall be conditioned upon payment to the Village of a deposit equal to
three (3) times the average monthly charge for the three (3) months immediately
prior to the entry of the order for relief or for such other adequate assurance
of payment that the Village shall deem appropriate consistent with the
requirements of Federal law. (1984 Code § 7-4-8-2)
CHAPTER 4
CURBSIDE RECYCLING PROGRAM
SECTION:
8-4-1: Created
8-4-2: Participation In Program
8-4-3: Placement And Pick Up Of Bins
8-4-4: Prohibited Removal Or Scavenging
8-4-5: Rules
8-4-6: Penalty
8-4-1: CREATED:
A curbside recycling program is hereby created in the village. The program
shall begin on or after January 1, 1993. The program shall allow for the pick
up of recyclable materials by one or more waste haulers. "Recyclable materials"
include, but are not limited to, old newspapers, soft drink containers made
from high density polyethylene (HDPE), milk jugs made from polyethylene
terephthalate (PETE), bimetal food and beverage cans, aluminum, clear glass,
brown glass and green glass. (Ord. 1993-3, 4-6-1993)
8-4-2: PARTICIPATION IN PROGRAM:
   A.   Residents: Participation by residents shall be promoted by free
distribution of one recycling bin to each residence. However, participation by
residents shall be voluntary, not mandatory.
   B.   Waste Haulers: No waste hauler shall operate or conduct business within
the village unless such waste hauler participates in the village recycling
program as established by this chapter, as amended from time to time. (Ord.
1993-3, 4-6-1993)
8-4-3: PLACEMENT AND PICK UP OF BINS:
   A.   All recyclable materials shall be placed in bins provided by the
village.
   B.   Such materials shall be picked up at curbside, or if a resident has
paid the waste hauler for special service, at another location on the
resident's premises.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to set out recyclable materials for
collection more than twenty four (24) hours before the expected time of
collection. (Ord. 1993-3, 4-6-1993)
8-4-4: PROHIBITED REMOVAL OR SCAVENGING:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of the property upon
which the recycling bin is located or an employee of any authorized waste
hauler, to remove or scavenge recyclable materials from any resident's
recycling bin or other recycling container. (Ord. 1993-3, 4-6-1993)
8-4-5: RULES:
The village shall from time to time make rules consistent with this chapter for
the orderly, safe and sanitary operation of the program. Such rules and
amendments shall be published, as enacted, in pamphlet form as provided by the
Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 1993-3, 4-6-1993)
8-4-6: PENALTY:
Any person who violates subsection
8-4-2B or 8-4-3C or section
8-4-4 of this chapter may be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code per offense. Each violation shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 1993-3, 4-6-1993; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 5
UTILITY FACILITIES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Facilities Underground
8-5-2: Overhead Facilities Prohibited
8-5-1: FACILITIES UNDERGROUND:
   A.   Effective January 1, 2011, it shall be unlawful, except as specifically
provided herein, for any person or utility to erect or construct poles,
overhead wires and associated overhead structures to supply electric,
communication or other similar or associated service to any area, whether
platted or not platted within the corporate boundaries of the village of
Sherman.
   B.   The subdivider, developer or owner of any real property, or any portion
thereof, shall make the necessary arrangements for the installation of
underground facilities, including circuits for streetlights and traffic signals
that may be required by the village. Such arrangements shall be made with each
of the companies or entities supplying the electrical and/or communications
service as shall have been approved by the village. A letter from each of the
service providers shall be submitted to the village of Sherman indicating that
arrangements have been made for the burial of the utility in question.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter will prevent a subdivider, developer or owner
of any real property located within the village from making arrangements with a
private contractor for the installation of the underground utility provided the
contractor is qualified and meets the approval of the utility company and
provided the installation meets the specifications and requirements of the
utility company and the village. (Ord. 2010-19, 12-21-2010)
8-5-2: OVERHEAD FACILITIES PROHIBITED:
The village requires that main traffic corridors, entrances to developments and
shopping areas, and highly visible public areas be free from overhead utility
lines, utility poles, communication towers, and other associated overhead
utility structures as provided in section
8-5-1 of this chapter, except as follows:
   A.   Temporary and emergency utility lines shall not be subject to
underground installation requirements. For the purpose of this section, a
"temporary utility line" will be defined as an installation that will be in
place less than twelve (12) months.
   B.   Utilities, subdividers, developers or owners may petition the village
for an exception to the underground installation requirements for new utilities
on a case by case basis as follows:
      1.   The village board shall have sole authority to hear and grant
underground utility installation exceptions. Among other factors, the village
board will consider the following criteria when judging underground utility
installation exceptions:
         a.   Location of the proposed utility.
         b.   Visibility of the utility from high traffic locations.
         c.   Existing and proposed use of the adjacent property.
      2.   All petitions for underground installation exception shall include
the following documents:
         a.   Location map showing the utility installation.
         b.   Detailed submission of pole heights, pole type and material,
spacing of poles, structure height, and all other pertinent information.
         c.   Ground level photographs of the existing area where utility poles
and structures will be installed.
         d.   Detailed discussion of the reason(s) for construction of aerial
rather than underground installation. (Ord. 2010-19, 12-21-2010)
CHAPTER 6
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose And Scope
8-6-2: Definitions
8-6-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
8-6-4: Collocation Requirements And Conditions
8-6-5: Dispute Resolution
8-6-6: Indemnification
8-6-7: Insurance
8-6-8: Severability
8-6-9: Effective Date
8-6-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Act.
   B.   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances
or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
   C.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws
or regulations. (Ord. 2018-08, 8-21-2018)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
 
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
         radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
                                        Uniform building, fire, electrical,
                                        plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted
APPLICABLE CODES:                       by a recognized national code
                                        organization or local amendments to
                                        those codes, including the National
                                        Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT:                              Any person who submits an application
                                        and is a wireless provider.
                                        A request submitted by an applicant to
                                        the Village for a permit to collocate
                                        small wireless facilities, and a
APPLICATION:                            request that includes the installation
                                        of a new utility pole for such
                                        collocation, as well as any applicable
                                        fee for the review of such application.
                                        To install, mount, maintain, modify,
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION:               operate, or replace wireless facilities
                                        on or adjacent to a wireless support
                                        structure or utility pole.
                                        Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
                                        522(6), as amended; information
                                        service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
                                        (24), as amended; telecommunications
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE:                 service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
                                        (53), as amended; mobile service, as
                                        defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as
                                        amended; or wireless service other than
                                        mobile service.
                                        A cable operator, as defined in 47
                                        U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider
                                        of information service, as defined in
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER:        47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a
                                        telecommunications carrier, as defined
                                        in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a
                                        wireless provider.
FCC:                                    The Federal Communications Commission
                                        of the United States.
FEE:                                    A one-time charge.
                                        A building, property, or site, or group
                                        of buildings, properties, or sites that
                                        are either (i) listed in the National
                                        Register of Historic Places or formally
                                        determined eligible for listing by the
                                        Keeper of the National Register, the
                                        individual who has been delegated the
                                        authority by the federal agency to list
                                        properties and determine their
                                        eligibility for the National Register,
                                        in accordance with Section VI.D. 1 .a.i
                                        through Section VI.D.I .a.v of the
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
                                        codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C;
                                        or (ii) designated as a locally
                                        landmarked building, property, site, or
                                        historic district by an ordinance
                                        adopted by the Village pursuant to a
                                        preservation program that meets the
                                        requirements of the Certified Local
                                        Government Program of the Illinois
                                        State Historic Preservation Office or
                                        where such certification of the
                                        preservation program by the Illinois
                                        State Historic Preservation Office is
                                        pending.
 
LAW:                     A federal or State statute, common law, code, rule,
                         regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
                         A small wireless facility that is not larger in
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in
                         width, and 12 inches in height and that has an
                         exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE:  A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in
                         public rights-of-way.
                         A written authorization required by the Village to
PERMIT:                  perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a
                         project.
                         An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
PERSON:                  partnership, association, trust, or other entity or
                         organization.
                         The functional division of the federal government, the
                         State, a unit of local government, or a special
                         purpose district located in whole or in part within
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY:    this State, that provides or has authority to provide
                         firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
                         emergency services to respond to and manage emergency
                         incidents.
RATE:                    A recurring charge.
                         The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
RIGHT-OF-WAY:            highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility
                         easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way
                         does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
                         A wireless facility that meets both of the following
                         qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an
                         enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in volume or,
                         in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
                         the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit
                         within an imaginary enclosure of no more than 6 cubic
                         feet; and (ii) all other wireless equipment attached
                         directly to a utility pole associated with the
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in
                         volume.
                         The following types of associated ancillary equipment
                         are not included in the calculation of equipment
                         volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
                         telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based
                         enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
                         switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
                         the connection of power and other services.
 
 
                                  A pole or similar structure that is used in
                                  whole or in part by a communications service
UTILITY POLE:                     provider or for electric distribution,
                                  lighting, traffic control, or a similar
                                  function.
                                  Equipment at a fixed location that enables
                                  wireless communications between user
                                  equipment and a communications network,
                                  including: (i) equipment associated with
                                  wireless communications; and (ii) radio
                                  transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-
                                  optic cable, regular and backup power
                                  supplies, and comparable equipment,
                                  regardless of technological configuration.
WIRELESS FACILITY:                Wireless facility includes small wireless
                                  facilities. Wireless facility does not
                                  include: (i) the structure or improvements
                                  on, under, or within which the equipment is
                                  collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul
                                  facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that
                                  is between wireless support structures or
                                  utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic
                                  cable that is otherwise not immediately
                                  adjacent to or directly associated with an
                                  antenna.
                                  Any person authorized to provide
                                  telecommunications service in the State that
                                  builds or installs wireless communication
                                  transmission equipment, wireless facilities,
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: wireless support structures, or utility poles
                                  and that is not a wireless services provider
                                  but is acting as an agent or a contractor for
                                  a wireless services provider for the
                                  application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER:                A wireless infrastructure provider or a
                                  wireless services provider.
                                  Any services provided to the general public,
                                  including a particular class of customers,
WIRELESS SERVICES:                and made available on a nondiscriminatory
                                  basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum,
                                  whether at a fixed location or mobile,
                                  provided using wireless facilities.
 
 
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
                            A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
                            tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard;
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: or other existing or proposed structure designed to
                            support or capable of supporting wireless
                            facilities. Wireless support structure does not
                            include a utility pole. (Ord. 2018-08, 8-21-2018)
 
8-6-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
Section
8-6-4  paragraph I. regarding Height Exceptions Or Variances, but not subject
to zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any
zoning district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively
for commercial or industrial use.
   B.   Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the
Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      1.   A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the
Village, together with the Village's small cell facilities permit application,
as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities
on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
         a.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, makeready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         b.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         c.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
         d.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         e.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         f.   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
         g.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      2.   Application Process: The Village shall process applications as
follows:
         a.   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         b.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to
approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of
a completed application.
            (1)   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than seventy-five (75) days after the submission of a completed
application.
            (2)   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th
day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         c.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or
deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission
of a completed application.
            (1)   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed
application.
            (2)   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the
120th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after
the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the
deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit
request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         d.   The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
            (1)   If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances
or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
            (2)   The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including
the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
Village denies an application.
            (3)   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the
Village and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after
notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional
application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application
within thirty (30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is
deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30)
days of denial shall require the application to submit a new application with
applicable fees, and recommencement of the Village's review period.
            (4)   The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its
intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis,
which may be submitted with the revised application.
            (5)   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
         e.   Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an
approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility
pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment
agreement, provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a municipal
utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate
on a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village and the
applicant shall enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment
agreement.
      3.   Completeness Of Application:
         a.   Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the
Village shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the
applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically
identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if
the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30)
days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the
Village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the
Village.
         b.   Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends
the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
      4.   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         a.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
Village; or
         b.   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      5.   Consolidated Applications:
         a.   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities
within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at the applicant's
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the collocation of up to twenty-five (25) small wireless facilities if the
collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless
facility and substantially the same type of structure.
         b.   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities,
the Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the
application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which
incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for
consolidated treatment or that are denied. The Village may issue separate
permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
      6.   Duration Of Permits:
         a.   The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than
five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless
the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or
modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village codes or any
provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
         b.   If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein,
renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable Village code provisions
or regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
      7.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal
delivery at the Village's designated place of business, by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail. (Ord. 2018-08, 8-21-2018)
8-6-4: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably
determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
   B.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
   C.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
      1.   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the
type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public
safety agency's communications equipment.
      2.   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
      3.   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
      4.   The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility
based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with
the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
   D.   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric
supply zone of the pole.
      1.   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
      2.   For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   E.   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local
code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
   F.   The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that
are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a Village
ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village, a comprehensive plan or other
written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way,
including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
   G.   Alternate Placements:
      1.   Except as provided in this collocation requirements and conditions
section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocation small
wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles,
or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole.
However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless
facility associated with a new utility pole, the Village may propose that the
small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed
collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the
alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate
location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material
costs as determined by the applicant.
      2.   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
   H.   Height Limitations:
      1.   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support structure on
which the small wireless facility is collocated.
      2.   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on
which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
         b.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
   I.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height for a
new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the
small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply
for a special use permit, variance or administrative waiver, in conformance
with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in Village ordinances.
   J.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   K.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply
with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
   L.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
   M.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by makeready work for a municipal utility pole
or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   N.   Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
      1.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
      2.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
      3.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      4.   The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         a.   Routine maintenance;
         b.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with Section
8-6-3 B.1.d. titled Application Requirements; or
         c.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      5.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   O.   Exceptions To Applicability:
      1.   Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small
wireless facilities on:
         a.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled
by the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
         b.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
         c.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-
7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public
commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of
the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public
commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do
not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless
facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the
Public Utilities Act.
      2.   For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the
meaning given to that term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any
requirement (a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer
cable service or video service or (b) to obtain any required permission to
install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than
small wireless facilities subject to this chapter.
   P.   Pre-Existing Agreements:
      1.   Existing agreements between the Village and wireless providers that
relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility
poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small
wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to
applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject to
applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
      2.   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village
on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the
Village makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small
wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the
collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application
submitted two (2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by
notifying the Village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The
existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination
provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has
collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to
the Village before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its
option under this paragraph.
   Q.   Annual Recurring Rate:
      1.   A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring
rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole located
in a right-of-way that equals (i) two hundred dollars ($200) per year or (ii)
the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use
of space on the Village utility pole.
      2.   If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and
direct costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200) payable on the first
day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice
of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   R.   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after receipt of notice from the Village notifying the wireless
provider of the abandonment.
      1.   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
      2.   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if
it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
Village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider. (Ord. 2018-08, 8-21-2018)
8-6-5: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Sangamon County, Illinois shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for
collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the
right-of-way, the Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on
its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200) per year
per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution
of the dispute. (Ord. 2018-08, 8-21-2018)
8-6-6: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability. (Ord. 2018-08, 8-21-2018)
8-6-7: INSURANCE:
   A.   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
      1.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
      2.   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      3.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
   B.   The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification
and documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility .
   C.   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider
that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to
comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this
section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 2018-08, 8-21-
2018)
8-6-8: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter that can be
given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid
provision or invalid application of this chapter is severable. (Ord. 2018-08,
8-21-2018)
8-6-9: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect on the 21st day of August, 2018.
(Ord. 2018-08, 8-21-2018)
TITLE 9
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Permit Requirements
9-1-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 1 :
   A.   Building And Occupancy And Use Permits Required: No structure shall be
erected and subsequently used or occupied unless a building permit has been
obtained prior to construction, and unless occupancy and use permits are
obtained prior to the use and occupancy of that structure.
   B.   Compliance With Village Regulations:
      1.   Prior to the issuance of the building permit or the subsequent
issuance of the use and occupancy permit, and as a condition precedent to the
issuance thereof, all ordinances and regulations of the village shall be
complied with that relate to building codes, land subdivisions and use
ordinances, zoning ordinances and utility service ordinances (including sewer
and water) as said ordinances affect the premises or structure for which said
building or use and occupancy permits are sought. (1984 Code §
4-3-1; amd. Ord. 2011-9, 7-5-2011)
      2.   The following inspections are required to be performed during
construction of any commercial building in the village:
         a.   The following inspections will be performed by a designated
representative of the village:
            (1)   Zoning and drainage of the proposed improvement prior to
issuance of a building permit. Owner must locate and stake out all property
corners and proposed building footprint.
            (2)   Footing inspection prior to pouring footings. Owner must
notify village twenty four (24) hours before inspection is needed.
            (3)   Periodic site inspections for erosion and temporary drainage
as determined.
            (4)   Final site inspection upon completion of site work, including
the parking lot, drives, entrance, signage, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, water
connection, electrical connection, fencing, etc.
            (5)   Occupancy permit/final inspection. Owner must notify village
twenty four (24) hours before inspection is needed.
            (6)   The village of Sherman reserves the right to enter the site
and conduct any inspection of the building or the site during construction. The
property owner or the owner's designated agent will provide access and
accommodate all inspections.
         b.   The following inspections will be performed by an independent
qualified building inspector (as defined below) contracted by the property
owner or his agent:
            (1)   Plumbing ground work inspection, if applicable, must be
completed before the concrete floor is poured.
            (2)   Electrical ground work inspection, if applicable, must be
completed before the concrete floor is poured.
            (3)   Plumbing, electrical and mechanical rough in inspections must
be completed before drywall or plaster walls or ceilings are installed.
            (4)   Electrical service entrance.
            (5)   Fireplace inspection must be completed before drywall or
plaster walls or ceilings are installed.
            (6)   Framing inspection must be completed before insulation,
drywall, or plaster is installed.
            (7)   Insulation inspection must be completed before drywall or
plaster walls and ceilings are installed.
            (8)   Final inspection of all plumbing, electrical, mechanical,
doors, windows, and hardware when all systems are installed, functioning, and
fully operational. Floor coverings, painting, and cosmetic finishes are not
required for final inspection.
            (9)   The independent qualified building inspector will file
certified inspection results with the village no later than forty eight (48)
hours after each inspection.
            (10)   Final inspections must be complete before an occupancy
permit will be issued.
         c.   The independent qualified building inspector shall have one or
more of the following qualifications:
            (1)   Certified by the state of Illinois to be a qualified building
inspector.
            (2)   Certified by a nationally recognized building official
certification organization.
            (3)   Qualified by an apprentice program certified by the bureau of
apprentice training. (Ord. 2011-9, 7-5-2011)
   C.   Required Information:
      1.   Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall
furnish the following to the satisfaction of the village:
         a.   Minimum Foundation Elevation:
            (1)   The top of any exterior foundation shall extend a minimum of
one and one-half feet (1.5') above the lowest elevation of the street gutter
adjacent to the lot or a minimum of one and one- half feet (1.5') above the
lowest elevation of any drainage swale adjacent to the lot.
            (2)   The top of any exterior foundation shall extend a minimum of
eight inches (8") above the final surface of the ground immediately adjacent to
the foundation.
         b.   Slope Adjacent To Buildings: The grade away from exterior
foundation walls shall fall a minimum of six inches (6") within the first ten
feet (10'), except as restricted by lot lines where the fall will be a minimum
of six inches (6") regardless of the horizontal distance available.
         c.   Minimum Garage Floor Elevation: The finished garage floor
elevation shall be a minimum of one foot (1.0') above the lowest elevation of
the street gutter adjacent to the lot or a minimum of one foot (1.0') above the
lowest elevation of any drainage swale adjacent to the lot.
         d.   Walkout Basement And Basement Egress Windows: In the absence of
other requirements, finished basement floor elevations or sill elevations for
basement egress windows shall be a minimum of one and one-half feet (1.5')
above the lowest elevation of any other portion of the lot.
         e.   Maximum Foundation Elevation: Excessive fills should be avoided.
The following criteria will be used to evaluate lots where fill is used to
raise the lot:
            (1)   Fill which alters or blocks drainage swales will not be
allowed.
            (2)   Driveway slopes from street to garage should not be steeper
than ten percent (10%).
            (3)   The maximum height above the curb for all foundations shall
be thirty six inches (36"), unless prior written approval is obtained from the
building official.
         f.   Existing Drainage Pattern: Site grading shall not alter or block
the existing drainage pattern. Drainage swales must be maintained. Cross
section and slopes of drainage swales shall not be altered. No change to the
location or quantity of surface water entering or leaving the lot will be
allowed.
      2.   Each building permit shall be required to provide satisfactory
documentation and evidence of compliance with the following codes, and the
following codes are hereby adopted:
2006 International building code;
2006 International residential code - one- and two- family buildings;
2005 National electric code;
2000 Life Safety Code, NFPA 101;
2006 International Property Maintenance Code;
Illinois Plumbing Code; and
Illinois Accessibility Code. (Ord. 2009-26, 8-18-2009)
   D.   Penalties:
      1.   Building Permit: Any person or entity commencing or altering a
structure without a building permit shall be subject to a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day for which a building permit is not
obtained shall constitute an additional offense. The person or entity subject
to a fine shall be the person or entity defined as the builder or contractor on
the building permit application. No builder or contractor shall initiate
construction or alteration of a structure until the building permit is
obtained. Nothing herein shall limit any other remedies the Village may have in
law or equity against any person or entity commencing or altering a structure
without a building permit.
      2.   Occupancy Permit: Any person or entity using or occupying a
structure, which has been constructed or altered such that a building permit
was required, prior to the issuance of an occupancy or use permit shall be
subject to a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense,
said fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
Each day for which a use and occupancy permit is not obtained shall constitute
an additional offense. In addition, any builder or contractor that allows
occupancy of a structure until the occupancy permit is obtained shall be liable
for a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, said fine
not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day
for which a use and occupancy permit is not obtained shall constitute an
additional offense. Nothing herein shall limit any other remedies the Village
may have in law or equity against any person or entity occupying or using a
structure that has not first been issued an occupancy permit. (Ord. 2013-8, 7-
2-2013)
 
Notes
  1. See also section
1 10-3-2 and subsection
  10-3-7B of this code.
CHAPTER 2
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Code Adopted
9-2-2: Amendments To Code
9-2-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The document, copies of which are on file with the village clerk, being marked
and designated as the international property maintenance code, as published by
the International Code Council, Inc., and as attached to the ordinance codified
herein as exhibit A, is hereby adopted as the Sherman property maintenance code
for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Sherman property maintenance code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
9-2-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-10, 4-21-2009)
9-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the code adopted in section
9-2-1 of this chapter are amended as follows:
Section 101.1 Amend all references to the code to mean the Sherman property
maintenance code.
Section 103.6 All references throughout the code that refer to any fee shall be
subject to the following: "The fees for all activities and services performed
by the village in carrying out this code shall be as provided by the village
board by separate ordinance."
Section 104.1 All references throughout the code that refer to the code
official shall include the following: "The code official may, with the consent
of the village president and the board of trustees, refer matters arising under
this code for enforcement by intergovernmental agreement to Sangamon County."
Section 111 Amend by adding the following: "All appeals of any order, decision
or other determination made by the code official shall be heard by the village
board."
(Ord. 2009-10, 4-21-2009)
CHAPTER 3
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Definition
9-3-2: Nuisance Declared
9-3-3: Dangerous Buildings Prohibited
9-3-4: Abatement Procedures
9-3-5: Additional Enforcement Powers
9-3-6: Abatement Costs
9-3-7: Penalty
9-3-1: DEFINITION:
The term "dangerous building", as used in this chapter, is hereby defined to
mean and include:
   A.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which is dangerous
to the public health because of its construction or condition, or which may
cause or aid in the spread of disease or cause injury to the health of the
occupants of said building or of neighboring structures;
   B.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of
faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard;
   C.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, by reason
of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
liable to cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any
part of such a structure; and
   D.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of
its condition or because of lack of doors or windows, is available to and
frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of
such structure. (1984 Code §
4-1-1)
9-3-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any "dangerous building", as defined in section
9-3-1 of this chapter, in the village is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance. (1984 Code §
4-1-2)
9-3-3: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the village, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or
person in custody or possession of any dangerous building to permit the same to
remain in a dangerous condition, or to occupy such building or permit it to be
occupied while such building is or remains in a dangerous condition. (1984 Code
§ 4-1-3)
9-3-4: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice To Abate: Whenever the trustee of public health and environment
or any officer or employee of the village shall be of the opinion that any
building or structure in the village is a dangerous building, such person shall
file a written statement to this effect with the village clerk. The village
clerk shall thereupon cause written notice to be served upon the owner thereof,
and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by registered or certified mail, or by
personal service. Such notice shall state that the building has been declared
to be in a dangerous condition, that such dangerous condition must be removed
or remedied by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing it and that
the condition must be remedied at once. Such notice may be in the following
form: (1984 Code § 4-1-4; amd. 2010 Code)
TO                             (owner-occupant of the premises) of the premises
known and described as                          .
You are hereby notified that (describe building) on the premises above
described has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after
inspection by                          .
The causes for this decision are (insert facts as to the dangerous condition).
You must remedy this condition or demolish the building immediately, or the
Village will proceed to do so at your expense.
(1984 Code § 4-1-4)
   B.   Failure To Abate; Abatement By Village: If the person receiving such
notice has not complied therewith within fifteen (15) days from the time when
the notice is served upon such person by personal service or by registered or
certified mail, the trustee for public health and environment may proceed to
remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous building after applying to the
circuit court for an appropriate order under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-31-1 et seq., as amended. (See also subsection
9-3-5B of this chapter.) (1984 Code § 4-1-4; amd. 2010 Code)
   C.   Unknown Owner: If the owner of the premises concerned is unknown, or if
his address is unknown, service of any notice provided for in this chapter may
be made by posting a copy thereof on the premises and by publishing a copy
thereof one time in a newspaper published or circulated within the village.
(1984 Code § 4-1-5)
   D.   Appeals: The owner or other person interested in such building or
premises, within fifteen (15) days after such notice, may appeal from receiving
the order or orders of officers or employees of the village to the village
board. The village board shall thereupon make an investigation and shall either
sustain or revoke the order. If the order is sustained, or if no appeal is made
to the village board, it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant to comply
with such order within fifteen (15) days. (1984 Code §
4-1-6; amd. 2010 Code)
9-3-5: ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT POWERS:
   A.   In addition to the actions authorized by other sections of this
chapter, the chief of the fire protection district, the president or any other
village official whose duty it is to investigate fires, may make the
investigation authorized by law. If such officer shall find that any building
or structure is so occupied or situated as to endanger persons or property, or
by reason of faulty construction, age, lack of repair or for any other cause is
especially liable to fire, or is liable to cause injury by collapsing or
otherwise, he shall order the dangerous condition removed or remedied, and
shall so notify the owner or occupant of the premises. Service of such notice
may be in person or by registered or certified mail, and any person so notified
may appeal from the decision of such officer in the manner provided by law.
(1984 Code § 4-1-7)
   B.   In addition to the actions authorized by other sections of this
chapter, the village officials may proceed under the provisions of the Illinois
municipal code by applying to the circuit court for an order to demolish or
repair unsafe and dangerous buildings, or uncompleted and abandoned buildings,
which said statute authorizes a lien when the village is compelled to take such
action. The village officials may also proceed under the provisions of the
Illinois municipal code which authorizes an injunction to require compliance
with building, fire, health and safety standards. (1984 Code § 4-1-8)
9-3-6: ABATEMENT COSTS:
In the event the trustee for public health and environment or any other
authorized officer or employee remedies any conditions under this chapter, or
demolishes any building or structure under this chapter, the reasonable costs
and expenses of remedying said defect or demolishing said building or structure
shall be paid by the owner of said premises, and shall become a lien on said
real estate until paid. (1984 Code § 4-1-9; amd. 2010 Code)
9-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1984 Code § 4-1-10; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Definitions
9-4-2: Permanent Use; Park Regulations
9-4-3: Storage Of Mobile Homes And Trailers
9-4-4: Penalty
9-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
MOBILE HOME: A structure designed to be used for human habitation, carrying or
storage of persons or property, not having a permanent foundation, being able
to be easily equipped with wheels or other devices to be transported from place
to place. "Mobile home" shall include a manufactured home.
MOBILE HOME PARK: An area of land on which two (2) or more occupied mobile
homes are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue, together with any
building, structure or enclosure used as part of the equipment of such park.
(1984 Code § 4-2-1; amd. 2010 Code)
9-4-2: PERMANENT USE; PARK REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any trailer coach or mobile
home, used for human habitation, upon any plot of ground in the village, except
in a mobile home park licensed and approved by the state 1 . In addition, such
mobile home park must comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations of the village, state of Illinois and the United States of America.
(1984 Code § 4-2-2; amd. 2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10-2-2, definition of "mobile home", of this code.
9-4-3: STORAGE OF MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILERS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the storage of any
trailer coach or mobile home for a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30)
days, provided said trailer coach or mobile home is not used for living or
sleeping purposes. (1984 Code § 4-2-3)
9-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues. (1984 Code § 4-2-4)
CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Statute Authority And Purpose
9-5-2: Definitions
9-5-3: Duties Of Village Officials
9-5-4: Base Flood Elevation
9-5-5: Development Permit
9-5-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Damages
9-5-7: Protecting Buildings
9-5-8: Subdivision And Other Development Requirements
9-5-9: Public Health And Other Standards
9-5-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
9-5-11: Variances
9-5-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
9-5-13: Violations; Penalties
9-5-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
9-5-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village by
the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12,
5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2, in order to accomplish the following
purposes:
   A.   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   B.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   C.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, as well as flood rescue and relief operations;
   D.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   E.   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   F.   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   G.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The "base flood" is also known as the 100-year
flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
9-5-4 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank,
that is principally aboveground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these "critical facilities" can impact the delivery of
vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or
can put special populations at risk. Examples of "critical facilities" where
flood protection should be required include: emergency services facilities
(such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and
senior care facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites
(telephone switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous
materials storage facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic
substances).
DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
      1.   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building.
      2.   Substantial improvement of an existing building.
      3.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      4.   Installation of utilities and construction of roads, bridges,
culverts or similar projects.
      5.   Construction or erection of levees, dams walls or fences.
      6.   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface.
      7.   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of floodwaters or surface waters.
   B.   "Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
(1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): "Floodplain" and "special
flood hazard area (SFHA)" are synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the village of Sherman, Illinois, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
village of Sherman, Illinois, or that may be annexed into the village of
Sherman, Illinois, that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The
floodplains of the village of Sherman, Illinois, are generally identified as
such on panel numbers 0075, 0100, 0235 and 0255 of the countywide flood
insurance rate map of Sangamon County, Illinois, prepared by the federal
emergency management agency and dated effective August 2, 2007. Floodplain also
includes those areas of known flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Sangamon County, Illinois,
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village of Sherman,
Illinois, or that may be annexed into the village of Sherman, Illinois, are
generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared for
Sangamon County, Illinois, by the federal emergency management agency and dated
effective August 2, 2007.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Sangamon River and Fancy Creek
shall be as delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Sangamon
County, Illinois, prepared by FEMA and dated effective August 2, 2007. The
floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of the village of Sherman,
Illinois, shall be according to the best data available from federal, state, or
other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   C.   Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
9-5-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date hereof and includes any subsequent improvements of
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date hereof.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis.
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size.
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The "actual start"
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, "actual
start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the effective date hereof (or
during the life of the building, for the next 10 years) equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred
regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must
be included in this determination. The term includes "repetitive loss"
buildings, as defined in this section.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
   A.   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure taking place subsequent to the effective date hereof (or during the
life of the building, for the next 10 years) in which the cumulative percentage
of improvements:
      1.   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started; or
      2.   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
   B.   "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
   C.   The term does not include:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
required federal, state, and/or local permits and elevation certification is
presumed to be in violation until such time as the documentation is provided.
(Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007)
9-5-3: DUTIES OF VILLAGE OFFICIALS:
The zoning enforcement officer and village clerk shall be responsible for the
general administration of this chapter and shall ensure that all development
activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the village meet
the requirements of this chapter. Specifically, the zoning enforcement officer
and village clerk shall: (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007; amd. 2010 Code)
   A.   Process development permits in accordance with section
9-5-5 of this chapter;
   B.   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
9-5-6 of this chapter;
   C.   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
9-5-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the as built elevation
of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproofing certificate;
   D.   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
9-5-8 of this chapter;
   E.   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
9-5-9 of this chapter;
   F.   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
9-5-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   G.   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
9-5-13 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   H.   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   I.   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse;
   J.   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   K.   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   L.   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies
of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development
activities subject to this chapter;
   M.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   N.   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007)
9-5-4: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   A.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Sangamon River and
Fancy Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
countywide "flood insurance study of Sangamon County, Illinois" prepared by the
federal emergency management agency, effective August 2, 2007.
   B.   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an AH zone
or AO zone shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the countywide
"flood insurance rate map of Sangamon County, Illinois".
   C.   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an A zone on the countywide "Flood Insurance Rate Map Of Sangamon
County, Illinois" shall be according to the best data available from federal,
state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must
be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   D.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Sangamon County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village of Sherman or that may be annexed into the village
of Sherman shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the "Flood
Insurance Study Of Sangamon County, Illinois", prepared by the federal
emergency management agency and dated effective August 2, 2007. (Ord. 2007-6,
6-19-2007)
9-5-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required; Compliance With Provisions: No person, firm,
corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall commence any
development in the floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from
the zoning enforcement officer and village clerk. The zoning enforcement
officer and village clerk shall not issue a development permit if the proposed
development does not meet the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-
2007; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Application For Permit: The application for development permit shall be
accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
9-5-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
(Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007)
   C.   Review Of Information: Upon receipt of an application for a development
permit, the zoning enforcement officer and village clerk shall compare the
elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any development located on
land that can be shown by survey data to be higher than the current base flood
elevation and which has not been filled after the date of the site's first
flood insurance rate map is not in the floodplain and, therefore, not subject
to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any development located on
land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected,
but not shown on the current flood insurance rate map, is subject to the
provisions of this chapter. The zoning enforcement officer and village clerk
shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the
development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to
the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
   D.   Additional Documents: The zoning enforcement officer and village clerk
shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other
federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit not required letters
that may be required for this type of activity. The zoning enforcement officer
and village clerk shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and
local permits have been obtained. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007; amd. 2010 Code)
9-5-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development, will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat
to public health and safety. The following specific development activities
shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois department of natural resources, office of
water resources statewide permit number 2:
         a.   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one foot (1.0'); and
         b.   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half foot (0.5') at a point one thousand
feet (1,000') upstream of the proposed structure.
         c.   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile.
         d.   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel.
         e.   The design must be certified by a registered professional
engineer in the state of Illinois, and the designs must meet the conditions of
an IDNR/OWR permit.
         f.   The design must be certified by a second registered professional
engineer.
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 3: The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier
cells, or other similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. army
corps of engineers.
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 4:
         a.   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
         b.   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
         c.   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream.
         d.   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris.
         e.   All disturbed areas shall be returned to preconstruction grades
and revegetated.
         f.   All Illinois commerce commission, national electrical safety
code, and federal requirements must be met.
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 5:
         a.   The boat dock must not extend more than fifty feet (50') into a
waterway and no more than one-fourth (1/4) of the width of the waterway and
shall not extend beyond the navigational limit established by the IDNR and
corps of engineers.
         b.   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet (10').
         c.   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
landowner's shoreline frontage nor fifty feet (50').
         d.   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet (10') of the projected
property line.
         e.   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
         f.   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water.
         g.   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with floatation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
         h.   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill.
         i.   Nonfloating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which will
minimize obstruction to flow.
         j.   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or corp of engineers.
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6: The following activities (not involving
fill or positive change in grade) are covered by this permit:
         a.   The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or septic
tanks not crossing a lake or stream.
         b.   The construction of light poles, signposts, and similar
structures.
         c.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures.
         d.   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures
such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports.
         e.   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten (10) square feet in any dimension.
Only one such building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit.
         f.   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are made
to the outside dimensions of the building, and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7:
         a.   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection.
         b.   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour velocity
of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the use of
riprap or other design measures.
         c.   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation.
         d.   Disturbance of stream side vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8:
         a.   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of the
river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet (3') of cover shall be provided.
The river, lake or streambed shall be returned to its original condition.
         b.   Disturbance of stream side vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         c.   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the environmental protection act, 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., shall be provided with shutoff valves on each
side of the body of water to be crossed.
         d.   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days prior
to the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 9:
         a.   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. "Urban
areas" are defined as: areas of the state where residential, commercial, or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten (10) years. (The department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban.)
         b.   In addition to the materials listed in subsection A8a of this
section, other materials (e.g., tire revetments) may be utilized in rural
areas, provided all other conditions of this permit are met.
         c.   The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto
bodies, garbage or debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water
pollution as defined by the environmental protections act, 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq.
         d.   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one thousand
feet (1,000').
         e.   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
         f.   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project.
         g.   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of the
bank.
         h.   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full width
and cross sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site.
For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe of
the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the cross sectional
area of the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent (10%) nor the
volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of the
stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and
to lessen the quantity of material required.
         i.   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
         j.   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         k.   In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            (1)   It is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s) or
gabion structure(s); and
            (2)   The volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot.
         l.   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and
federal laws and rules shall not be placed in a floodway.
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10:
         a.   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
         b.   The principal structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
         c.   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred
(500) square feet in size; and
         d.   Must not deflect floodwaters onto another property and must not
involve the placement of any fill material.
         e.   No construction shall be undertaken in or within fifty feet (50')
of the bank of the stream channel.
         f.   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions.
         g.   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing structure
shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for review.
         h.   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11:
         a.   The affected length of the stream shall not, either singularly or
cumulatively, exceed one thousand feet (1,000').
         b.   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel; and
         c.   The cross sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
         d.   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            (1)   Removed from the floodway;
            (2)   Used to stabilize an existing bank, provided no materials
would be placed higher than the existing top of the bank, and provided the
cross sectional area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than
ten percent (10%), nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards
per linear foot of the stream bank;
            (3)   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain
area such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            (4)   Used to stabilize an existing levee, provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            (5)   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
            (6)   Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         e.   Disturbance of stream side vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12:
         a.   A registered professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            (1)   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the
backwater induced by the existing structure; and
            (2)   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         b.   A registered professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects, the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
         c.   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR.)
         d.   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the department's statewide permit number 9 (minor shoreline, channel and
stream bank protection activities) or statewide permit number 11 (minor
maintenance dredging activities).
         e.   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 13:
         a.   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has received all required federal, state and local
authorizations.
         b.   The term "temporary" shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
         c.   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
         d.   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any
channel or floodway.
         e.   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or stream
channel until a registered professional engineer determines and documents that
the temporary structure will meet the requirements of special condition number
3 of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum,
confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the backwater
induced by the temporary structure.
         f.   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
         g.   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
         h.   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution as
defined by the environmental protection act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
1 et seq.
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   B.   Other development activities not listed in subsection A of this section
may be permitted only if:
      1.   A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007)
9-5-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: In addition to the damage prevention
requirements of section
9-5-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the effective date hereof (or
during the life of the building, for the next 10 years). If substantially
improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood
protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the effective date hereof (or
during the life of the building, for the next 10 years). If substantially
damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this
section.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
9-5-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Residential And Nonresidential Buildings:
      1.   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
         a.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
            (1)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above
the flood protection elevation;
            (2)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
            (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure;
            (4)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not
incorporated debris or refuse material; and
            (5)   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from
or onto neighboring properties, and when necessary, stormwater management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
         b.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with
the following:
            (1)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts,
piles, walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters;
            (2)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation;
            (3)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood
protection elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent
opening on each wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of
two (2) openings. The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
below the base flood elevation; and
            (4)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
   (A) All structural components below the flood protection elevation shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
   (B) Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible
pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood protection
elevation, provided they are waterproofed;
   (C) The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used solely for
parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as habitable
space; or
   (D) In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with these
requirements may be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect.
         c.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below
the flood protection elevation; provided, that the following conditions are
met:
            (1)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
            (2)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters; a minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area; the openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade;
            (3)   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood
protection elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade;
            (4)   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the
interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the foundation wall must not
exceed four feet (4') at any point;
            (5)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event;
            (6)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
            (7)   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation.
      2.   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in
lieu of elevation), provided a registered professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
         a.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
         b.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
         c.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
         d.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection B2.
   C.   Manufactured Homes Or Travel Trailers: Manufactured homes or travel
trailers to be permanently installed on site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection B1 of this section; and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile
home tie-down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870.
   D.   Travel Trailers And Recreational Vehicles: Travel trailers and
recreational vehicles on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per
year shall meet the elevation requirements of subsection C of this section
unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck;
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches;
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet;
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated;
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement out of the floodplain;
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation;
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model; and
      10.   Must either:
         a.   Entirely be supported by jacks; or
         b.   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   E.   Garages, Sheds Or Other Minor Accessory Structures: Garages, sheds or
other minor accessory structures constructed ancillary to an existing
residential use may be permitted, provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principle structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) in market value or replacement cost, whichever is greater, or less
than five hundred (500) square feet.
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007)
9-5-8: SUBDIVISION AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The village shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they
are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   B.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of sections
9-5-6 and
9-5-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain. Where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      3.   A signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/2.
   C.   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels.
   D.   Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007)
9-5-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   A.   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
9-5-6 and
9-5-7 of this chapter, the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
9-5-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation, whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   B.   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not
to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-
2007)
9-5-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained. In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of a watercourse. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007)
9-5-11: VARIANCES:
   A.   Authority: Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship
on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the village
zoning board of appeals for a variance. The zoning board of appeals shall
review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its
recommendation to the village board of trustees. The village board of trustees
may attach such conditions to the granting of a variance as it deems necessary
to further the intent of this chapter.
   B.   Standards For Variance Request: No variance shall be granted unless the
applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   C.   Variances From Specific Provisions:
      1.   The zoning board of appeals shall notify an applicant in writing
that a variance from the requirements of the building protection standards of
section
9-5-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
         a.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance
coverage;
         b.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
         c.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
      2.   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
9-5-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or "historic structure", as defined
section
9-5-2 of this chapter, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
9-5-6 and
9-5-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
         a.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
         b.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure
being removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007)
9-5-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
made lawfully hereunder. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007)
9-5-13: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation: Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain
or failure to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be
deemed to be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007)
   B.   Determination Of Violation; Notice: Upon due investigation, the zoning
enforcement officer and village clerk may determine that a violation of the
minimum standards of this chapter exists. The zoning enforcement officer and
village clerk shall notify the owner in writing of such violation. (Ord. 2007-
6, 6-19-2007; amd. 2010 Code)
   C.   Injunction And Penalty: If such owner fails, after ten (10) days'
notice, to correct the violation:
      1.   The village shall make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance herewith;
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense;
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues; and
      4.   The village shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007)
   D.   Insurance Increased: The zoning enforcement officer and village clerk
shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to
increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood
insurance policy to be suspended.
   E.   Suspension Of Development; Stop Work Order; Hearing:
      1.   The zoning enforcement officer and village clerk are authorized to
issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop
work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and
shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring
the stop work order. The stop work order constitutes a suspension of the
permit. (Ord. 2007-6, 6-19-2007; amd. 2010 Code)
      2.   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked
until a hearing is held by the village zoning board of appeals. Written notice
of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state the grounds
for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation and the time and place
of the hearing.
      3.   At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on his behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the village
zoning board of appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended
or revoked.
   F.   Other Remedies; Costs: Nothing herein shall prevent the village from
taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord.
2007-6, 6-19-2007)
9-5-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the village to
fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance program. However, this
chapter does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve
eligibility in the program; nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair
any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and
other ordinance easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2007-6,
6-19-2007)
CHAPTER 6
BUILDING FACADES
SECTION:
9-6-1: Nonresidential Facade Standards
9-6-1: NONRESIDENTIAL FACADE STANDARDS:
   A.   These standards are intended to provide a framework for future
commercial developments. This framework requires a basic level of architectural
variety, compatibility of scale with surrounding uses, pedestrian and bicycle
access, and recognition of the historical context of the village of Sherman.
These standards are not to be interpreted as limiting architectural or planning
creativity, but are intended to promote commercial development that is both
aesthetically and commercially successful.
      1.   Architectural Review Commission: As part of the building permit
review process, all applicants for permits for commercial development shall
submit samples of building materials (brick, stone, roofing, etc.), color
selections, and color renderings along with the building plans to the
architectural review commission for approval.
The village president, village architect and village administrator shall serve
on the architectural review commission.
      2.   Large Commercial Uses: In order to promote a desirable land plan for
a large commercial site, the applicant should be aware how the structures shall
be viewed from the access roads leading to the proposed development and have
addressed the following:
         a.   Access road traffic shall be clear and unencumbered by parking
stalls. Such access shall provide for all necessary traffic lanes.
         b.   Access points shall be minimized.
         c.   The perimeter of the property shall provide for a thirty foot
(30') minimum landscape strip.
         d.   The perimeter of the site adjacent to a street shall provide for
commercial outlots, if possible.
         e.   Parking for all outlots shall be placed away from the access
roads.
         f.   Parking for all outlots shall be screened from the adjoining
street system by the building and shall be provided on the exterior ring road
or between buildings, but not on access road frontage.
         g.   All entrances to the development shall be allowed to provide for
a large monument sign. (1 per entrance and sign can be up to 20 square feet in
size, per village ordinance.)
      3.   Street Orientation:
         a.   Facades shall be articulated to reduce long unbroken lines and
provide interest. Facades greater than one hundred feet (100') in length should
incorporate wall plan projections or recesses.
         b.   Ground floor facades that front on public streets shall have
arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or similar features.
         c.   Buildings shall incorporate architectural features and patterns
that provide visual interest, at the scale of the pedestrian.
         d.   The elements noted herein shall be an integral part of the
building rather than superficially applied trim, graphics, or paint.
         e.   Building facades must include a repeating pattern that shall
include no less than two (2) of the elements noted in these standards. At least
one of the elements shall repeat horizontally. These elements shall include:
            (1)   Color change.
            (2)   Texture change.
            (3)   Material module change.
      4.   Building Style:
         a.   Building design and architectural style should create and enhance
a district's character for pedestrians and motorists. Diversity in building
design should be encouraged, but designs shall be consistent with the area's
overall character.
            (1)   A range of architectural styles is encouraged in all
districts. Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of appearance
shall be based on quality of design and relationship to surroundings.
            (2)   Harsh, plain, incompatible and/or bizarre building designs
are not allowed.
            (3)   Unarticulated, flat front, all glass, or metal, futuristic
style buildings are not allowed.
            (4)   All buildings are to be designed with common architectural
elements, including: open glass storefronts; clearly defined entrances to
ground and upper floors; sign bands and awnings incorporated into the design
and scale of the building; upper floor windows placed in proportion to building
width and height; and cornices and parapets.
            (5)   Adjacent buildings shall have component parts in good
proportion with one another. Similar design linkages shall include placing
window lines, belt courses, and other horizontal elements in a pattern that is
harmonious and reflects the same elements on neighboring buildings.
            (6)   Large structures shall be designed to reduce perceived height
and bulk by dividing the building mass into small scale components (i.e.,
height of a wall, cornice, or parapet line should match that of adjacent
buildings).
            (7)   Buildings with ground level retail and office space shall
include open, clear glass windows to allow views into building interiors and to
reinforce a positive, active shopping environment.
            (8)   Reflective glass is not allowed.
            (9)   Architectural design must articulate and enhance buildings,
especially those located at street corners due to their prominence and
visibility. Where appropriate, features such as cupolas, atriums, clock towers,
and/or varying rooflines should be incorporated to add visual interest to the
street.
            (10)   Monotony of design in multiple building projects by
repetition of units is not allowed. Variation of detail, form and siting shall
be employed to provide interest. Buildings of the same design or exterior
elevation are not allowed on adjacent lots.
            (11)   Historic buildings and existing buildings that display
distinct design styles and elements of the past shall be preserved.
            (12)   Solid windowless walls must be avoided. If such walls are
necessary to the function of the building, they should incorporate arches,
piers, columns, landscaping and other elements that reduce building scale and
add visual interest.
            (13)   Direct advertising of a property or business shall be
limited.
            (14)   Where possible, display windows shall be installed on the
sides of buildings adjacent to pedestrian paths, plazas, outdoor cafes, and
parking lots.
            (15)   Existing exposed sides and rears of buildings shall be
improved with steam cleaning, power washing, tuckpointing, accent painting, and
limited graphics.
            (16)   All graphics on blank, exposed side and rear walls shall be
limited to ten percent (10%) or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is
less, of the blank exposed wall area.
            (17)   New buildings shall incorporate interesting architectural
details or features to provide layers of interest and variety.
            (18)   Eccentric and protruding facade designs that do not relate
to the street or limit future tenant changes are prohibited.
      5.   Building Materials:
         a.   High quality, durable materials, which do not require frequent
maintenance (brick, stone, and glass) shall be used for all facades, as well
as, the sides and/or rears of buildings that are visible from streets and
parking lots.
         b.   Decorative block, smooth/textured synthetic plaster (exterior
insulation and finish systems [EIFS]), and wood trim shall be used only for
decorative accent purposes and limited in their use on building facades and
visible walls.
         c.   Cinder block, concrete block, stucco, metal, plywood, vinyl
siding, wood siding, precast concrete, poured in place concrete, aggregate
stone/rock and glass block windows shall not be used on building facades or on
walls that are visible from streets, sidewalks, and parking lots.
         d.   Wall materials shall be the same for all elevations or if more
than one is used, they shall be harmonious. Facade treatment with face brick at
the front elevation and common brick at the other elevations is not acceptable.
      6.   Building Colors:
         a.   Building colors shall be generally compatible with the area's
context. Primary colors are not allowed unless used sparingly for subtle trim
accents. Earth tones, red/brown masonry are allowed.
         b.   Compatible, consistent color schemes for future developments and/
or redevelopments are required.
      7.   Building Entrances And Windows:
         a.   Building entrances and windows shall be oriented to the street
and designed to be easily accessible. If a building has a parking lot in the
rear, clearly defined rear entrances are required to provide access. Safety and
security issues, as well as, aesthetic and visibility considerations shall be
addressed regarding the use of rear building entrances.
            (1)   Primary entrances should be located along the street, with
secondary entrances located behind the building or along a secondary street.
            (2)   Building windows and doors shall be clear glass oriented to
the street and proportionate to the building scale.
            (3)   All building entrances shall be designed so that doorways and
vestibules are easily seen by shoppers and visitors, easily distinguished by
tenants and use, and open and visible from the sidewalk.
            (4)   Reflective glass is not allowed.
            (5)   Each principal building on a site shall have a clearly
defined, highly visible public entrance(s) featuring at least three (3) of the
following:
               (A) Canopies or porticos.
               (B) Overhangs.
               (C) Recesses/projections.
               (D) Arcades.
               (E) Peaked roof forms.
               (F) Arches.
               (G) Outdoor patios.
               (H) Display windows.
               (I) Architectural details such as tile work and moldings that
are integrated into the building structure and design.
               (J) Integral planters or wings that incorporate landscape.
      8.   Building Awnings:
         a.   Unattractive and oversized awnings detract from the
attractiveness of a building, as well as, the streetscape and shall not be
permitted.
            (1)   Building awnings shall be consistent and complementary in
color and style with the building facade and awnings of adjacent buildings.
            (2)   Excessively bright and brilliant awning colors are not
allowed.
            (3)   Letter style on awnings for multi-tenant buildings shall be
consistent.
      9.   Building Lighting:
         a.   Special building lighting shall be required to add visual
interest and increase nighttime visibility and safety.
         b.   Building lighting shall be carefully planned and integrated into
the design/style of the building and streetscape.
         c.   Electrical conduit and mechanical equipment for building or
signage lighting shall be hidden from view or carefully integrated into
building design.
      10.   Roofs:
         a.   Variations in roof lines shall be used to add interest to and
reduce the massive scale of large buildings.
         b.   Roof features shall complement the character of adjoining
neighborhoods.
         c.   Roofs shall have no less than two (2) of the following features:
            (1)   Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment (i.e.,
HVAC) units from public view. Such parapets shall feature three- dimensional
cornice treatments.
            (2)   Overhanging eaves on sloping roofs are required.
      11.   Mechanical Equipment:
         a.   Mechanical or utility equipment on the ground or on roofs or
other parts of a building that cannot be located out of view shall be screened
by walls constructed of materials similar to those of the primary facade.
Screening shall be effective in all seasons.
         b.   Mechanical equipment along the front or visible side facade is
not allowed. Corner buildings shall not locate mechanical equipment on the
secondary street frontage.
         c.   All vents, gutters, downspouts, flashing, electrical conduit and
similar appurtenances shall be hidden, screened or at the least painted to
match the adjacent surface.
         d.   Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be located in the center or a
rear corner of a building away from the street elevation and screened from
public view or located as not to be conspicuously visible.
      12.   Signage:
         a.   Sign colors and materials shall be consistent with the colors and
materials of the building and awnings.
         b.   Business signage shall be simple and incorporated into a
building's architecture. Such signs shall serve to identify a business while
contributing to the attractiveness and pedestrian friendly orientation of the
street. The quality, size, placement and look of signs shall all be considered
in the overall design of the building.
         c.   Sign materials, size, color, lettering, lighting, location, and
arrangement, shall be harmonious with the building design and shall be
compatible with signs on adjoining buildings. Signs shall have good
proportions. Materials used in signs shall be weather retardant.
         d.   Window lettering, either vinyl applied or painted, is encouraged
to add interest to storefronts. Temporary pinups, fliers and signs should be
avoided and limited in their use.
         e.   Business signs shall not obstruct or obscure architectural
details or significant architectural elements.
         f.   Decorative overhanging or blade signs are encouraged for row
buildings along the street with the size controlled and coordinated with a
building's facade design. Decorative "icon" signs such as coffee cups, barber
poles, toothbrushes, and ice cream cones if such signs provide visual interest
may be permitted. Sign brackets, hardware, and lighting systems shall be kept
to a minimum and screened wherever possible.
         g.   Decorative overhanging or blade signs must not exceed six (6)
square feet in size with a maximum height of three feet (3') and placed at a
minimum ten feet (10') above the sidewalk. They shall not extend more than four
feet (4') from the face of the building and must comply with the signage
ordinance.
         h.   Business signs shall be placed on a building so they are oriented
for viewing by pedestrians.
         i.   Text on business signs shall be simple and easy to read.
         j.   Billboards shall not be placed on top of buildings, or on blank
sidewalls, in vacant lots, or parking areas.
         k.   To avoid visual clutter along the street, redundant signage or
multiple external signs shall not be permitted.
         l.   Business signs shall not be placed at or above the cornice or
roof lines of buildings.
         m.   Signs shall be constructed of high quality durable materials.
Sign colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint.
         n.   Business signs shall be placed on the front of buildings only,
unless the building is located on a corner or has a rear or side entrances.
         o.   Overhanging signs shall be limited to one sign per business,
including "icon" signs unless the business is located on a corner.
         p.   Sign lighting shall be carefully considered in the building
design. If direct lighting is used, flare, brightness, visible hardware and
maintenance issues shall be addressed. Strategically placed lamp fixtures that
are compatible with the sign design and building architecture are required for
illuminating signs. When external spot or flood lighting is used, it must be
arranged so that the light source is shielded from view.
         q.   Neon signage and lighting shall be limited to one sign per
business. Neon lighting and signage that outlines the entire window is not
permitted. (Ord. 2011-8A, 5-17-2011)
CHAPTER 7
LANDSCAPE, SCREENING, AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Scope
9-7-2: Definitions
9-7-3: Performance Standards
9-7-4: Landscape Plan
9-7-5: Installation And Maintenance
9-7-6: Calculations
9-7-7: Front Yard, Corner Side Yard And Through Lot Landscaping
9-7-8: Parking Lot Landscaping
9-7-9: Landscaping For Business Lots Adjoining A Residential District
9-7-10: Screening Of Activity Areas
9-7-11: Site And Parking Area Lighting Requirements
9-7-1: SCOPE:
   A.   Scope; Purpose; Applicability:
      1.   Scope: This chapter contains the performance standards and
regulations pertaining to the landscape, screening, and lighting elements for
various uses and parking areas; requirements for the provision of trees along
public rights of way; maintenance requirements for trees and other landscape
components; and administration and enforcement of these regulations.
      2.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for
the provision, installation and maintenance of landscape plantings in and
around the various land uses and associated parking areas. The addition of
plant material is to define parking areas, mitigate the view of cars and
pavement, help to direct traffic flow, provide continuity to streetscape,
minimize noise and glare, moderate heat, wind and other climate effects and to
obtain the environmental benefits of increase planting. The landscape
requirements are intended to provide buffering between single-family and duplex
uses and multiple-family, office, commercial, and industrial uses. The overall
impact of such factors is intended to enhance and protect property values for
the benefit of both public and private investment.
      3.   Buildings And Facilities Covered: This chapter applies to the
following:
         a.   All new construction of buildings or parking areas approved by
the village after the effective date of this chapter;
         b.   That area directly affected by any addition, or accumulated total
increase of twenty percent (20%) or more, in gross square foot area of the
ground floor, to any existing building;
         c.   That area directly affected by any addition, or accumulated total
increase of twenty percent (20%) or more in the numbers of parking spaces
provided to any existing parking facility. (Ord. 2011-8A, 5-17-2011)
9-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
Definitions for the purpose of this chapter:
GROUND COVER: Plants, other than turf grass, which normally reaches an average
maximum height of not more than twenty four inches (24") at maturity. Ground
cover does not include plants commonly referred to as weeds.
LANDSCAPING: Required by this chapter shall mean living plants in a combination
of trees, shrubs, and/or ground cover.
MULCH: Nonliving organic and synthetic materials customarily used in
landscaping designed to retain moisture, stabilize soil temperatures, control
weed growth and retard erosion.
SHRUB: A self-supporting woody perennial plant (deciduous or evergreen) of low
to medium height characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from
its base and having a height of not less than two feet (2') and normally
maturing to a height of not more than ten feet (10').
SIZE SPECIFICATIONS: Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, all size
specifications for plant materials shall be based upon the time of planting.
When caliper is specified for tree planting, the caliper of the tree trunk
shall be measured at twelve inches (12") above the ground level.
TREES:
Canopy Trees (Medium-Tall): A self-supporting woody, deciduous plant having not
less than a one and three-fourths inch (13/4") caliper and reaches a mature
height of not less than twenty feet (20') and a mature spread of not less than
fifteen feet (15').
Evergreen Trees: A tree having foliage that persists and remains green
throughout the year and having a height of not less than six feet (6') and
maturing to a height of not less than twenty feet (20').
Ornamental Trees (Small): A self-supporting woody, deciduous plant having not
less than a one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper and normally attains a mature
height of at least fifteen feet (15') and usually has one main stem or trunk
and many branches. Several species may appear to have several stems or trunks.
(Ord. 2011-8A, 5-17-2011)
9-7-3: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   All landscape plans shall fully meet the following standards:
      1.   Landscaping shall not hinder the vision of motorists and pedestrians
necessary for safe movement into, out of, and within the site.
      2.   Landscaping materials shall be selected and placed in such a manner
that they do not interfere with or damage existing utilities.
      3.   Landscaping materials shall be selected and placed so that the safe
and enjoyable use of surrounding properties is not inhibited.
      4.   Landscaping shall be selected and placed with sensitivity toward the
ultimate size that will be achieved over time.
      5.   Landscaping with thorns, berries, and other harmful plant
characteristics shall be carefully placed to avoid potential harm to people or
property on and off site. (Ord. 2011-8A, 5-17-2011)
9-7-4: LANDSCAPE PLAN:
   A.   Landscape Plan Required:
      1.   A general site plan showing the location and description of
plantings (trees, shrubs or ground cover) shall be included with the site plan
submitted for each building permit application where landscape is required.
      2.   Applications for approval of a detailed landscape plan shall be
submitted to the village president within ninety (90) days after applying for a
building permit, for a project which is subject to the landscape requirements.
Construction or implementation of landscaping prior to approval is done at the
applicant's own risk.
      3.   An application for approval of a landscaping plan may be denied by
the village president if it is incomplete or if its approval would cause a
violation of this chapter.
      4.   If a landscaping plan is deemed to be incomplete, the village
president shall inform the applicant within thirty (30) days, of those elements
of the application that are missing but which if supplied would cause the plan
to be approved.
      5.   If a landscaping plan application is denied because the village
president believes its approval would cause a violation of this chapter, the
village president shall identify those portions of this chapter that he
believes would be violated and explain why those portions would be violated.
      6.   In conjunction with the requirements of other provisions of this
title and the village president with respect to site plan review prior to the
start of any construction or upon application of any building permit, or curb
cutting, a landscape plan shall be submitted to, reviewed by, and approved by
the village president. The landscape plan shall comply with the following
requirements and contain the following elements:
         a.   Be drawn to scale, including dimensions and distances, location
of all property lines, north arrow, date of preparation and revisions, name of
designer/drafter;
         b.   Delineate the location of all buildings, structures and pavement
that are proposed or will remain on the site, as well as, the location of all
existing or proposed watercourses, ponds, or lakes;
         c.   Location of any existing or proposed signs, walls, fences, berms
(1 foot contour intervals), site furniture, lights, fountains, and sculptures
on the site;
         d.   Delineate the existing and proposed parking spaces, or other
vehicular areas, access aisles, driveways and similar features;
         e.   Location of all sidewalks or other pedestrianways that are
proposed for or currently adjoin the site;
         f.   Designate by name and location the plant material to be installed
or preserved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Plants to be
installed should be shown at one-half (1/2) of mature size;
         g.   Identify and describe the location and characteristics of all
other landscape materials to be used. Include a plant list that describes the
common name (available in any nursery catalog), quantity, and size at
installation for each proposed plant;
         h.   Show all landscapes features, including areas of vegetation to be
preserved, in context with the location and outline of existing and proposed
buildings and other improvements on the site, if any. In instances where
healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, in part or in
whole, the requirements may be adjusted to allow credit for such plant material
if such an adjustment is in keeping with and will preserve the intent of this
chapter.
         i.   Include tabulation clearly displaying the relevant statistical
information necessary to evaluate compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. This includes gross acreage, area of preservation areas, number of
trees to be planted or preserved, square footage of paved areas, and such other
information as the village president may require. (Ord. 2011-8A, 5-17-2011)
9-7-5: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Installation And Maintenance Of Landscaping:
      1.   Immediately upon planting, all trees shall conform to the "American
Standard For Nurserymen", published by the American Association Of Nurserymen,
Inc., as revised from time to time.
      2.   All new landscaped areas shall be installed prior to the occupancy
or use of the premises or if the time of the season or weather conditions are
not conducive to planting, the village president may authorize a delay for such
planting up to six (6) months after occupancy or use of the buildings or
premises. Dead plant material shall be replaced in a timely fashion with living
plant material, taking into consideration the season of the year, and shall
have at least the same quality of landscaping as initially approved.
      3.   The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the care,
maintenance, repair of all landscaping, fences, and other visual barriers
including refuse disposal area screens, etc. All landscaping and screening
shall be maintained in a healthy, neatly trimmed, clean and weed free
condition. The ground surface of landscaped areas shall be covered with either
grass and/or other types of pervious ground cover located beneath and
surrounding the trees and shrubs.
      4.   All required shrubs and trees shall be mulched and maintained to a
minimum depth of three inches (3") with shredded hardwood bark, cypress, or
gravel mulch. Plant groups shall be mulched in a continuous bed in which the
edge of the mulching bed does not extend any more than four feet (4') beyond
the edge of the plantings. When required shrubs or trees are planted
individually and away from nearby plants, they shall be encircled in a mulched
area with a diameter of no more than five feet (5'). Evergreen trees are
allowed a mulched circle with a diameter large enough to accommodate the spread
of the tree and up to four (4) additional feet of mulch beyond the edge of the
tree. All mulch proposed to be placed within or directly adjacent to a parking
lot shall be shredded hardwood bark or cypress mulch. Gravel mulch is not
permitted within or directly adjacent to parking lots. Mulch shall be applied
as a weed barrier. Plastic sheeting is not permitted as weed barrier.
      5.   In the event any landscaping violates the provisions of this
chapter, the property owner shall be notified of the specific violation and
shall be granted a reasonable period of time within which to restore or replace
said plant material, fence, wall and/or other barrier. If said violation is not
corrected within the given period of time, the property owner shall be subject
to a fine as set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2011-8A, 5-17-
2011)
9-7-6: CALCULATIONS:
   A.   Calculation Of Minimum Requirements: The amount of all required
landscaping shall be calculated by utilizing the point system described herein.
If the applicant decides to create a landscape design by a different means than
the point system, they may do so through the alternative compliance provisions
described below. The landscaping requirements of this chapter shall be based on
formulas found herein. The requirements for a given yard or parking lot shall
be the total of all equations listed under the applicable section. In
calculating any requirement in this section, should a fraction result of one-
half (0.5) or greater, it shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
      1.   Point Allocations: The following point allocations shall apply for
all required landscaping:
Classification Base Value
Classification                                     Base Value
Tree:                                               
 Shade (tall or canopy) trees                     18 points
 Evergreen trees                                  18 points
 Intermediate (small, medium or ornamental) trees 2 points
Shrub:                                              
 Evergreen trees                                  18 points
 Evergreen shrubs                                 3 points
 Deciduous shrubs                                 2 points
Ground cover:                                       
 Flowering perennials or annuals                  8 points per 100 sq. ft.
 Green perennials or annuals                      4 points per 100 sq. ft.
 
      2.   Incentives For Preserving Existing Landscaping: Existing landscaping
that is in a vigorous growing condition and is not specifically prohibited by
this chapter may count toward meeting the point requirements of this chapter.
Furthermore, the following plant materials will be awarded five (5) additional
points (added to base value) per tree when preserved:
 
Shade (tall or canopy) trees                    12+ inches diameter trunk
Intermediate (small, medium or ornamental) tree 15 feet high or taller
Evergreen tree                                  15 feet high or taller
 
Additional points may be credited to the owner of "monumental, historic,
champion or rare" trees. The specific point value shall be determined by the
city arborist, at the recommendation of the tree commission.
      3.   Incentive For Planting Larger Landscaping: Planting of landscaping
larger than the minimum required sizes will be rewarded with five (5)
additional points (added to base value) per tree when the proposed sizes are as
follows:
 
Shade (tall or canopy) trees               4 inches diameter (5 inches in TBYs)
Intermediate (small, medium or ornamental) 10 feet high or taller
trees
 
      4.   Incentive For Planting Native Plant Materials And/Or Recommended
Trees: Use of plant materials identified as "native" to the area by the
Illinois department of natural resources natural history survey and/or trees
listed in the top ten tree list recommended by the tree commission and/or the
state tree (white oak) will be rewarded with five (5) additional points (added
to base value) per tree, three (3) additional points per shrub, and one point
per ground cover or perennial plant.
      5.   Alternative Plan: Petitioners may choose to follow the point system
described above or to submit a landscape plan to the village president under
the alternative compliance provisions of this section. The alternative
compliance provisions are intended to give the petitioner the flexibility
needed to respond to unique site issues and still meet the intent of this
chapter.
      6.   Compliance: Landscape plans submitted through the alternative
compliance process shall fully achieve the performance standards and landscape
plan requirements as described in sections
9-7-3 and
9-7-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-8A, 5-17-2011)
9-7-7: FRONT YARD, CORNER SIDE YARD AND THROUGH LOT LANDSCAPING:
   A.   All developed zoning lots other than those zoning lots that are located
within a single-family zoning district or zoning lots developed as single-
family or duplex, shall provide front and corner side yard landscaping as
provided for in this section. (3 or more townhouses and condominiums shall not
be considered as single-family or duplexes.)
      1.   The number of points that must be achieved through landscaping for
front and corner side yards shall be based on the overall length of the lot
frontage as measured along the property line divided by two (2). For example,
if the front or corner side lot frontage of a property is two hundred twenty
feet (220') in length, then one hundred ten (110) points must be achieved
through landscaping. One-half (1/2) of the points for front and corner side
yard landscaping must be achieved by utilizing plants from the tree
classification and one-half (1/2) must be from the shrub or ground cover
classification.
      2.   Front yard, corner side yard and through lot frontage landscaping
shall be planted in the required front yard, corner side yard and through lot
yard. If there is additional area between the required front or corner side
yard and the closest on site parking lot or building all or some of the
required landscaping may be planted within such area subject to approval by the
village president. (Ord. 2011-8A, 5-17-2011)
9-7-8: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING:
   A.   The number of points that must be achieved for parking lots through
landscaping shall be equal to the total number of parking spaces provided. The
points may be achieved through the use of any combination of trees, ground
cover and/or shrubs.
      1.   Less Than One Hundred Spaces: When a parking lot has less than one
hundred (100) parking spaces the landscaping may be placed within interior
curbed parking islands and/or within ten feet (10') of the perimeter of the
parking lot.
      2.   Greater Than One Hundred Spaces: When a parking lot has one hundred
(100) or more parking spaces, one-half (1/2) of the required points shall
consist of canopy (medium-tall) trees planted in curb islands within the
interior of the parking lot. The intent of this provision is to break up large
expanses of pavement and to provide shading by locating canopy (medium-tall)
trees away from the perimeter and within the interior of parking lots.
      3.   Parking Lot Islands: Parking lot islands shall be curbed with
concrete, asphalt or a functionally equivalent material that must be approved
by the village president. The following materials are not considered
functionally equivalent to concrete curbs and are therefore unacceptable for
use as curbs:
         a.   Landscape timbers.
         b.   Railroad ties.
         c.   Wood/lumber.
         d.   Concrete wheel stops.
      4.   Minimum Area: The minimum area for planting all types of trees
within parking lots shall not be less than one hundred fifty three (153) square
feet. Shade trees and intermediate trees shall not be planted in any area with
a width of less than five feet (5'). Evergreen trees shall not be planted in an
area with a width of less than ten feet (10'). Shrubs and ground cover shall
not be planted in areas with a width of less than two feet (2'). When plants
are proposed to be planted within curbed islands or adjacent to curbs, the
width of such planting areas shall be measured from inside of curbs. The
locations of the parking lot landscaping will be subject to review by the
village president.
      5.   Visibility: No landscaping or walls that exceed twenty four inches
(24") in height shall be located within ten feet (10') of any parking lot
access drive or otherwise located so as to interfere with the sight distance
visibility of vehicular traffic or pedestrians.
      6.   Walls And Fences: Walls and fences shall be wrought iron, or
simulated wrought iron, wood, stucco or architectural quality brick, stone or
textured and pigmented concrete that is compatible within the adjoining
building design and architectural integrity of the area.
      7.   Vehicle Overhang: Vehicles may not overhang the minimum required
landscape area. However, planting areas adjacent to parking may be increased by
a minimum of two feet (2'), exclusive of the curbing, to allow vehicles to
overhang. The adjacent parking space overhanging the planting area may be
reduced in size by the same amount, and the parking space overhanging the
planting area shall not be required to provide wheel stops in addition to the
curbing. Any plant material in the planting area shall be located outside the
overhang area and out of the way from danger from vehicles, or shall be ground
cover material, no greater than twelve inches (12") in height at maturity.
      8.   Other Applicable Regulations: All other applicable regulations for
parking lots apply. The Illinois accessibility code will be enforced for all
parking lots. (Ord. 2011-8A, 5-17-2011)
9-7-9: LANDSCAPING FOR BUSINESS LOTS ADJOINING A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Office, commercial and industrial zoning lots which abut, or, in the
absence of an alley, would abut any residential zoning lot or district shall be
required to provide a transitional buffer yard (TBY) unless otherwise provided
for in this chapter. Multi- family zoning lots which abut, or in the absence of
an alley, would abut any single-family, or duplex zoning lot or district, are
also required to provide a TBY.
      1.   Depth: Depth of yard shall meet size as required by title 10 of this
code.
      2.   Prohibited Materials In TBY: Any TBY required pursuant to this
chapter shall be maintained as a planted or landscaped area only. No driveways,
refuse containers, storage, aisleways, vehicular maneuvering area, mechanical
equipment, sidewalks materials other than landscaping, or structures of any
form shall be located within any required TBY. However, if any emergency exit
into the TBY area is required by a code, a concrete pad of no more than twenty
three (23) square feet may be placed at grade level immediately outside of the
required exit.
      3.   Utility Structures: Utility structures may be permitted in a TBY on
a case by case basis and only through the alternative compliance provisions of
this chapter.
      4.   Plant Material: Plant material for TBY shall meet the following:
         a.   The number of points that must be achieved through landscaping in
a TBY shall be based on the overall length of the TBY as measured along the TBY
property line. For example, if the property line running the length of the TBY
is one hundred eighty feet (180') long, then one hundred eighty (180) points
must be achieved through landscaping.
         b.   One-half (1/2) of the points for TBY landscaping must be achieved
by utilizing plants from the tree classification and one-half (1/2) must be
from the shrub or ground cover classification.
         c.   One-half (1/2) of the total points for TBY landscaping must also
be evergreen or broadleaf evergreen plantings.
         d.   All shade trees in a TBY must be one and three-fourths inches
(13/4") caliper size or larger. (Ord. 2011-8A, 5-17-2011)
9-7-10: SCREENING OF ACTIVITY AREAS:
   A.   On site activity areas as described below that are adjacent to a
required TBY are required to be visually screened with a fence, wall, berm,
evergreen planting or combination thereof which achieves a substantially solid
six foot (6') visual barrier. If a fence or wall is used to meet this
requirement, it must be located between the activity area and the TBY.
Topography and adjacent uses shall be taken into account to determine the most
effective means of screening. This visual barrier shall be required when all or
any portion of the subject site that is adjacent to the required TBY is planned
or used for the following activities:
Loading or unloading of goods;
Parking, temporary or permanent of vehicles;
Production, assembly, processing, or demolition of goods;
Refuse container/dumpster loading, unloading, or storage;
Storage of materials or merchandise.
      1.   These requirements shall be in addition to all other landscaping
requirements of any type.
      2.   When plantings are utilized to meet this requirement, they must be
capable of achieving a substantially solid visual barrier within two (2) years
from the date of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   B.   Other than in the downtown district, all refuse disposal areas shall be
screened from public view by a solid, commercial grade wood fence, wall, or
equivalent material or compact evergreen plantings with a minimum height of six
feet (6') and not greater than eight feet (8').
   C.   Any scrap, junk, salvage, reclamation or similar yard, or any auto
salvage yard shall provide a solid fence or wall on all lot lines with only
such openings as are necessary for ingress or egress. Said fence or wall shall
be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance and shall be of such height that
any materials stored within the confines of the fence cannot be seen above a
line of sight established between a point four and one-half feet (41/2') above
the centerline of the street nearest to that fence, and the top of said fence.
(Ord. 2011-8A, 5-17-2011)
9-7-11: SITE AND PARKING AREA LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lighting: Lights shall be installed in all parking areas containing
five (5) or more parking spaces and shall be illuminated between dusk and dawn
whenever said premises are open for operation. Open for operation shall be any
time that a retail business is open for the sale of goods or services or a
retail or office actually has employees working within or upon said premises,
other than guards, watchmen, or home occupation. For all parking areas with
more than twenty (20) parking spaces, the illumination may be provided through
the use of pole mounted light fixtures. Building mounted fixtures shall be
primarily for aesthetic and security purposes and shall comply with general
standards as noted below.
   B.   Definitions:
    FULL CUTOFF TYPE FIXTURE: A luminaire or light fixture that by the design
of the housing, does not allow any light dispersion or direct glare to shine
above a ninety degree (90°), horizontal plane from the base of the fixture.
Full cutoff fixtures must be installed in a horizontal position as designed, or
the purpose of the design is defeated, and disability glare will result.
   LIGHT TRESPASS: Light from an artificial light source that is intruding into
or spills over to adjoining sites, streets, public and private property.
   STRAY LIGHT: Produced within the eye by luminance source (usually light
source) within the field of view.
   UPLIGHTING: Any light source that distributes illumination above a ninety
degree (90°) horizontal plane.
   C.   General Standards:
      1.   Site lighting shall include all lighting on property, other than
lighting within a fully enclosed building.
      2.   Site lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the building design
and the adjoining landscape and shall not be used in such a manner as to turn
the building itself into "signage".
      3.   Parking lot poles/fixtures of the same style, height, color and
intensity of lighting shall be used throughout the development area. Varying
styles of fixtures may be permitted if it is demonstrated that the styles
contribute to an overall theme for the area.
      4.   Site lighting shall not result in light trespass by spilling over to
adjacent sites or properties.
      5.   Site lighting shall not result in disability glare that is directed
toward or reflected onto adjoining properties.
      6.   Site lighting shall not result in disability glare that is directed
toward or reflected onto streets, or interior drives where such glare could
negatively impact vehicular or pedestrian safety.
      7.   Except when displaying the flags of the United States Of America,
state of Illinois or village of Sherman or as may be provided elsewhere in this
section, site lighting shall at no time be directed upward (uplighting), in a
radiating pattern and/or moving or sweeping pattern, or at any angle which will
light surfaces other than building walls, parking or pedestrian areas, and
landscaped area, and shall not create lighting patterns which will direct light
toward residential areas.
      8.   All site lighting shall be installed utilizing underground cable.
      9.   Except where otherwise provided, fixture heads shall be of full
cutoff type which controls the lighting pattern and shields abutting property
from direct view of the light source.
      10.   Site lighting, other than security lighting, shall be turned off
when a facility is closed, vacant or otherwise occupied solely by security
employees.
      11.   Outdoor display lots for vehicles and similar sales facilities
shall reduce display fixture illumination within thirty (30) minutes after
closing so the remaining illumination level is sufficient for security purposes
only; however, that any illumination used after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
shall be reduced to levels sufficient for security purposes only.
   D.   Plan Submission Requirements: Detailed drawings of all exterior light
fixtures including the angle at which they are mounted, in relationship to
grade and a site plan showing their location shall be submitted with each
building permit application, of which the light fixtures are a part of.
A photometric pattern, showing the foot-candle value at all property lines
shall be submitted within ninety (90) days following the application of each
building permit, if the scope of work includes the installation of exterior
lighting. (Ord. 2011-8A, 5-17-2011)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; PURPOSE; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title
10-1-2: Intent And Purpose
10-1-3: Interpretation And Application
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the ZONING ORDINANCE FOR
THE VILLAGE OF SHERMAN, ILLINOIS. (1984 Code §
5-1-1)
10-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   This title is adopted for the purpose of:
      1.   Promoting and protecting the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the people.
      2.   Securing adequate light, high quality environment and safety from
fire and other dangers.
      3.   Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
village.
   B.   To these ends, it is the purpose of this title to set up and accomplish
certain standards and objectives by:
      1.   Organizing the village into districts, regulating and restricting
therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of
buildings, structures or land, whether for residence, office, business,
manufacturing or other specific uses.
      2.   Regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings and other
structures.
      3.   Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback lines
along streets, alleys or property lines.
      4.   Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of the lot area and
determining the area of open spaces within and surrounding such buildings.
      5.   Providing for certain permitted uses and conditional permitted uses.
      6.   Regulating the size, type and location of signs.
      7.   Requiring accessory off street parking and loading facilities.
      8.   Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided herein.
      9.   Providing for the change and amendment of such regulations and
boundaries of the respective districts.
      10.   Providing for the continuance of uses of structures of land which
were lawful before the effective date hereof, but which could be prohibited,
regulated or restricted under the terms of this title or future amendments.
      11.   Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
title or of any amendment hereto. (1984 Code §
5-1-2)
10-1-3: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of this
title, the provisions contained herein shall be held to be minimum
requirements, adopted for the promotion of public health, morals, safety and
general welfare.
   B.   Conflicting Provisions: In case of any conflict between this title, or
any part hereof, and the whole or part of any existing or future ordinance of
the village or the whole or part of any existing or future private covenants or
deeds, the most restrictive shall, in all cases, apply. (1984 Code §
5-1-3)
   C.   Application Of Provisions: No structure shall be constructed, erected,
placed or maintained and no land use commenced or continued within the village
except as specifically, or by necessary implication, authorized by this title.
Conditional uses are allowed only on permit granted by the zoning board of
appeals upon finding that the specified conditions exist. Where a lot is
devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures
are authorized as indicated in the land use matrix (section
10-6-3 of this title) and supplementary regulations (chapter 12 of this title).
(1984 Code §
5-1-4)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Rules Of Word Construction
10-2-2: Definitions
10-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
   A.   The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
   B.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future
the present.
   C.   The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive.
   D.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. (1984 Code § 5-
1-5)
   E.   All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot. Any
fraction less than one-half (1/2) may be dropped, and any fraction of one-half
(1/2) or more shall be counted to the integral foot next above. (1984 Code § 5-
1-5; amd. 2010 Code)
   F.   Whenever a word, phrase or a term defined hereinafter appears in the
text of this title, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the
definition thereof. The word "lot" shall include the words "piece" and
"parcel"; the word "building" shall include all other structures of every kind
regardless of similarity to buildings; and the phrase "use for" shall include
the phrases "arranged for", "intended for", "maintained for", "designed for"
and "occupied for". Synonyms in common usage of certain words, phrases or terms
are shown parenthetically. (1984 Code § 5-1-5)
10-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, phrases, and terms, whenever they occur in this title,
shall be interpreted as herein defined:
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING: A subordinate building or use which is located on
the same lot on which the main building or use is situated and which is
reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such
building or main use, when permitted by district regulations.
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
AGRICULTURAL USES: Includes farming, dairy, pasturage, agriculture,
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and, where conditionally permitted,
livestock, animal and poultry husbandry and necessary accessory uses secondary
to normal agricultural activities. All agricultural uses shall comply with
applicable federal, state and village health and environmental regulations.
ALLEY: Any public or private way dedicated to public travel of less than fifty
feet (50') in width, but not less than sixteen feet (16') in width.
APARTMENT: A room, suite or group of rooms arranged, designed, used or intended
to be used as a single housekeeping unit, located in a multiple-family
building. Complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, must always be
included for each housekeeping unit.
AS BUILT PLANS: Final plans showing all changes in the proposed plans,
indicating in detail how the project was constructed.
AUTO WRECKING YARD: Any place where two (2) or more vehicles not in running
condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored
to operating condition, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or
storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof; and including any farm
vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being
restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any
other goods, articles or merchandise. See definition of Recycling Center.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: Major part replacement, major repair or rebuilding or
reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision service,
including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or
paint shop; or vehicle steam cleaning.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: General maintenance and tuneup of a vehicle;
replacement of parts and motor services to passenger cars and trucks not
exceeding two (2) tons.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where fuel, lubricating oil or grease, for
operation of automobiles, is offered for sale directly to the public on the
premises, and including minor accessories and services for automobiles, but not
including automobile repairs, and including washing of automobiles where no
chain conveyor, blower or steam cleaning device is employed. When the
dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels or lubricants is
incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified
as a parking garage.
BASEMENT: A story partly below grade, with at least one-half (1/2) of its
height (measured from floor to ceiling) above grade.
BLOCK: The distance, as measured along a street, between intersecting streets
from centerline to centerline; and where the context requires, the term also
means the enclosed area within the perimeter of the streets or property lines
enclosing it.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the board of trustees of the village.
BOARDING HOUSE: A lodging house at which meals are provided. See definition of
Lodging Room.
BUILDING: Any structure which:
   A.   Is permanently affixed to the land; and
   B.   Has one or more floors and a roof.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level or its
equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the building
to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof, to the deck line
of a mansard roof, and to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of
a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided, that where buildings are set back from
the street line, the height of the building may be measured from the average
elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
BUILDING LINE: A line so designed on the preliminary plan, which delineates the
minimum open space required between the front or side of a structure and the
street right of way.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which the principal use of the
lot on which it is located is conducted.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size, setbacks and mutual relationships of
buildings or other structures, and includes:
   A.   The size and height of the building or other structure;
   B.   The gross floor area of the building in relation to lot area (floor
area ratio);
   C.   The amount of lot area provided per dwelling;
   D.   The location of buildings or other structures in relation to lot lines
or other buildings; and
   E.   All open areas relating to a building or other structure.
BUSINESS: Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is
exhibited or sold, or which occupies time, attention, labor, and materials, or
where services are offered for compensation.
CAFE: See definition of Restaurant.
CARPORT: A roofed accessory building or structure providing space for the
parking of motor vehicles and containing not more than two (2) enclosing walls,
screens, lattices, or other material. When attached to a principal building, a
carport shall be considered a part of the principal building and subject to all
applicable bulk regulations for the district in which it is located.
CARRYOUT RESTAURANT: An eating establishment where food or beverages are
primarily packaged to be carried away from its place of sale and not consumed
on the premises.
CELLAR: A story with more than one-half (1/2) of its height (measured from
floor to ceiling) below grade.
CLINIC, MEDICAL: A building containing the offices and associated facilities of
one or more practitioners and allied professional assistants for the purpose of
carrying on their professions and providing medical, dental, psychiatric,
osteopathic, chiropractic, physical therapy, or similar services for
outpatients only. The clinic may include an accessory medical laboratory.
CLUB, NONBUSINESS: A nonprofit organization of bona fide members paying annual
dues, organized for social, educational or recreational purposes.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association, or group of persons who are
bona fide members paying dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building or
portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their
guests.
CODE: The village code of Sherman, Illinois, and amendments thereto.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street of relatively short length that serves as a
connection between a major or secondary thoroughfare and several minor streets.
The term includes the principal entrance streets of a residential development
and streets for major circulation within such a development.
COMMERCIAL DAYCARE CENTERS: Any childcare facility receiving more than eight
(8) children for daytime care during all or part of a day. The term "commercial
daycare center" includes facilities commonly called childcare centers, day
nurseries, nursery schools and kindergartens.
COMMUNITY FACILITY: A facility which provides a service that is educational,
spiritual, social or recreational in nature, and which operates primarily for
the benefit and welfare of the residents within the area it is intended to
serve.
COMMUNITY, WELFARE, OR HEALTH CENTER: A community service facility where
social, recreational, welfare, health, or childcare assistance is provided by a
public, quasi-public, tax exempt church, or governmental agency.
CONSTRUCTION: The performance of all things necessary to build, rebuild or
improve a road or street.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICE, TEMPORARY: An office which is located in a temporary
structure at a construction site where consulting, recordkeeping, clerical
work, or other business of a construction contractor is carried on during the
term of construction.
CONSTRUCTION PLANS: The drawings prepared in the manner and containing the
date, documents and information required in this title.
CONTRACTOR'S MAINTENANCE YARD: An open yard and/or enclosed structure for
storage of construction or contractor's supplies and operational equipment, but
not constituting a junkyard or salvage yard; may or may not be located on the
same zoning lot as the contractor's office.
CONTRACTOR'S OFFICE: A business office carrying on operations which may be
physically separate (on another zoning lot) from the contractor's yard and/or
maintenance yard.
COUNTY: The county of Sangamon, state of Illinois.
CUL-DE-SAC: A short street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and
having the other end permanently terminated by a turnaround for vehicles.
CURB AND GUTTER: The level of the established curb in front of a building or
structure measured at the center of such front. Where no curb level has been
established, it shall be deemed to be the established level of the centerline
of the street surface in front of a building or structure, measured at the
centerline of each front.
DEAD END STREET: See definition of Cul-De-Sac.
DENSITY: The number of living units per acre allowable under the schedule of
district regulations.
DISTRICT: A section or part of the incorporated or unincorporated portion of
the village for which the use regulations are uniform.
DRAINAGE COURSE: A natural watercourse, swale, gully, dry stream or ditch which
naturally carries stormwater runoff or which is fed by a street or building
gutters or by stormwater sewers.
DRIVE: See definition of Street.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment which accommodates patrons'
automobiles on the premises, allowing service to the patrons in their
automobiles.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: An eating establishment where food or beverages are
dispensed and where such food or beverages may be generally consumed on the
premises within automobiles or vehicles.
DRIVEWAY: A private road providing access to a garage, house or other building.
DUPLEX: A residence containing only two (2) dwelling units. See definition of
Dwelling, Two-Family.
DWELLING: A permanent building used primarily for human habitation but not
including facilities for the housing of transient residents nor to include
mobile homes.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A permanent building or portion thereof providing
separate living accommodations for three (3) or more families.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A permanent building, separate and freestanding, in
itself providing living accommodations for one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A permanent building designed exclusively for occupancy
by two (2) families.
EASEMENT: A nonprofitable interest in land owned by another that entitles the
village the right to use land, but only for a limited and specifically named
purpose.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
village of Sherman".
ENGINEER: The engineer for the village of Sherman.
FAMILY: One or more persons each related to one another by blood, marriage or
adoption, or a group of not more than five (5) persons not all so related
maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit which is not a "boarding
house" or "lodging room" as defined in this section.
FAMILY CARE FACILITY: A facility providing shelter, counseling, and other
rehabilitative services in a family like environment of six (6) or fewer
residents, and not more than two (2) staff or supervisory personnel, not
legally related to the facility operators or supervisors, who, by reason of
mental or physical disability, chemical or alcohol dependency, family or school
adjustment problems, require a minimum level of supervision, but do not require
medical or nursing care or general supervision, and which is licensed and/or
approved by the state of Illinois, or by a state agency. A family care facility
may also include uses such as foster homes, halfway houses, community
residential alternative facilities, or house individual programs.
FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: Family homes which receive not more than eight (8)
children for care during the day.
FEE: Fixed charges, levied by the village, to defray costs of administration
associated with various provisions of this code.
FENCE: An enclosure, barrier, or boundary made of posts, boards, wood, wire,
stakes, stone, brick, earth, rails or vinyl.
FINAL PLAT: The final survey and drawing with supporting material indicating
the subdivider's plan of the subdivision, which, after board approval, shall be
filed with the Sangamon County recorder of deeds.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD CREST ELEVATION: The maximum instantaneous elevation of the water surface
during the period of a 100-year flood as established by the U.S. federal
management agency, federal insurance administration.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA, SPECIAL OR SFHA: Are synonymous. Those lands within the
jurisdiction of the village of Sherman, Illinois, the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village of Sherman, Illinois, or that may be annexed into
the village of Sherman, Illinois, that are subject to inundation by the base
flood. The floodplains of the village of Sherman, Illinois, are generally
identified as such on panel numbers 0075, 0100, 0235 and 0255 of the countywide
flood insurance rate map of Sangamon County, Illinois, prepared by the federal
emergency management agency and dated effective August 2, 2007. Floodplain also
includes those areas of known flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Sangamon County, Illinois,
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village of Sherman,
Illinois, or that may be annexed into the village of Sherman, Illinois, are
generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared for
Sangamon County, Illinois, by the federal emergency management agency and dated
effective August 2, 2007.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Sangamon River and Fancy Creek
shall be as delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Sangamon
County, Illinois, prepared by FEMA and dated effective August 2, 2007. The
floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of the village of Sherman,
Illinois, shall be according to the best data available from federal, state, or
other sources.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a
building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the
centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings. However, the floor area of a
building does not include:
   A.   Cellar space;
   B.   Elevator shafts or stairwells, accessory water tanks, or cooling
towers;
   C.   Attic space, whether or not a floor actually has been laid, providing
structural headroom of less than seven feet six inches (7'6");
   D.   Uncovered steps;
   E.   Terraces, breezeways, or open porches; provided, that not more than
fifty percent (50%) of the perimeter of such terrace, breezeway or open porch
is enclosed;
   F.   Floor space used for accessory off street loading spaces, up to two
hundred percent (200%) of the amount required by the applicable regulations;
and
   G.   Floor space used for permitted or required accessory off street parking
spaces located at not more than twenty three feet (23') above grade.
FUNERAL HOME: A place where corpses are prepared for visitation, service, or
burial.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building where automotive vehicles are painted, repaired,
rebuilt, reconstructed and/or stored for compensation.
GARBAGE: Food waste, refuse, or something left as worthless or useless.
GAS STATION: See definitions of Service Station and Automobile Service Station.
GRADE: With reference to a building or structure, is the average elevation of
the ground adjoining the building or structure on all sides. In case walls are
parallel to and within five feet (5') of a sidewalk, the ground level shall be
measured at the sidewalk.
GRINDER PUMP: An electrical pump used to reduce sewer mass into sewer waste and
pump said sewer waste through village sewer lines.
GROUP CARE FACILITY: A facility providing shelter, counseling, and other
rehabilitative services in a family like environment to more than six (6) but
less than fifteen (15) residents, and not more than three (3) staff or
supervisory personnel not legally related to the facility operators or
supervisors, who, by reason of mental or physical disability, chemical or
alcohol dependency, or family or school adjustment problems, require a minimum
level of supervision, but do not require medical or nursing care or general
supervision, and which is licensed and/or approved by the state of Illinois or
by a state agency.
GUESTHOUSE: Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the
same premises with the main building for use by temporary guests of the
occupants of the premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen facilities nor
be rented or otherwise used as a separate building.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material or substance in any form or quantity which
might be harmful to life, property, or the environment as defined by the
Illinois Compiled Statutes and applicable regulations.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation customarily carried on in a dwelling unit by a
member of the occupant's family, and which meets the criteria contained in
section
10-12-20 of this title.
HOTEL: A building or part of a building, with a common entrance or entrances,
in which dwelling units or rooming units without kitchen units are used
primarily for transient occupancy, or in which other special services are
provided in addition to those listed in the definition of "hotel, apartment" of
this section. A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public
banquet halls, ballrooms or meeting rooms.
HOTEL, APARTMENT:
   A.   A building or part of a building, with a common entrance or entrances,
in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for permanent
occupancy and may have kitchen units, and in which one or more of the following
special services are provided:
      1.   Maid service.
      2.   Furnishing or laundering of linen.
      3.   Telephone, secretarial, or desk service.
      4.   Bellboy service.
   B.   An apartment hotel may include a restaurant, beauty shop, barbershop,
or drugstore; provided, that in residence districts, such facilities shall be
accessible only through the lobby, and that no signs shall be visible from the
street, except as permitted by the applicable district regulations. An
apartment hotel, which includes public banquet halls, ballrooms, or meeting
rooms, shall be treated as a hotel for the purposes of this title.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER: One or more persons each related by blood, marriage or
adoption and maintaining one common household.
INSTITUTION: A facility or establishment providing shelter, counseling, general
or specialized care, or nursing care, dedicated to public service, education,
fraternal or philanthropic purposes. An institution includes uses such as
nursing homes, sanitariums, all types of facilities for children, the aged, and
mentally and physically disabled.
JUNKYARD (SALVAGE, WRECKING YARD, AUTO GRAVEYARD): Any establishment, building,
or area maintained, used or operated for the storing, keeping, dismantling,
disassembling, buying, or selling of machinery, appliances, or other similar
materials; or inoperable, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or discarded automobiles,
automobile parts, vehicles, or vehicle parts. Any premises on which there
remains an inoperable, partially dismantled, wrecked, or junk automobile(s) or
vehicle(s) as a permanent storage place shall be considered dead storage and,
for the purposes of this title, shall be deemed an automobile graveyard or
junkyard.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises on which two (2) or more dogs, at least
four (4) months of age, are kept, boarded for compensation, or kept or bred for
sale.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
LOADING, OFF STREET: A space, accessible from a street, alley or way, in a
building or on a lot for the use of trucks while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials.
LOCATION MAP: A preliminary drawing of a proposed subdivision indicating the
outline of the area to be subdivided with approximate boundary dimensions and
total acreage along with any existing and proposed roads, utilities, and other
public facilities expected to service the area.
LODGING ROOM: A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without
cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of
rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping
accommodations shall be counted as one lodging room. See definition of Boarding
House.
LOT: A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other
open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on any
improved public street and may consist of:
   A.   A single lot of record.
   B.   A portion of a lot of record.
   C.   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record
and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record.
   D.   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided, that in no
case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this title, and the plat act, 765
Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/0.01 et seq.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through
front, side and rear lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
single street, the interior angle of which is one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°) or less.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT WIDTH: The distance from side lot line to side lot line at the required
front yard line.
MAINTENANCE: The performance of all things necessary to keep a highway in
serviceable condition for vehicular traffic. Maintenance includes the plowing
of snow.
MAYOR: See definition of Village President.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
MOBILE HOME: A structure designed or intended for permanent habitation, and
designed with a fixed axle and wheels, whether wheels or axle are attached or
not. Mobile homes shall only be located in mobile home parks 1 .
MOBILE HOME CONVERSION: When a mobile home has been modified, adapted, and/or
converted and approved pursuant to the codes and regulations and attached to
the ground by a permanent foundation. A mobile home or a mobile home conversion
shall not be allowed as a building, but shall remain subject to all provisions
of this code applicable to mobile homes 2 . Mobile homes and trailers shall be
defined as the same.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A contiguous parcel of land which has been planned and
improved for the placement of mobile homes. Developments or portions of
development intended for the sale of individual lots or parcels for the
placement of mobile homes on permanent foundation shall not be included within
the definition of a mobile home park 3 .
MODULAR HOME: A dwelling designed partially or intended for permanent
habitation which is constructed at a factory or plant and then assembled at the
building site. Modular homes shall meet the minimum building standards
established by the village of Sherman.
MORTUARY: See definition of Funeral Home.
MOTEL: A building or part of a building, with a common entrance lobby, common
entrance or entrances, or may have doorway(s) opening directly to the outdoors,
in which lodging units or rooming units, normally without kitchen facilities,
are used primarily for transient occupancy, in which other special services are
provided in addition to those listed in the definition of "hotel, apartment" of
this section. A motel may include, but is not limited to, a restaurant,
cocktail lounge, gift shop, public banquet hall, ballroom, meeting room,
swimming pool, recreational facility, or holidome.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or premises in which freight is received or
dispatched by motor vehicle.
NATURAL GRADE LEVEL: The mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the
portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the
building.
NONCOMPLYING BUILDING OR OTHER STRUCTURE: Any lawful building or other
structure which does not conform with the applicable bulk regulations for the
district, either on the effective date hereof or amendments hereto.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any lawful use of a building or other structure or a tract
of land which does not conform to the applicable use regulations for the
district, either on the effective date hereof or as a result of a subsequent
amendment hereto. However, no principal use shall be deemed nonconforming
because of failure to provide required accessory off street parking spaces or
required accessory off street loading spaces, nor because of the existence of
accessory signs, business entrances, or show windows which are themselves
nonconforming uses.
NUISANCE:
   A.   Anything detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare or well
being.
   B.   Any act or omission detrimental to the health, welfare, safety or well
being of the village or its inhabitants.
NURSING HOME: A private home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or
a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such a home may contain
equipment for surgical care or for treatment of a disease or injury, but does
not include maternity care or mental illnesses.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies or controls the whole or any part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
OFF STREET LOADING SPACE: An on the property space for temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading which abuts upon a street, alley
or other appropriate means of access. Such space shall not be less than ten
feet (10') in width, fourteen feet (14') in height and twenty five feet (25')
in length, exclusive of access isles and maneuvering space, unless otherwise
specified.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE (ACCESSORY): A space provided to service a principle
use with or without remuneration.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE (COMMERCIAL): A space provided which is not intended
to serve a principal use, or is intended to serve a general area or a variety
of uses, and in which cars are parked subject to remuneration, whether such
space is contained within a ramp or structure, or whether such space is
contained within a surface level parking lot.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Any officers of the village of Sherman. Whenever reference is made in
this code to a village officer by title only, this shall be construed as though
followed by the words "of the village of Sherman".
OPEN PORCH: An unobstructed entrance to a building which has no enclosing or
confining walls, but which may be covered and have poles or posts as supports
for the covering.
OPEN SPACE: The total area in square feet which is countable as open space but
is not paved in streets, walks or driveways and is suitably improved for public
or private recreational pursuits of all residents. Recreation space should
provide for active and passive recreation activities. That part of a recreation
area having a dimension of less than twenty feet (20') shall not be included as
countable recreation space. In addition, countable recreation space must be at
least twenty feet (20') away from any residential wall containing a window on
the ground floor.
OPERATOR:
   A.   The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
   B.   The person who is in control of the operation of any motor vehicle
within the corporate limits of the village.
OWNER: Any person with an ownership or interest in property, whether real,
personal or mixed, including, but not limited to, any fee simple ownership,
tenant in common, joint tenant, lessee, trustee, beneficiary under any trust,
receiver, assignee or personal representative.
PACKAGE LIQUOR: Where alcoholic beverages are sold in original packages at
retail for consumption off the premises.
PARK: Any publicly owned park, playground, beach or parkway.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A public right of way across or within a block designed
primarily for use by pedestrian traffic.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, and any trustee,
receiver, assignee or personal representative, as well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every description of money, goods, chattels, effects,
evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary
obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred,
increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right of interest
therein.
PLAN COMMISSION: The planning committee of the village of Sherman.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: Any area or tract of land of ten (10) acres or more
under single or common ownership to be developed as a single entity and
classified as a conditional permitted use in a residential district.
PRELIMINARY PLAN: Refers to a preliminary survey, drawings, and supportive
material indicating the proposed layout of a subdivision.
PRIVATE GARAGE (COMMERCIAL): An accessory building occupied by the motor
vehicles of the business or businesses located on the same zoning lot.
PRIVATE GARAGE (RESIDENTIAL): Any accessory building occupied by the passenger
motor vehicles of the families residing on the same zoning lot. This may
include not more than one commercial vehicle of not more than two (2) tons'
capacity.
PUBLIC GARAGE: Any building, other than that herein defined as a "private
garage", used for storage or care of motor vehicles, or where such vehicles are
equipped for operation, minor repairs, or kept for remuneration.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Refers to site grading, or any street, curb and gutter,
sidewalk, drainage ditch, sewer, catch basin, pedestrianway, street name and
traffic control sign, or other facility necessary for the general use of
property owners in a subdivision.
PUBLIC SERVICE AREA: An area including such uses as fire and police stations,
telephone exchanges, radio and television transmitting and relay stations and
towers, filter plants and pumping stations and similar uses.
RECORDER: The recorder of deeds for Sangamon County.
RECREATION SPACE: See definition of Open Space.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Any nonhazardous municipal solid waste materials subject
to recovery techniques.
RECYCLING CENTER: A facility dedicated to operations involving the collection,
segregation and processing of nonhazardous materials including glass,
newspapers, cardboard, magazines, office paper, soda/beer cans, rubber tires,
food/juice cans, plastics, food, yard waste, appliances and motor oil.
RECYCLING DROP-OFF POINT: A place where recyclable materials may be deposited
for collection and off site processing.
REFUSE: All waste products resulting from human habitation, except for sewage.
RESIDENCE OR RESIDENTIAL: A building or part of a building containing dwelling
units or rooming units used primarily for permanent occupancy. For the purposes
of this title, residences include all single-family or two-family houses,
multiple dwellings, boarding or rooming houses, or apartment hotels. However,
residences do not include:
   A.   Transient accommodation, including accommodations in hotels, motels or
tourist cabins, or trailer or mobile home parks, or trailers or mobile homes;
or
   B.   In a mixed building, that part of the building used for any
nonresidential uses, except accessory to residential uses. "Residential" means
pertaining to a residence.
RESIDENCE, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building containing only one dwelling unit.
REST HOME: A private home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a
place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but not including equipment
for the treatment of sickness or injuries or for surgical care.
RESTAURANT (CAFETERIA, INN, CAFE): An establishment in which foods,
refreshments or beverages are offered for sale for consumption in the building
in which the establishment is located, or at tables situated on the lot upon
which the establishment is located. If any portion of the foods, refreshments,
or beverages are sold for consumption in automobiles parked on the zoning lot
upon which the establishment is located, the establishment shall be considered
to be a drive- in restaurant. The term restaurant does not apply to churches;
religious, fraternal, youth or patriotic organizations; service clubs; and
civic or union organizations which occasionally prepare to serve or sell meals
or lunches to transients or to the general public, nor shall it include any
public or private school lunchroom.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts entered into between private parties and
constitute a restriction on the use of all private property within a
subdivision for the benefit of property owners, and to provide mutual
protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to
impair stability of values and shall be required to accompany the final plat at
the time of recording.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land over which is built a public roadway with
appurtenances necessary to allow the convenient and unobstructed passage of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
ROADBED: The graded portion between edge of shoulder and edge of shoulder.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A method of disposing of refuse by spreading and covering
with earth.
SANITARY SEWER: A constructed conduit for the collection and carrying of liquid
and solid sewage wastes, other than stormwaters, to a sewage treatment plant.
SERVICE ACCESS STREET: A street parallel to and adjacent to a controlled access
thoroughfare which serves abutting properties.
SERVICE STATION: Any building, structure, land area or other premises, or
portion thereof, used for the sale at retail of motor vehicle fuels and oils,
or for servicing (minor repairs) or lubricating motor vehicles, which activity
may be accompanied by accessory uses and sales. See definition of Automobile
Service Station.
SETBACK, FRONT YARD: The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the
front line or side line of the building and the lot line nearest the street
line.
SEWAGE SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL: A system of piping, tanks and other facilities
serving only one lot.
SIDEWALK: A paved pedestrianway intended for pedestrian use only.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: An assembly or structure, including passive designs, used
for gathering, concentrating, absorbing, and/or storing radiant energy from the
sun.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: The standard specifications for road and bridge
construction, adopted by the department of transportation, state of Illinois,
latest revision at time of construction plan approval.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STORAGE, ACCESSORY USES: Accessory uses to a retail store such as storerooms,
or stockrooms, which may be used to store materials and merchandise clearly
related and incidental to the business. Storage area(s) may be part of the
building and/or a separate building located on the same zoning lot.
STORM SEWER: A constructed conduit for carrying stormwaters to a drainage
course.
STREET: Any public or private way dedicated to public travel fifty feet (50')
or more in width. The word "street" shall include the words "road", "highway"
and "thoroughfare". This term shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards,
public squares, public places and sidewalks, and any other property which is
part of a dedicated right of way within the village whether such right of way
is dedicated pursuant to statute or by common law.
STREET AND THOROUGHFARE PLAN: The portion of the official village plan
providing and planning for the present and future system of streets for the
village.
STRUCTURAL CHANGE (MAJOR): Any change in the supporting members of a building
or structure such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any substantial structural change in the roof or in the exterior walls, but not
to include repairs such as painting, glazing, siding, roofing and patching
needed for normal maintenance.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or
less permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a
permanent location on the ground.
SUBDIVIDER: Any owner, agent or person controlling land who commences
proceedings under the subdivision title by submitting a location map to the
planning committee.
SURETY: A bonding agency that is financially qualified to do business in the
state of Illinois.
SWALE: A natural or manmade grass water drainage system utilized to accommodate
surface runoff.
TAVERN: A place where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the
premises.
TEMPORARY BUILDINGS: May include a construction office and construction storage
facilities, and may be permitted in any district, when approved pursuant to the
codes and regulations under the jurisdiction of the zoning enforcement officer
during the period that the construction work is in progress, but such temporary
buildings shall be removed upon the completion of the construction work.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
TOURIST HOME: A building which contains a single dwelling unit and in which
meals or lodging, or both, are provided or offered to transient guests for
compensation.
TOWING AND TEMPORARY STORAGE OF VEHICLES: Towing and temporary storage of
vehicles is allowed: a) as a principal use; or b) as an incidental use to motor
vehicle services and related business, in order to service or repair such
vehicles, or where such vehicles are temporarily retained for service or
repairs, or for return to the lawful owner or other appropriate agency for
further processing.
TOWNSHIP HIGHWAY COMMISSIONER: The township highway commissioner for the
township(s) in which the subdivision is located.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE: Any signs, markings and devices placed on or adjacent
to a street or highway by authority of the village of Sherman, the state of
Illinois, department of transportation or the Sangamon County superintendent of
highways.
TRAILER PARK: A zoning lot occupied by or designed to accommodate more than one
trailer. See definition of Mobile Home Park.
TRAVEL TRAILER: All vehicles and portable structures built on a chassis,
designated as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses,
and containing less than two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: Any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more travel
trailers, occupied for dwelling and sleeping purposes, are located, regardless
of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations.
USE: The purpose or activity for which a building, structure or land is
occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: A subordinate use which is clearly and customarily incidental
to the principal use of a building or premises and which is located on the same
lot as the principal building or use except for such accessory parking
facilities as are specifically authorized to be located elsewhere.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VILLAGE: The village of Sherman, County of Sangamon, state of Illinois.
VILLAGE CLERK: The village clerk of the village of Sherman.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The president of the village board may be referred to as
"mayor" or "president of the village".
WAREHOUSE: A building used for the storage of goods for compensation or the
storage of goods which will be subsequently transported to another location for
sale or consumption.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, such
terms shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles
or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: These terms may include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in
case he is unable to write, by his proper mark.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied
and unobstructed by buildings, except as otherwise provided in this title.
   A.   Front Yard: The yard extending across the entire width of the lot
between the principal building and the right of way line or street line which
the building faces.
   B.   Rear Yard: The yard extending across the entire width of the lot
between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the principal building.
   C.   Side Yard: The yard extending along the side lot line from the front
yard to the rear yard and lying between the side lot line and the nearest part
of the principal building.
ZONING BOARD: The Sherman zoning board of appeals.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATION):
Whenever in this title the term zoning enforcement officer is used, it shall
mean the zoning administrative officer and such deputies or assistants as have
been or shall be duly authorized by the village.
ZONING LOT: A lot that is to be used for a use permitted in the district in
which it is located at the time of applying for a building permit. It is a plot
of ground, made up of one or more parcels, which is or may be occupied by a
building or buildings, including the open spaces required by this title. A
"zoning lot" may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
ZONING MAP: The map incorporated into this title. (1984 Code § 5-1-7; amd. Ord.
2004-33, 10-12-2004; 2010 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  9-4-2 of this code.
2 2. See title 9, chapter 4 of this code.
3 3. See also section
  9-4-2 of this code.
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-3-1: Administrative And Enforcement Officials
10-3-1-1: Zoning Enforcement Officer
10-3-2: Building Permit
10-3-3: Certificate Of Compliance
10-3-4: Variations
10-3-5: Amendments
10-3-6: Contents Of Variation And Amendment Petitions
10-3-7: Fees
10-3-8: Appeals
10-3-9: Enforcement
10-3-10: Penalty
10-3-1: ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
The administration of this title is hereby vested in the zoning enforcement
officer of the village and in the zoning board of appeals. (1984 Code § 5-10)
10-3-1-1: ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
   A.   Created; Appointment; Term: There is hereby created the office of the
zoning enforcement officer. The zoning enforcement officer shall be appointed
by the village president with the advice and consent of the village board for a
term of one year.
   B.   Duties: The zoning enforcement officer or his duly authorized
representative shall enforce this title. In the performance of his duties, he
shall:
      1.   Examine and approve applications that conform with this title and
issue building permits and zoning certificates of compliance for all uses of
land, buildings, and structures when the application conforms with the
provisions of this title.
      2.   Determine lot, bulk, and parking requirements in specific instances.
      3.   For industrial districts, receive certificates indicating compliance
with the performance standards for the I-1 or I-2 district from an engineer
registered with the state or scientific testing laboratory, approved by the
village board.
      4.   Keep records of and pertaining to this title including:
         a.   All maps, amendments, conditional uses, variations, appeals, and
other pertinent data.
         b.   All uses and structures which do not conform with the regulations
of each district.
      5.   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and uses of the land
to determine compliance with this title.
      6.   Receive, file and forward to the zoning board of appeals all
petitions for amendments, variances, conditional permitted uses and appeals
which are filed in the office of the zoning enforcement officer. All petitions
shall have attached a location map illustrating the shape and dimensions of the
property in question and a list of contiguous property owners and their
addresses including owners across streets and alleys.
      7.   Provide clerical technical assistance as may be required by this
title and the zoning board of appeals in the exercise of its duties. Interested
parties may copy records at their own expense.
      8.   File reports with the village president relative to findings of the
zoning enforcement officer on all reports of zoning violations made to him by a
citizen or a village official.
      9.   Provide and maintain a public information bureau relative to all
matters arising out of this title and post all public notices called for in
this title. (1984 Code § 5-10-1)
10-3-2: BUILDING PERMIT 1 :
   A.   Permit Required; Exemption: It shall be unlawful to commence the
excavation for or the construction of any building, including accessory
buildings and swimming pools, or to commence the moving or major structural
change of any buildings, including accessory buildings, until the zoning
enforcement officer has issued a building permit for such work. (1984 Code § 5-
10-2; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Application For Permit:
      1.   In applying to the zoning enforcement officer for a building permit,
the applicant shall submit a dimensioned sketch or scale plan indicating the
shape, size, height and location of all buildings to be erected, changed
structurally, or moved, and of any building already on the lot. He shall also
state the existing and intended use of all such buildings and supply such other
information as may be required by the zoning enforcement officer for
determining whether the provisions of this title are being observed. (1984 Code
§ 5-10-2)
      2.   All plans submitted in connection with a building permit application
for a multi-family dwelling structure of more than two (2) units or a
commercial structure shall be affixed with the seal of an architect licensed by
the state of Illinois, and no building permit shall be approved by the zoning
enforcement officer unless the application for a building permit is accompanied
by plans bearing the seal of a licensed architect where the application
pertains to the construction or improvement of multiple-family dwellings in
excess of two (2) units or commercial structures. (Ord. 1995-3, 1-17-1995; amd.
2010 Code)
   C.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit: If the proposed excavation or
construction as set forth in the application is in conformity with the
provisions of this title and other ordinances of the village, the zoning
enforcement officer shall issue a building permit for such excavation or
construction. If a building permit is refused, the zoning enforcement officer
shall state, in writing, with cause, and shall immediately forward such notice
or refusal to the applicant. The zoning enforcement officer shall grant or deny
the permit within ten (10) days from the date the application is submitted. The
issuance of a building permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any
provisions of this title.
   D.   Expiration Of Permit: A building permit shall become void unless:
      1.   For residential construction, the exterior is completed within six
(6) months and totally completed within two (2) years.
      2.   Commercial construction is completed within two (2) years. (1984
Code § 5-10-2)
   E.   Display Of Permit: Any person or entity issued a building permit by the
village pursuant to the terms of this section shall display such permit upon
the premises so it is visible from the street adjoining the front of the
property for which the permit has been issued, and shall maintain such posting
until construction is fully completed. (Ord. 1990-6, 4-3-1990)
   F.   In the event construction does not comply with the terms of the
building permit issued hereunder, or in violation of Village Code, both the
owner and if applicable general contractor shall be responsible for the payment
of a fine in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2500.00),
payable to the Village. Any fine under this section must be paid prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 2020-03, 2-18-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  9-1-1 of this code.
10-3-3: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Certificate Required: No land or building or part thereof hereafter
erected or changed in its use or structure shall be used until the zoning
enforcement officer shall have issued a certificate of compliance indicating
that such land, building or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, are
found to be in conformity with the provisions of this title.
   B.   Inspection And Issuance Or Denial Of Certificate: Within three (3) days
after notification that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for
occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the zoning enforcement officer to
make a final inspection thereof and to issue a certificate of compliance if the
land, building or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are found to
conform with the provisions of this title; or if such certificate is refused,
to state the refusal in writing, with the cause, and immediately forward such
notice of refusal to the applicant. No certificate of compliance shall be
issued until the zoning enforcement officer has determined that the land,
building or part thereof and the proposed use are in full compliance with all
rules and regulations of the state department of public health and the village
relating to sewage, sanitary facilities and septic tank requirements. (1984
Code § 5-10-3)
10-3-4: VARIATIONS:
   A.   Authority: The village board shall decide variations from the
provisions of this title in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
title and shall verify them only in the specific instances hereinafter set
forth where the zoning board of appeals shall have made findings of fact based
upon the standards hereinafter prescribed that there are practical difficulties
or a particular hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
regulations of this title. Any proposed variation which fails to receive the
approval of the board of appeals shall not be passed except by the favorable
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the village board.
   B.   Initiation: A petition for a variation may be filed by any interested
property owner or contract purchaser. In cases where a contract purchaser is
the petitioner, the contract purchaser shall provide a letter from the owner
which states that the owner is aware of the petition and the request(s)
contained therein, that the petitioner is indeed a contract purchaser and that
the owner approves the action. Such petitions for a variation shall be filed in
writing and shall contain such information as the zoning board of appeals may
require by rule.
   C.   Processing: A petition for a variation shall be filed with the zoning
enforcement officer. The zoning enforcement officer shall forward such petition
to the board of appeals within ten (10) days. The petition shall include a list
of adjacent property owners, including owners across the street and across the
alley, as well as their mailing address(es). A map shall also be submitted
which shows the boundaries of the property, the location of existing and/or
proposed structures in relation to property lines, and adjacent land uses.
   D.   Hearing: No variation shall be made by the village board except after a
public hearing before the zoning board of appeals of which there shall be a
notice of time and place of hearing published at least once, not more than
thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days, before the hearing, in one or more
newspapers with a general circulation within the village.
   E.   Standards For And Conditions Of Variations:
      1.   The zoning board of appeals shall not recommend to the village board
that the regulations of this title be varied as authorized in subsection A of
this section unless it shall make findings of fact based upon the evidence
presented to it in each specific case:
         a.   That the property in question cannot be economically used or
cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only for the
conditions allowed by the regulations;
         b.   That the plight of the owner is due to circumstances unique to
the property and not generally applicable to other property in the area; and
         c.   That the variation, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality, impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property, increase the congestion of traffic, or diminish or impair
property values in the locality.
      2.   The zoning board of appeals may impose such conditions and
restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to
comply with the standards of this subsection.
   F.   Authorized Variations: Variations from the regulations established in
this title shall be recommended to the village board by the zoning board of
appeals only in accordance with standards established in subsection E of this
section and in the following instances as examples:
      1.   To permit a height greater than allowed;
      2.   To permit a yard less than the yard required by the applicable
regulation;
      3.   To permit the use of any lot located in a residence district having
insufficient area and width for a single-family dwelling, provided such lot is
of record on the effective date hereof;
      4.   To permit the use of any lot not covered above, or a use otherwise
prohibited solely because of insufficient area of the lot;
      5.   To permit the same off street parking spaces to qualify as required
spaces for two (2) or more uses; provided, that the maximum use of such
facility by each user does not take place during the same hours of the same
days of the week;
      6.   To increase by not more than twenty percent (20%) the gross area of
any sign; and
      7.   To reduce the applicable off street parking or loading requirements.
(1984 Code § 5-10-6)
10-3-5: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: The village board may from time to time, in the interest of
promoting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, and general welfare,
conserving the values of property throughout the village, avoiding or lessening
congestion throughout the village, and avoiding or lessening congestion in the
public streets and highways, amend the regulations and the districts created in
the manner set forth in this section.
   B.   Initiation: A petition for an amendment may be filed by an interested
property owner, contract purchaser or, in the case of text amendments or
general map amendments, village board members. In cases where a contract
purchaser is the petitioner, the contract purchaser shall provide a letter from
the owner which states that the owner is aware of the petition and the request
(s) contained therein, that the petitioner is indeed a contract purchaser, and
that the owner approves of the action. Such petitions for amendments shall be
filed in writing and shall contain such information as the zoning board of
appeals may require by rule.
   C.   Processing: A petition for an amendment shall be filed with the zoning
enforcement officer. The zoning enforcement officer shall forward such petition
to the board of appeals within ten (10) days. The petition shall include a list
of adjacent property owners, including owners across the street and across the
alley, as well as their mailing addresses. A map shall also be submitted which
shows the boundaries of the property, the location of existing and/or proposed
structures in relation to lot lines and adjacent land uses.
   D.   Hearing: No amendment shall be granted by the village board except
after a public hearing before the zoning board of appeals of which there shall
be a notice of the time and place of the hearing published at least once, not
more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in
one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the village.
   E.   Findings Of Fact And Recommendations Of Zoning Board Of Appeals:
      1.   Within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing on a proposed
amendment, the zoning board of appeals shall make written findings of fact and
shall submit the same, together with its recommendations, to the village board.
If the proposed amendment is to change the zoning classification of a
particular property, the zoning board of appeals shall make findings based upon
evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect to the following
matters:
         a.   Existing uses of property within the general vicinity of the
property in question.
         b.   The zoning classification of property within the general area of
the property in question.
         c.   The suitability of the property in question for the uses
permitted under the existing zoning classification.
         d.   The trend of development within the vicinity since the property
was originally classified.
      2.   The zoning board of appeals shall only recommend the adoption of a
proposed amendment when it finds that the public interest will be served in
addition to the interest of the applicant.
   F.   Action By Board Of Trustees:
      1.   The village board shall act on a proposed amendment only when it has
received a written report and recommendation from the zoning board of appeals
on the proposed amendment.
      2.   After any application for an amendment has been acted upon by the
village board, another application requesting the same relief shall not be
accepted or considered by the village board for a period of six (6) months
after such action, unless the application shows that there has been a
substantial change in circumstances, as determined by the zoning board of
appeals, since such action.
      3.   In case of written protest filed with the village clerk against any
proposed amendment, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent
(20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley
therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, such amendment shall not be
passed except by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the
village board. In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be served by
the protestor or protestors on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a
copy upon the applicant's attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of
such application for the proposed amendment. In order to perfect its protest,
the protestor(s) shall file the protest with the zoning enforcement officer at
least twenty four (24) hours before the village board meeting. (1984 Code § 5-
10-7)
10-3-6: CONTENTS OF VARIATION AND AMENDMENT PETITIONS:
   A.   Any petition filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for any
amendment to this title or for any variance from the requirements of this title
shall contain the following:
      1.   The identity of all owners and contract purchasers of the property
in question including the owners of the beneficial interest in any land trust
which is the holder of legal title to the property which is the subject of the
petition.
      2.   An accurate description of the real estate which is the subject
matter of the relief sought in the petition.
      3.   A statement setting forth the present zoning of the property in
question under this title or, in the case of property to be annexed to the
village, the present zoning classification under the zoning ordinance of
Sangamon County.
      4.   A brief, complete and accurate statement of the relief sought by the
petitioners, setting forth the zoning reclassification sought by the
petitioners, if any, and the precise sections of this title to be varied, if
any.
      5.   A brief, clear and accurate statement of the petitioner's present
and proposed use of the premises in the event the rezoning or variance relief
requested is granted.
      6.   The common address of the property in question by number and street
or, if number and street are not available, by other accurate designation.
      7.   A statement that the petitioners have read the contents of the
petition and that the contents are true and correct.
   B.   The petition may be signed by the petitioners or by their attorney of
record, and the attorney of record shall include his address and telephone
number after the body of the petition. (Ord. 1990-7, 4-3-1990)
10-3-7: FEES:
   A.   Variations; Amendments; Conditional Permitted Uses; Appeals: Any
application for variation shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00). An application for an amendment or conditional permitted use
for all uses of land or buildings shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred
dollars ($200.00). Appeals shall be accompanied by a fee of seventy five
dollars ($75.00). Each applicant shall be responsible for the payment of the
legal publication. These filing fees are nonrefundable. (1984 Code § 5-10-9)
   B.   Building Permit:
      1.   Application for a building permit shall be accompanied by an
inspection and registration fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus a fee
of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each one hundred (100) square feet, or portion
thereof, of improvements up to two thousand (2,000) square feet, plus an
additional five dollars ($5.00) for each one hundred (100) square feet, or
portion thereof, of improvements beyond two thousand (2,000) square feet. The
registration and inspection fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not
apply to additions to or alterations of existing structures. In no case shall
the minimum fee for a building permit be less than seventy five dollars
($75.00). In calculating the area subject to the permit fee, any attached
garage area shall be excluded. Any unattached garage or storage area
constructed at the time of obtaining the original permit shall not be included
in the calculation for determining the cost of a permit. Any attached garage,
unattached garage or storage area constructed after obtaining the original
permit shall be governed by subsections B2 and B3 of this section. (Ord. 1998-
13, 7-21-1998; amd. Ord. 2009-26, 8-18-2009; 2010 Code)
      2.   Whenever any porch, deck, fence, exterior stairway, unattached
storage shed of less than five hundred (500) square feet, swimming pool or
other improvement not already covered by subsection B1 of this section is
constructed within any front, rear or side yard, a building permit must be
obtained by the owner and an inspection conducted. The cost of such permit
under this subsection B2 shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
      3.   The permit charge for a barn, warehouse or storage facility of over
five hundred (500) square feet shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00). If any
portion of a barn, warehouse or storage facility is used for office, business
or residential purposes, the provisions of subsection B1 of this section shall
apply. (Ord. 1998-13, 7-21-1998; amd. 2010 Code)
      4.   No fee will be charged in the case of a tax exempt organization
requesting a building permit for real estate which is also tax exempt;
provided, however, that the application for said building permit must be
prepared and filed in accordance with the requirements of the ordinances of the
village in all other respects. (Ord. 1998-13, 7-21-1998)
      5.   In the event construction of any structure is commenced prior to
application being made to the zoning enforcement officer for a building permit,
the fee for the building permit shall be doubled. (1984 Code § 5-11-2)
   C.   Large Scale Developments: There shall be a one hundred dollar ($100.00)
filing fee for large scale developments. (2010 Code)
10-3-8: APPEALS:
   A.   Authority: The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals
from any administrative order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the zoning enforcement officer or other authorized officials of the village
relating to regulations of this title. (1984 Code § 5-10-5)
   B.   Initiation: An appeal to the zoning board of appeals may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by any officer of the village based in whole or in part
upon the provisions of this title. The appeal shall be filed in the office of
the zoning enforcement officer within forty five (45) days of the action being
appealed. The appeal shall be taken by the zoning enforcement officer to the
zoning board of appeals within thirty (30) days. The appeal shall be in writing
specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall
forthwith transmit to the board all the documents constituting the record upon
which the appeal action is taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the
action is taken certifies to the board of appeals, after the notice of appeal
has been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the written appeal,
a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In this
event, the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order which may be granted by the board of appeals or by a court of record on
the application and on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and
due cause shown. (1984 Code § 5-10-5; amd. 2010 Code)
   C.   Processing:
      1.   The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for said hearing
and give notice thereof to parties and shall decide the appeal within a
reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by
attorney.
      2.   The zoning board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its
opinion ought to be made on the premises, and to that end has all powers of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken.
   D.   Decisions: All decisions, after the zoning board of appeals' hearing on
appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination of
the zoning enforcement officer or other authorized officials of the village
board, shall, in all instances, be final administrative determinations and
shall be subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable statutes
of the state of Illinois. (1984 Code § 5-10-5)
10-3-9: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The zoning enforcement officer shall have the power to make such
orders, requirements, decisions, and determinations as are necessary to enforce
this title.
   B.   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any
building, structure or land is used in violation of this title within the
corporate limits of the village, the proper authorities of the village, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate legal action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use to restrain, correct or abate such variation, to prevent the
occupancy of such building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about such premises so located within the
corporate limits. (1984 Code § 5-11-1)
   C.   The zoning enforcement officer, village official or persons under their
supervision shall conduct investigations to determine compliance or
noncompliance with the provisions of this title. In the performance of such
investigation, the zoning enforcement officer, village official or authorized
representatives may enter into and upon and cause any land or structure to be
inspected and examined at all reasonable times of the day or night. Inspections
shall be conducted after notifying the owners of the property; except, that
when the owner is not available, the zoning enforcement officer, village
official or their representatives may inspect the land and the exterior of any
structures. (1984 Code § 5-11-1; amd. 2010 Code)
10-3-10: PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with,
or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title shall be
fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each day of noncompliance. (1984 Code § 5-11-2)
ARTICLE A. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
10-3A-1: Statute Authority; Board Created; Appointment And Terms; Removals And
Vacancies
10-3A-2: Meetings
10-3A-3: Powers
10-3A-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY; BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS; REMOVALS AND
VACANCIES:
A board of appeals is hereby authorized in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-13-3. The board of appeals shall consist of seven (7) members to
be appointed by the president and board of trustees. The members of the board
of appeals shall serve as follows: for the initial appointments, one for one
year; one for two (2) years; one for three (3) years; one for four (4) years;
one for five (5) years; one for six (6) years; and one for seven (7) years. The
successor to each member so appointed shall serve for five (5) years. One of
the members so appointed shall be named chair at the time of his appointment.
The appointing authority has the power to remove any member of the board for
cause and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term of the member whose place has become vacant. (1984 Code § 5-10-4; amd.
2010 Code)
10-3A-2: MEETINGS:
   A.   Generally: Meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call
of the chair and at such other times as the board may determine. The chair, or
in his absence the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses.
   B.   Public Meetings: All meetings of the board shall be open to the public.
(1984 Code § 5-10-4)
   C.   Minutes And Records: The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep record of its examinations and other
official actions. All board of appeals actions shall be a matter of public
record.
   D.   Quorum: No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the board
being present. Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The
concurring vote of four (4) members is necessary to take action on matters that
come before the board of appeals. (1984 Code § 5-10-4; amd. 2010 Code)
10-3A-3: POWERS:
The zoning board of appeals is hereby invested with the following jurisdiction
and authority, as granted by the statutes of the state and this title:
   A.   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the zoning enforcement officer under this title.
   B.   To hear and submit findings and recommendations to the village board on
applications for variations from the terms provided in this title in the manner
prescribed by, and subject to, the standards established herein.
   C.   To hear or submit findings and recommendations to the village board on
a proposed amendment in the manner prescribed herein.
   D.   To hear and submit findings and recommendations to the village board on
proposed conditional permitted uses in the manner prescribed herein.
   E.   To hear and submit findings and recommendations on the extension of a
zoning district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot or parcel
held in single ownership at the effective date hereof.
   F.   To grant continuances of public hearings where there is a showing of
good cause as to why a delay is necessary.
   G.   To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under this title. (1984 Code § 5-10-4)
ARTICLE B. CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES; PROCEDURE
SECTION:
10-3B-1: Classification
10-3B-2: Authorization
10-3B-3: Initiation
10-3B-4: Processing
10-3B-5: Hearing
10-3B-6: Standards
10-3B-7: Conditions
10-3B-8: Denial By Board Of Appeals; Approval By Village Board
10-3B-1: CLASSIFICATION:
The execution of this title is based upon the division of the affected area of
the village into zoning districts within any one of which the use of land and
buildings and the bulk and location of buildings or structures, as related to
the land, are essentially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are
special uses of the land which, because of their unique character, cannot be
properly classified in any particular zoning district or districts without
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring
lands, and upon the public need for the particular use or the particular
location. These special uses, termed "conditional permitted uses" in this
title, fall into two (2) categories:
   A.   Uses operated by a public agency or public regulated utilities, or uses
traditionally affected with a public interest.
   B.   Uses entirely private in character, but of such nature that the
operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property or public facilities. (1984 Code § 5-10-8)
10-3B-2: AUTHORIZATION:
Conditional permitted uses shall be authorized by the village board; provided,
that no application for a conditional permitted use shall be acted upon by the
board until after the public hearing has been held by the zoning board of
appeals, after due notice by publication as required herein, and its report of
findings and recommendations has been transmitted to the village board. (1984
Code § 5-10-8)
10-3B-3: INITIATION:
A petition for a conditional permitted use may be filed by any interested
property owner or contract purchaser. In cases where a contract purchaser is
the petitioner, the contract purchaser shall provide a letter from the owner
which states that the owner is aware of the petition and the request(s)
contained therein, that the petitioner is indeed a contract purchaser, and that
the owner approves the action. Such petition for a variation shall be filed in
writing and shall contain information as the zoning board of appeals may
require by rule. (1984 Code § 5-10-8)
10-3B-4: PROCESSING:
A petition for a conditional permitted use shall be filed with the zoning
enforcement officer. The zoning enforcement officer shall forward such petition
to the zoning board of appeals within ten (10) days. The petition shall include
a list of adjacent property owners, including owners across the street and
across the alley as well as their mailing address(es). A map shall also be
submitted which shows the boundaries of the property, the location of existing
and/or proposed structures in relation to property lines and adjacent land
uses. (1984 Code § 5-10-8)
10-3B-5: HEARING:
No conditional permitted use shall be granted by the village board except after
a public hearing before the zoning board of appeals of which there shall be a
notice of the time and place of the hearing published at least once, not more
than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in
one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the village. (1984
Code § 5-10-8)
10-3B-6: STANDARDS:
No conditional permitted uses shall be granted by the village board unless the
conditional permitted use:
   A.   Is so proposed that the proposed location, design and method of
operation of such use will minimize the adjacent effects on the character of
the surrounding area.
   B.   Is so proposed to be operated, designed and located so that the public
health, safety, and welfare will be protected.
   C.   Will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the
vicinity in which it is located. (1984 Code § 5-10-8)
10-3B-7: CONDITIONS:
The zoning board of appeals may recommend and the village board may provide
such restrictions upon the location, construction, and operation of a
conditional permitted use, including, but not limited to, provisions for off
street parking and loading, as may be deemed necessary to promote the general
objectives of this title and to minimize the injury to the value of property in
the vicinity. (1984 Code § 5-10-8)
10-3B-8: DENIAL BY BOARD OF APPEALS; APPROVAL BY VILLAGE BOARD:
Any proposed conditional permitted use which fails to receive the approval of
the zoning board of appeals shall not be approved by the village board except
by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all trustees then holding office. (2010 Code)
CHAPTER 4
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
SECTION:
10-4-1: Plan Adopted
10-4-1: PLAN ADOPTED:
The comprehensive plan for the village is hereby adopted by the village board
of trustees. Said comprehensive plan will be used as the basis for updating the
zoning and subdivision ordinances of the village, and shall be used as a
guideline for approving or disapproving actions affecting growth and
development within the jurisdiction of the village. (1984 Code § 5-1-6)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
10-5-1: Districts Established; Purposes
10-5-2: Zoning Districts Map
10-5-3: Determination Of District Boundaries
10-5-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; PURPOSES:
In order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this title, the following
districts are hereby established:
   A.   AG Agricultural District: The purpose of the agricultural district is
to encourage the preservation of proper setting for and pleasant approaches to
the village; to provide an area for certain types of agricultural pursuits
protected from infringements of unguided urban development; to create and
preserve a setting for rural small estate residential development; to conserve
areas physically unsuitable for intensive development; and to provide in the
area immediately surrounding the village, an environment capable of
accommodating future expansion of the village in an orderly and efficient
manner.
   B.   R Residential Districts: The purpose of the residential districts is to
provide an area for residential uses and those public and semipublic uses
considered an integral part of the community they serve.
      1.   R-1 Residential, Single-Family, Low Density: The R-1 residential
district provides for single-family dwellings, large lot development for
families wishing a lower density and more open space in the neighborhood and
accompanying community facilities.
      2.   R-2 Residential, Single-Family And Two-Family, Medium Density: The
R-2 residential district provides for single-family and two- family dwellings
so that medium density may be achieved. This classification allows for a high
quality residential development while conserving and reducing the need for
street pavements, utility lines and allowing more efficient police, fire and
other community services.
      3.   R-3 Residential, General Residence, Single-Family, Two-Family, And
Multiple-Family, High Density: The R-3 residential district provides for
multiple-family dwellings so that a high density of development may be achieved
and a greater variety of building structural types may be erected. The
increased density is intended to provide for the advantages of a wider choice
of housing type, housing expense, and for the opportunity to be free from the
maintenance demands associated with lower density housing.
      4.   R-4 Residential, Single-Family Mobile Home, Medium Density: The R-
4 residential district provides space for mobile home parks.
   C.   Business Districts: The purpose of the business districts is to provide
an area for commercial uses and those public and semipublic uses normally
considered an integral part of a self- sufficient community.
      1.   B-1 Business District: The B-1 business district provides for
communitywide retail shopping and personal services. It is intended to
establish and preserve optimum conditions and access for high traffic retail
intensive establishments and commercial shopping centers.
      2.   B-2 General Business District: The B-2 business district provides
for the business sales and services needed by the general population and
businesses. It is intended to establish and preserve conditions conducive to
efficient transfer of goods and services from business to business, and to
provide for uses not accommodated in the B-1 district.
   D.   Industrial Districts: The purpose of the industrial districts is to
provide an area for those uses considered incompatible with day to day
commerce.
      1.   I-1 Restricted Performance Manufacturing District: The I-1 district
provides for a range of manufacturing uses which can meet stringent performance
standards. (See chapter 11 of this title.)
      2.   I-2 General Performance Manufacturing District: The I-2 district
provides for a range of manufacturing uses which can meet less stringent
performance standards. (See chapter 11 of this title.) (1984 Code §
5-2-1)
10-5-2: ZONING DISTRICTS MAP:
The location and boundaries of districts established by this title shall be
shown on the zoning districts map dated                    which is hereby
incorporated as part of this title. (1984 Code §
5-2-2)
10-5-3: DETERMINATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Boundaries are as shown on the zoning districts map, as amended from time to
time. When uncertainty exists with regard to the boundaries of districts as
shown on the zoning districts map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   District boundary lines are either the centerlines of railroads,
highways, streets, alleys, easements, or streams; or are lot lines and tract
lines, or such lines extended, unless otherwise indicated.
   B.   Wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling
a railroad, highway, or street, the depth of such strips shall be in accordance
with the dimensions shown on the map measured at right angles from the
centerline of a railroad, street or highway, and the length of frontage shall
be in accordance with the dimensions shown on the map from the centerlines of
railroad, highway or street rights of way unless otherwise indicated. (1984
Code §
5-2-3)
CHAPTER 6
PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL PERMITTED, AND PROHIBITED USES; LAND USE MATRIX
SECTION:
10-6-1: Permitted And Conditional Permitted Uses
10-6-2: Prohibited Uses
10-6-3: Land Use Matrix
10-6-1: PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES:
Uses which are permitted in the various zoning districts within the village are
identified under the appropriate column in the land use matrix (section
10-6-3 of this chapter) as "P" for permitted. Conditional permitted uses are
identified under the appropriate column in the land use matrix as "C" for
conditional permitted uses. Conditional permitted uses are only allowed by the
village board after a public hearing before the zoning board of appeals and
after the required findings have been made that the use is necessary and
desirable at the particular location. (1984 Code §
5-2-4)
10-6-2: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not specifically allowed within a given district as permitted or
conditionally permitted in the land use matrix (section
10-6-3 of this chapter) are prohibited. In order to establish a prohibited use,
a petition must be filed to amend the land use matrix. The procedure for filing
amendments shall be followed. (1984 Code §
5-2-5)
10-6-3: LAND USE MATRIX:
A "P" in the matrix indicates a use that is permitted. A "C" in the matrix
indicates a use that is a conditional permitted use.
LAND USE DISTRICTS
         AG R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 I-1 I-2
                                                                          DISTRICTS
LAND USE                                                                  AG R- R- R- R- B- B- I- I-
                                                                             1  2  3  4  1  2  1  2
Abrasive manufacture                                                                      P
Acoustical material manufacture                                                           P
Advertising display manufacture                                                         P  P
Agricultural machinery:                                                                    
     Display, sales, repair and service                              P            P  P  P
     Manufacture                                                                     P
     Storage yards                                                   C              P  P
Agriculture                                                               P                 
Aircraft manufacture, including parts                                                     P
Airports                                                                                  P
Ambulance service                                                                   P  P     
Amusement parks:                                                                           
     Limited as to total area and distance from residence district             P  P     
     Unlimited                                                                 C  P     
Animal kennels                                                                      C  P     
Animal pounds                                                                           P  P
Animal training and grooming                                                        P  P     
Antique shops                                                                       P  P     
Apartment hotels                                                                P    P  P     
Appliances:                                                                                
     Electrical appliance manufacturing                                            P  P
     Electrical or household appliance store and repair                        C  P  P  P
Aquariums:                                                                                 
     Private                                                                 C  C  C     
     Public                                                                  C  C  C     
Arcades                                                                           P  P  P     
Arenas, auditoriums, or stadiums                                                    C  C  C  C
Army and navy surplus store                                                         C  P     
Art galleries:                                                                             
     Commercial                                                                P  P     
     Noncommercial                                                             C  P     
Art goods, manufacture, religious or church                                             P  P
Art needlework                                                                      P  P     
Artist supply stores                                                                P  P     
Arts and crafts supply stores                                                       P  P     
Asbestos and asbestos products manufacture                                                C
Athletic equipment manufacture                                                          P  P
Athletic goods store                                                                P  P     
Auction rooms                                                                       C  C  P  P
Automobiles:                                                                               
     Dead storage, junkyards, graveyards                                             C
     Driving schools                                                           C  C     
     Glass or mirror shops                                                     C  P     
     Laundries                                                                   C  P  P
     Manufacture                                                                     C
     Parts manufacture                                                             C  C
     Rental establishment                                                        C  P  P
     Repairs                                                                          
      Major                                                                    C  P  P  P
      Minor                                                                    C  P  P  P
     Sales, new from enclosed showroom                                         C  C  P  P
     Sales, new or used, open or enclosed                                      C  C  P  P
     Seat cover or convertible top establishments                              C  P  P  P
     Service station (see Gasoline service stations)                                  
     Showrooms                                                                 C  C  P  P
     Supply stores, with repair service                                        C  C  P  P
     Towing                                                                    C  C  P  P
     Wrecking yard                                                                   C
Awning manufacture:                                                                        
     Custom, including repairs                                                 C  P  P  P
     Unlimited                                                                   C  P  P
Bait sales                                                                          C  C  P  P
Bakeries                                                                            C  P  P  P
Banks and trust companies                                                           P  P  P  P
Barbershop and beauty shop equipment sales                                          P  P  P  P
Barbershops                                                                         P  P  P  P
Baths, steam (see Physical culture establishments)                                         
Battery manufacture, including rebuilding                                               C  P
Beauty parlors                                                                      P  P  P   
Beverages:                                                                                 
     Alcohol manufacture                                                           C  C
     Bottling works                                                                P  P
Bicycle:                                                                                   
     Manufacture                                                                   P  P
     Rental or repair shops                                                    P  P  P  P
     Sales                                                                     P  P     
Blacksmith shops                                                                      C  P  P
Blueprinting establishments                                                           C  P  P
Boarding houses                                                                 C      C     
Boats:                                                                                     
     Building or repair                                                            P  P
     Fuel sales, open or closed                                                    P  P
     Showrooms, with no repair services                                        C  P  P  P
     Storage, repair or painting, including the incidental rental, sa            C  P  P
of boats, boat parts or accessories
Boiler manufacture                                                                      C  P
Books:                                                                                     
     Hand binding or tooling                                                     C  P  P
     Stores                                                                    P  P     
Bowling alleys                                                                      C  P  P   
Breweries (see Beverages)                                                                  
Brick manufacture                                                                       C  P
Brokerage house                                                                     P  P     
Brooms or brushes manufacture                                                           P  P
Building and loan associations                                                      P  P  C  C
Building materials:                                                                        
     Manufacture, including prefabricated houses and composition                   C  P
wallboard
     Sales, open or enclosed                                                     C  C  P
     Yards, open or closed, limited to lot area                                  C  P  P
Business machines:                                                                         
     Manufacture                                                                   P  P
     Sales, rental and incidental repair                                       P  P  P  P
     Small, repair shops                                                       C  P  P  P
Business schools and colleges                                                       C  P  P  C
Cafe                                                                                P  P  P  P
Calcimine manufacture                                                                     C
Camera manufacture                                                                      P  P
Camps, outdoor day                                                        C          P  P     
Candle manufacture, productions vs. incidental                                      C  C  P  P
Candy stores                                                                        P  P     
Canvas or canvas products manufacture                                                 C  P  P
Carnival grounds                                                          C          C  P     
Carpentry shops                                                           C            C  P  P
Carpet:                                                                                    
     Cleaning establishment                                                      C  P  P
     Manufacture                                                                   C  P
Carpet, rug, linoleum or other floor covering store                                 P  P     
Catering establishments                                                             C  P  P   
Cement manufacture                                                                        C
Cemeteries                                                                C                 
Ceramic products:                                                                          
     Manufacture                                                                   C  C
     Manufacture, custom                                                           C  C
Chalk manufacture                                                                       C  C
Charcoal manufacture                                                                      C
Chemicals, compounding or packaging                                                       C
Churches                                                                  P  C  C  C    C  C     
Cigar stores (see Tobacco)                                                                 
Cigarette and cigar manufacture (see Tobacco)                                              
Circus grounds                                                            C          C  C     
Clay products manufacture                                                               C  C
Clothing:                                                                                  
     Custom manufacturing or altering for retail                               C  P  P  P
     Manufacture                                                                   P  P
     Rental establishment                                                      P  P     
     Stores and clothing accessory stores                                      P  P     
Clubs:                                                                                     
     Fraternal                                                       C          C  C     
     Nonbusiness                                                                 C     
     Private                                                         C          C  C     
     Veterans                                                        C          C  C     
Coal:                                                                                      
     Sales, open or closed                                                         C  P
     Storage, open or closed                                                         P
Coin dealers                                                                        P  P     
Coin machines, rental and service                                                     C  P  P
Coke products manufacture                                                                 C
Colleges or universities, except business                                 P          C  C     
Community centers                                                         P  C  C  C  C  C  C     
Computer (see Typewriter)                                                                  
Concrete or concrete products manufacture                                                 C
Construction machinery manufacture and repair                                             C
Contractor establishments - electrical, glazing, heating, painting,
paperhanging, plumbing, roofing, kitchen, office or store fixture,                    C  P  P
ventilating
Contractor yards                                                                        P  P
Convents                                                                  P  C  C  C    C  C     
Cork and cork products manufacture                                                      C  P
Cosmetics or toiletries manufacture                                                     C  P
Country clubs                                                             P                 
Dairies, pasteurization and products                                      C              C  P
Dairy products stores, except drive-in                                              P  P     
Dance halls                                                               C          C  C     
Day camps, outdoors                                                       C          C  P     
Daycare center:                                                                            
     Commercial                                                      C      C  C  P  P     
     Family                                                          P  P  P  P  P         
Dead junkyard for appliances and machinery                                                C
Delicatessen stores                                                                 P  P     
Dental:                                                                                    
     Instruments manufacture                                                         P
     Laboratories (see Laboratories)                                                  
     Offices (see Offices)                                                            
Department stores                                                                   P  P     
Diaper supply establishments                                                        P  P     
Diesel engines manufacture                                                                P
Disinfectants manufacture                                                                 C
Drafting instruments manufacture                                                        P  P
Dressmakers, custom                                                                 C  P  P   
Drive-in refreshment stands                                                         P  P  P   
Drive-in restaurants                                                                P  P  P   
Drive-in retail outlet                                                              P  P  P   
Drive-in theaters                                                                   C  C     
Drugstores                                                                          P  P     
Dry cleaning and clothes pressing establishments                                    C  P  P  P
Dry cleaning and laundry distribution and pick up stations                          P  P  P  P
 
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments, automatic or self-service                  P  P  P  P
Dry goods stores                                                                    P  P     
Dwellings:                                                                                 
     Mobile homes                                                            P         
     Multi-family (apartments)                                             P           
     Single-family                                                   P  P  P  P           
     Two-family                                                          P  P           
Eating establishments, except drive-in                                              P  P  P  P
Electric:                                                                                  
     Power and steam generating plants                                               P
     Substations, serving distribution areas                         C  C  C  C  C  P  P  P  P
Electrical:                                                                                
     Appliance manufacture                                                         P  P
     Contractors (see Contractor establishments)                                      
     Stores, including repair                                                  C  P  P  P
Engraving or photo-engraving                                                        C  C  P  P
Equipment assembly, not including electrical machines                                   P  P
     Supplies manufacturing                                                        P  P
Excelsior manufacture                                                                   P  P
Exterminating or fumigating, commercial shops                                           C  C
Fairgrounds                                                               P            C  C   
Feathers:                                                                                  
     Bulk processing, washing, curing or dyeing                                    C  C
     Products                                                                      C  C
Feed stores                                                               P          C  P  P   
Felt:                                                                                      
     Bulk processing, washing, curing or dyeing                                    C  P
     Products manufacture, except washing, curing or dyeing                        C  P
Fertilizer manufacture                                                                    C
Filling stations (see Automobiles)                                                         
Film, photographic manufacture                                                            C
Finance companies                                                                   P  P  P  P
Fire protection equipment, sales, repair and service                                C  P  P  P
Fire stations                                                             P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Fish curing or preparation for packaging                                                C  C
Fishing tackle or equipment, rental or sales                                        P  P     
Florist shops                                                                       P  P     
Food:                                                                                      
     Products processing, except meat slaughtering, preparation of fi                C
or packing and rendering or refining of fats and oils
     Stores, including grocery stores                                          P  P  P   
Foundries, ferrous or nonferrous                                                          C
Fraternity houses                                                               C           
Frozen food lockers                                                                 P  P     
Fuel briquettes manufacture                                                               C
Funeral houses                                                                      P  P     
Fungicides manufacture                                                                    C
Fur:                                                                                       
     Furrier shops, custom, including custom cleaning, remodeling,             P  P     
repairing and storing
     Goods manufacture, not including tanning or dyeing                              C
     Tanning, curing, finishing or dyeing                                            C
Furnace cleaning and repairing shops                                                  C  P   
Furniture:                                                                                 
     Custom shops                                                              C  P     
     Manufacture                                                               C  C  P   
     Repairing and refinishing                                                 C  P  P   
     Stores                                                                    P  P     
Garages (see Parking garages, commercial)                                                  
Garden supply stores                                                                P  P  P   
Gas (excluding gasoline):                                                                  
     Manufacture                                                                     C
     Storage                                                                       C  C
     Valve and regulator sites serving a distribution area           C  C  C  C  C  C  P  P  P
Gasoline service stations                                                           P  P  P  P
Gift shops                                                                          P  P     
Glass:                                                                                     
     Cutting shops                                                             P  P     
     Manufacture                                                                     C
     Products manufacture from previous manufacture                                P  P
Glazing contractors (see Contractor establishments)                                        
Golf courses, lighted or unlighted                                        P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
     Driving ranges                                                  P          P  P     
     Driving ranges, lighted                                         P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
     Miniature courses                                               P          P  P     
Grain:                                                                                     
     Milling or processing                                           P              P  P
     Storage                                                         P              P  P
Graphite or graphite products                                                             C
Greenhouses                                                               P          P  P  P  P
Grocery stores (see Food)                                                                  
Gunsmiths, repairs                                                        P          P  P  P  P
Gymnasiums, commercial                                                              C  C     
Gypsum manufacture                                                                        C
Hair:                                                                                      
     Bulk processing, washing, curing, dyeing                                      C  P
     Products manufacture, custom                                                C  P  P
     Products manufacture (except washing, curing, and dyeing)                     C  P
Hardware:                                                                                  
     Manufacture                                                                   C  C
     Stores                                                                    P  P  P   
Harness repair                                                                        C  P   
Hat:                                                                                       
     Bodies manufacture                                                          C  P  P
     Repair shops                                                              C  P  P  P
     Shops                                                                     P  P     
Hatcheries                                                                C                 
Health services (see Physical culture establishments)                                      
Heating contractors (see Contractor establishments)                                        
Heating equipment showrooms without repair facilities                                 C  P  P
Home occupations                                                          P  P  P  P  P         
Home products manufacture                                                               C  C
Horseshoeing                                                              C          C  C     
Hosiery manufacture                                                                     C  P
Hospitals, except animal hospitals                                                  P  P     
Hotels:                                                                                    
     Apartment                                                       C          C  C     
     Transient                                                       C          P  P     
Household:                                                                                 
     Appliance stores and repair                                               P  P     
     Equipment or machinery repair shops                                       C  P     
Ice:                                                                                       
     Manufacture, dry or natural                                                   P  P
     Sales, open or enclosed                                         C          C  P  P  P
Ice cream shops                                                                     P  P     
Infant goods stores                                                                 P  P     
Ink manufacture                                                                         C  P
Insecticides manufacture                                                                  C
Institutions, fraternal, philanthropic, or for children or the aged       P      C    C  C  C   
Interior decorating establishments                                                  P  P     
Jewelry:                                                                                   
     From precious metals                                                          C  C
     Manufacture costume bulk                                                      C  C
     Shops                                                                     P  P     
Junkyards (see Automobiles)                                                                
Jute products manufacture                                                               C  C
Knit goods manufacture                                                                  C  P
Laboratories:                                                                              
     Medical or dental, for research or testing with limitations on            C  C  P   
external effects
     Research, experimental or testing                                           C  P  P
Landscape gardeners and contractors                                       P          P  P  P   
Laundries, automatic or self- service                                           C  C  P  P     
Laundries, without limitation on type of operation                                    C  C  P
Leather:                                                                                   
     Goods store                                                               P  P     
     Products manufacture                                                        C  P  P
     Tanning, curing, finishing or dyeing                                            C
Libraries:                                                                                 
     Private rental                                                  P      C    P  P     
     Public                                                          P  P  P  C    P  P     
Linen supply establishments:                                                               
     Manufacture                                                                     P
     Stores                                                                    P  P     
Linseed oil manufacture                                                                   C
Liquor stores, package                                                              P  P     
Livestock maintenance and keeping                                         C          C  C     
Loan association                                                                    P  P     
Locksmith shops                                                                     P  P     
Luggage:                                                                                   
     Manufacture                                                                   C  P
     Stores                                                                    P  P     
Lumber:                                                                                    
     Limited as to lot area                                                    C  C  P  P
     Processing or woodworking, bulk yards                                         P  P
     Unlimited                                                                       P
Machine:                                                                                   
     Shops including tool, die or pattern making                                 C  C  P
     Tools manufacture                                                               P
Machinery manufacture or repair:                                                           
     Heavy                                                                         C  P
     Miscellaneous or electrical equipment                                       C  P  P
     Rental or sales establishment                                             C  C  P  P
     Repair shops                                                              C  C  P  P
Machines, business (see Business machines)                                                 
Manure storage                                                            C                 
Masseurs (see Physical culture establishments)                                             
Matches manufacture                                                                       C
Mattress manufacture, rebuilding, renovating                                            C  P
Meat:                                                                                      
     Retail                                                                    P  P     
     Slaughtering or preparation or packing                                          C
     Wholesale                                                                 C  P  P  P
Medical:                                                                                   
     Appliances, custom manufacture                                            C  C  P  P
     Appliances, manufacture                                                       C  P
     Instruments manufacture                                                       C  P
     Laboratories (see Laboratories)                                                  
     Offices (see Offices)                                                            
     Stores                                                                    P  P  P  P
Meeting halls                                                             P          P  P     
Messenger services                                                                  C  P     
Metals manufacture:                                                                        
     Alloys or foil, miscellaneous                                                 C  P
     Castings or foundry products, heavy                                             C
     Finishing, plating, grinding, sharpening, polishing, cleaning,                C  P
rustproofing, heat treatment or similar processes
     Products, treatments or processing                                            C  P
     Reduction, refining, smelting, or alloying                                      C
     Stamping or extrusion                                                           C
     Treatment or processing                                                         C
Microwave towers (see Radio)                                                               
Military bases or installations                                           C              C  C
Mining machinery manufacture and repairs                                                  C
Mirror silvering shops                                                              C  C  P  P
Model construction supply stores                                                    P  P  P   
Monasteries                                                               P  C  C  C    C  C     
Monument:                                                                                  
     Sales establishment, with incidental processing to order        C                 
     Works, with no limitations on processing                                        C
Motels                                                                    C          P  P     
Motor freight stations (see Trucking terminals or motor freight stations)                  
Motorcycles:                                                                               
     Manufacture                                                                   C  P
     Repairs                                                                   C  P  P  P
     Sales, open or enclosed                                                   C  C  P  P
     Showrooms with no repair services                                         C  C  P  P
Movers and transfer companies                                                           P  P
Museums:                                                                                   
     Commercial                                                      P          P  P  P  P
     Public                                                          P          P  P  P  P
Music and musical equipment stores                                                  P  P     
Musical instruments:                                                                       
     Manufacture                                                                 C  P  P
     Repair shops                                                              P  P     
Newspaper publishing:                                                                   P  P
     Office                                                                    P  P     
     Printing                                                                      P  P
Newsstands, open or enclosed                                                        P  P  P  P
Novelty products manufacture                                                          C  C  P
Nurseries                                                                 P          P  P     
Nursing homes                                                                   C    P  P     
Office buildings                                                                    P  P  P  P
Office equipment:                                                                          
     Manufacture                                                                   C  P
     Repair shops                                                              C  P  P  P
Office or business machine stores, sales or rentals                                 P  P  P  P
Offices:                                                                                   
     Business (involving no retail sales), professional or government      C    P  P  P  P
     Dental, medical or osteopathy                                         C    P  P  P   
     Wholesale, storage restricted to samples                                    P  P  P
Oil cloth manufacture                                                                     C
Optical:                                                                                   
     Equipment manufacture                                                       C  C  P
     Goods manufacture                                                           C  C  P
Optician or optometrist establishments                                          C    P  P     
Orthopedic appliances:                                                                     
     Custom manufacture                                                          C  C  P
     Manufacture                                                                   C  P
     Stores                                                                    P  P  P   
Oxygen equipment, rental or distribution                                            C  P  P  P
Packing materials manufacture                                                           C  C
Packing or crating establishments                                                   C  C  C  P
Paint stores                                                                        P  P  P  P
Painting contractors (see Contractor establishments)                                       
Paper:                                                                                     
     Mills                                                                         C  P
     Products manufacture                                                          C  P
Paperhanging contractors (see Contractor establishments)                                   
Parking garages, commercial                                               C          C  C  P  P
Parking lots, commercial                                                  C          C  C  P  P
Parks, commercial                                                         P          C  C     
Pawnshops                                                                           P  P     
Peat storage                                                                          C  C  P
Perfume or perfumed soaps, compounding only, not including soap                     C  C  P  P
manufacture
Pet shops                                                                           P  P     
Petroleum and petroleum products:                                                          
     Sales                                                                     C  C  C  C
     Storage                                                                   C  C  C  C
Pharmaceutical products manufacture                                                     C  C
Photographic:                                                                              
     Developing or printing establishments                                     C       
     Equipment manufacture (except film)                                           P  P
     Equipment stores                                                          P  P     
     Equipment studios                                                         P  P     
     Equipment supply stores                                                   P  P     
     Retail                                                                      P  P  P
     Wholesale limited as to floor area                                          P  P  P
     Wholesale unlimited                                                           P  P
Photostatting establishment                                                         P  P  P  P
Physical culture establishments                                                     C  C     
Picture framing shops, custom                                                       P  P     
Plastics:                                                                                  
     Products manufacture                                                            C
     Raw manufacture                                                                 C
Plumbing                                                                                   
     Contractors (see Contractor establishments)                                      
     Equipment manufacture (see Tool or hardware manufacture)                         
     Showrooms, without repair facilities                                      C  P  P  P
Police stations                                                           P  P  P  P    P  P  P  P
Pool halls                                                                      C    P  P     
Porcelain products manufacture                                                            C
Post offices:                                                                              
     Branch                                                          P          P  P  P  P
     Main                                                            P          P  P  P  P
Poultry (see Slaughtering or packing of animals or poultry)                                
Precision instruments manufacture:                                                         
     Optical equipment, clocks, or like products                                 P  P  P
     Medical, dental, drafting instruments, optical goods or like                P  P  P
products
Printing                                                                              C  P  P
Produce or meat markets, wholesale                                        C            P  P  P
Public garage                                                                       C  P  P  P
Pump repairing and rental                                                           C  P  P  P
Pumping stations, water or sewage                                         P  C  C  C  C  P  P  P  P
Rabbits (see Slaughtering or packing of animals or poultry)                                
Racetracks                                                                                C
Radio:                                                                                     
     Stores and repair shops                                                   P  P  P  P
     Towers (includes microwave)                                     P          C  C  C  C
Railroad:                                                                                  
     Equipment manufacture, including railroad cars or locomotives                   C
     Freight terminals, yards, or appurtenances; or facilities or                  C  C
services used or required by railroad operations
Rectories                                                                 P  C  C  C    C  C     
Recycling centers                                                                   C  C  P  P
Reducing salons                                                                     P  P     
Refreshment stands:                                                                        
     Drive-in                                                                  P  P     
     Nondrive-in                                                               P  P     
Refrigerating plants                                                                    C  C
Religious or church art goods manufacture                                               C  P
Rent-alls, small equipment                                                          P  P  P  P
Residences (see Dwellings)                                                                 
Riding equipment shops                                                              P  P     
Riding stables                                                            P          C  C     
Road building equipment sales                                                         C  C  P
Roofing contractors (see Contractor establishments)                                        
Rooming houses                                                                  P    P  P     
Rubber products manufacture (excluding all rubber or synthetic                          C  C
processing)
Rug stores (see Carpet, rug, linoleum or other floor covering store)                       
Sanitariums                                                                     C    P       
Savings and loan associations                                                       P  P     
Sawmills                                                                                P  P
Scales, commercial weighing                                               P            C  P  P
Schools:                                                                                   
     Elementary                                                      P  C  C  C           
     Nursery                                                         P  C  C  C           
     Secondary                                                       P  C  C  C           
     Trade or other schools for adults, limited as to objectionable  P          P  P  P   
effects
Scrap metal, paper or rags storage                                                        C
Seed stores                                                                         P  P     
Sewage disposal plants                                                                    C
Sewing machine stores selling household machines only                               P  P     
Shoe:                                                                                      
     Manufacture                                                                     C
     Repair shops                                                              P  P     
     Stores                                                                    P  P     
Shoe polish manufacture                                                                   C
Shoeshine stands                                                                    P  P  P  P
Sign fabrication, metal and neon                                                        P  P
Sign painting shops                                                                     P  P
Silver plating shops, custom, and repair                                            C  C  P  P
Silverware manufacture, plate or sterling                                               P  P
Sisal products manufacture                                                              C  C
Size manufacture                                                                          C
Skating rinks, indoor                                                     C      C    C  P     
Slag piles                                                                                C
Slaughtering or packing of animals or poultry                                             C
Soaps or detergent:                                                                        
     Manufacture including fat rendering                                             C
     Packaging only                                                                C  C
Soldering shops                                                                       C  P  P
Solvent extracting                                                                        C
Sorority houses                                                                 C           
Sound systems and equipment sales                                                   C  P  P  P
Sporting equipment manufacture                                                          C  P
Sporting goods store                                                                P  P     
Stamp dealers (nongovernmental)                                                     P  P     
Stamp redemption centers                                                            P  P     
Starch manufacturers                                                                      C
Stationery stores                                                                   P  P     
Statuary, mannequins, figurines:                                                           
     Manufacture                                                                   P  P
     Sales                                                                     P       
Steel products:                                                                            
     Miscellaneous fabrication or assembly                                         P  P
     Structural products manufacture                                               C  P
Stock and bond market exchange                                                      P  P     
Stockyards                                                                                C
Storage, wholesale                                                                    C  P  P
Studios:                                                                                   
     Music, dancing or theatrical                                              P  P     
     Radio or television                                                       P  P     
Sugar refining                                                                            C
Swimming pools, commercial:                                                                
     Indoor                                                          C      C    P       
     Outdoor                                                         C      C  C  P       
Tackle shops                                                                        P  P     
Tailors, custom                                                                     P  P     
Tanning (see Leather; see Fur)                                                             
Tapestries manufacture                                                                C  P  P
Taverns                                                                             P  P  P  P
Taxicab stands                                                                      P  P  P  P
Taxidermist shops                                                                   C  P  P  P
Telegraph offices                                                                   P  P  P  P
Telephone exchanges                                                       P  C  C  C  C  P  P  P  P
Television:                                                                                
     Stores and repair shops                                                   P  P     
     Studios                                                         P          P  P  P  P
     Towers                                                          P          C  C  P  P
Textiles:                                                                                  
     Bleaching                                                                       C
     Products manufacture                                                            C
     Spinning, weaving, manufacturing, dyeing, printing, knit goods,                 C
yarn, thread or cordage
Tile manufacture                                                                          C
Tire recapping and repairing                                                          C  C  P
Tobacco:                                                                                   
     Curing and manufacture, or tobacco products manufacture                       C  C
     Stores                                                                    P  P     
Tool, die or pattern making establishments                                            C  C  P
Tool or hardware manufacture                                                            C  P
Topsoil storage                                                           P              C  C
Tourist cabins                                                                      P  P     
Tourist houses                                                                      P  P     
Towel supply establishments                                                           C  P  P
Toy:                                                                                       
     Manufacture                                                                   P  P
     Stores                                                                    P  P     
Trailers or mobile homes:                                                                  
     Manufacture, including parts                                                  C  P
     Parks                                                                   P         
     Rental, U-Haul                                                                C  P
     Repair, body                                                                  C  P
     Sales, open or enclosed                                                       C  P
     Showrooms, with no repair services                                            C  P
Travel bureaus                                                                      P  P  P   
Truck:                                                                                     
     Engine rebuilding                                                           C  P  P
     Manufacture                                                                     C
     Parts manufacture                                                             C  C
     Repairs, body                                                             C  C  P  P
     Repairs, except body repairs                                              C  C  P  P
     Sales (new or used), open or enclosed                                     C  C  P   
     Showrooms, with no repair services                                        C  P  P   
Trucking terminals or motor freight stations:                                              
     Limited as to lot area                                                      C  P  P
     Unlimited                                                                     P  P
Turpentine manufacture                                                                    C
Typewriter and computer sales stores, with incidental repairs                       P  P  P   
Typewriter, computer or other small business machine repair shops                   C  P  P   
Umbrella manufacture                                                                    P  P
Upholstering:                                                                              
     Bulk, excluding shops dealing directly with the consumer                      P  P
     Shops dealing directly with the consumer                                  P  P  P   
Variety stores                                                                      P  P     
Vehicles, manufacture, children's                                                       C  P
Venetian blinds (see Window shade)                                                         
Ventilating contractors (see Contractor establishments)                                    
Ventilating equipment showrooms, without repair facilities                            C  P  P
Veterinarian                                                              P          P  P  P   
Village Hall                                                                        C  C     
Wallpaper stores                                                                    P  P     
Warehouses                                                                            C  C  P
Watch or clock repair stores                                                        P  P     
Watchmaking                                                                         P  P     
Waterproofing materials manufacture                                                       C
Wax products manufacture                                                                  C
Weaving, hand                                                                       P  P     
Welding:                                                                              C  P  P
     Supply shops                                                                C  P  P
Wholesale establishment, accessory storage limited to 2,500 square feet               P  P  P
Window shade:                                                                              
     Custom shops, including repairs                                           P  P     
     Manufacture                                                                   C  P
Wood:                                                                                      
     Bulk processing or woodworking                                              C  P  P
     Distillation                                                                    C
     Products manufacture                                                          C  P
     Sales, open or enclosed                                                   C  P  P  P
Woodworking shops, custom                                                           C  P  P  P
 
(1984 Code § 5-3-1; amd. Ord. 2004-33, 10-12-2004; 2010 Code; Ord. 2014-11, 10-
7-2014)
CHAPTER 7
BULK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Lot Areas And Widths
10-7-2: Yards
10-7-3: Maximum Building Heights
10-7-4: Obstructions To Vision At Intersections
10-7-5: Small Lots Of Record
10-7-1: LOT AREAS AND WIDTHS:
   A.   Lot Areas And Widths Enumerated: In the districts as indicated, no
residence is permitted on a zoning lot with an area or width less than that
specified in the following table:
District Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit (Square Feet) Minimum Lot Width
                                                          (Feet)
                                               Minimum Lot    Minimum Lot
District                                       Area Per       Width
                                               Dwelling Unit  (Feet)
                                               (Square Feet)
AG                                             43,560         150
R-1:
     With public sewer and water          10,000         80
     Without public sewer or public water 43,560         150
R-2:
     Single-family dwelling:
          With public sewer and water10,000         80
          Without public sewer or pub43,560ter      150
     Two-family dwelling:
          With public sewer and water5,000          100
          Without public sewer or pub21,780ter      150
R-3:
     Single-family dwelling:
          With public sewer and water10,000         80
          Without public sewer or pub43,560ter      150
     Two-family dwelling:
          With public sewer and water5,000          100
          Without public sewer or pub21,780ter      125
     Multiple-family dwelling:
          Public sewer and water     2,500          125
R-4:
     Per mobile home                      See chapter 12, article A of
                                               this title
 
(1984 Code § 5-4-1; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Measurement Of Lot Width: Minimum lot width requirements shall be
measured at that portion of a lot line or property line which is coterminous
with a dedicated public street, road or highway right of way line. No building
permit shall be issued for construction of improvements on any lot which does
not have a lot line or property line coterminous with a dedicated street, road
or highway right of way line equal to at least that of the minimum lot width
requirement in the district under which the property is classified. (Ord. 1999-
26, 9-7-1999)
10-7-2: YARDS:
   A.   Basic Requirements: Subject to any applicable exceptions, modifications
or additional requirements provided in subsections B and C of this section,
front, side and rear yards are required as set forth in the following
provisions and table:
      1.   Joint Use Of Yard Requirements Prohibited: The minimum yard space
required for one building or other structures shall not again be considered as
yard space for an adjoining structure on the same or an adjoining zoning lot.
      2.   Maintain Required Yards: No zoning lot, unless otherwise specified,
shall be reduced in area so that the yards become less than those required by
this title. (1984 Code § 5-4-2)
      3.   Corner Lots: On corner lots where side yards are required, any side
yard abutting the street shall be the same depth as the depth of the required
front yard. The minimum depth side yard requirement shall apply to all other
interior lot lines. (Ord. 1995-8, 6-6-1995)
      4.   Table:
   FRONT, SIDE AND REAR YARD DIMENSIONS
         Depth Of Minimum  Minimum Width Of Side Yards         Minimum Depth of
District Front Yard (Feet) Either Side Yard  Total Of Both     Rear Yard (Feet)
                           (Feet)            Side Yards (Feet)
         Depth Of Minimum  Minimum Width Of Side Yards         Minimum Depth of
District Front Yard (Feet) Either Side Yard  Total Of Both     Rear Yard (Feet)
                           (Feet)            Side Yards (Feet)
R-1      301               101               301               20
R-2      301               101               301               20
R-3      301               101               301               20
R-4                       See chapter 12, article A of this    
                           title
B-1         15          None              None              10
                         See subsection B of this section    See subsection B
                                                               of this section
B-2      15                None              None              10
                         See subsection B of this section    See subsection B
                                                               of this section
I-1      20                None              None              20
                         See subsection B of this section    See subsection B
                                                               of this section
I-2      20                None              None              20
                         See subsection B of this section    See subsection B
                                                               of this section
   Note:
   1.    The terms and provisions shall apply only to lots in subdivisions for
which a preliminary plan was not approved prior to November 21, 2000.
(1984 Code § 5-4-2; amd. Ord. 2000-19, 11-21-2000; Ord. 2002-29, 10-15-2002)
   B.   Lots Adjoining Residential District:
      1.   In any business or industrial district where a side lot line
coincides with a side lot line or rear lot line in an adjacent residential
district, a side yard shall be provided with at least the width set forth in
the following table; and in any business or industrial district where a rear
lot line coincides with a side lot line or rear lot line in an adjacent
residential district, a rear yard shall be provided with at least the depth set
forth in the following table: (1984 Code § 5-4-6; amd. 2010 Code)
 
District Minimum Width Of Side Yard (Feet) Minimum Depth of Rear Yard (Feet)
B-1      15                                25
B-2      15                                25
I-1      25                                30
I-2      25                                30
 
      2.   No yard required by this subsection shall be used for storage or
processing of any kind. No side yard required by this subsection shall be used
for accessory off street loading.
      3.   Where a rear lot line abuts an alley, one-half (1/2) of the width of
the alley shall be counted as the required rear yard. (1984 Code § 5-4-6)
   C.   Exceptions:
      1.   Architectural features of residential buildings such as windowsills,
cornices and roof overhangs may project into the required yard, provided such
projection is not more than four feet (4') and does not reach closer than four
feet (4') to any lot line.
      2.   Signs, awnings, canopies and marquees are permitted to overhang the
sidewalk in the B-1 business district only; provided, that overhanging signs
are a minimum of eight feet (8') above the sidewalk at any point and that all
other structures are a minimum of six feet eight inches (6'8") above the
sidewalk at any point.
      3.   One-story accessory buildings may project into rear yards abutting
on an alley or easement, provided such projection extends not closer than five
feet (5') to the rear lot line and two feet (2') to a side lot line. (1984 Code
§ 5-4-5)
10-7-3: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHTS:
   A.   Heights Established:
      1.   Residential Districts: No building shall exceed two (2) stories or
thirty feet (30') in height unless each side yard is increased over the
required minimum by five feet (5') or fraction thereof of additional building
height over thirty feet (30'). In no case shall the building height exceed
fifty feet (50').
      2.   Business Districts:
         a.   In the B-1 business district, no building shall exceed two (2)
stories or thirty feet (30').
         b.   In the B-2 general business district, no building shall exceed
three (3) stories or forty five feet (45').
      3.   Industrial Districts:
         a.   In the I-1 restricted performance manufacturing district, no
building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height.
         b.   In the I-2 general performance manufacturing district, no
building shall exceed forty five feet (45') in height. (1984 Code § 5-4-3)
   B.   Exceptions: The height limitations of this title shall not apply to
church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy;
monuments, water towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks,
conveyors, flagpoles, radio towers and masts. (1984 Code § 5-4-4; amd. 2010
Code)
10-7-4: OBSTRUCTIONS TO VISION AT INTERSECTIONS 1 :
No permitted obstruction is allowed within twenty five feet (25') of a zoning
lot corner formed by the intersection of any two (2) street lines unless the
obstruction is less than three feet (3') in height above the ground or more
than ten feet (10') in height above the ground. Any portion of such a permitted
obstruction on a corner lot which is between three feet (3') and ten feet (10')
in height above the ground shall not be greater than fourteen inches (14") in
diameter. (1984 Code § 5-4-7)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  11-5-3C6 of this code.
10-7-5: SMALL LOTS OF RECORD:
For small lots and parcels of land of record existing at the effective date
hereof in all residence districts and the agricultural district,
notwithstanding the minimum lot area per dwelling unit and the lot width
requirements for the district, a single-family detached residence, additions to
single-family dwellings, and accessory building may be built upon such lot,
provided the following conditions can be met:
   A.   The lot has a width of at least forty feet (40');
   B.   Each side yard shall be at least three feet (3') in width;
   C.   The rear yard shall be at least three feet (3') in width;
   D.   The front yard shall be not less than the average front yard of
immediately adjacent buildings facing on the same street; and
   E.   Sanitary sewer and public water are available. (1984 Code § 5-4-8)
CHAPTER 8
NONCONFORMING USES AND NONCOMPLYING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
10-8-1: Nonconforming Uses
10-8-2: Noncomplying Buildings
10-8-1: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Continuation Of Nonconforming Use:
      1.   Any use of a building or land lawfully existing on the effective
date hereof, but which does not conform with the use regulations of the
district in which the building or land is situated, may be continued under the
regulations of this chapter, but this chapter shall not be interpreted as
authorizing the continuation of any use of a building or land which was not
lawfully existing on the effective date hereof as to such building or land.
      2.   Any use of a building or land which conformed with the use
regulations of the district in which the building or land was classified under
the village zoning ordinance immediately prior to the adoption of this title,
or which qualified as a nonconforming use under the village zoning ordinance at
that time, is a lawful nonconforming use which may continue as a nonconforming
use under the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   If a building or land becomes subject to this title, whether by the
extension of the zoning jurisdiction by reason of extension of the corporate
limits or otherwise, and the use of the building or land at the time it becomes
subject to this title is lawful but does not conform with the use regulations
of the district in which the building or land is situated, such use is a lawful
use which may continue as a nonconforming use under this chapter.
      4.   If a conforming use of a building or land becomes nonconforming by
virtue of an amendment of this title, then such use shall be considered to be a
lawful use which may continue as a nonconforming use under this chapter.
      5.   No use of a building or land which neither conforms with the use
regulations of the district in which the building or land is situated nor
qualifies as an authorized nonconforming use under the provisions of this
subsection shall be considered a lawful use or be permitted to continue under
the provisions of this title.
      6.   No use of a building which conforms with the use regulations of the
district in which the building is situated shall be considered to be
nonconforming merely because the building occupied by the use does not comply
with the height regulations of the district in which the building is situated
or because the building is so located on the zoning lot that it does not comply
with the yard regulations of such district.
      7.   The regulations of this chapter pertaining to a building occupied by
a nonconforming use shall apply not only to a building which is completely
occupied by such a use, but shall also apply to one in which the nonconforming
use occupies only a portion of the building. (1984 Code § 5-5-1)
   B.   Change Of Nonconforming Use: A nonconforming use may be allowed to
change to another nonconforming use by the village board only following a
public hearing before the zoning board as provided for in subsections D2 and D3
of this section. (1984 Code § 5-5-2)
   C.   Enlargement Or Extension: A nonconforming use in a residence district
may not be enlarged or extended. In other districts, a nonconforming use may be
allowed to be enlarged or extended by the village board only after a public
hearing before the zoning board as provided in subsections D2 and D3 of this
section. (1984 Code § 5-5-3)
   D.   Procedure For Change, Enlargement Or Extension:
      1.   Application For Change, Enlargement Or Extension: Application for a
change of one nonconforming use to another or for an enlargement or extension
of a nonconforming use shall be made in the same manner as is provided in
section
10-3-4 of this title for applications for variations and shall be accompanied
by the fee provided in section
10-3-7 of this title. (1984 Code § 5-5-4)
      2.   Requirements For Approval Of Change Of Nonconforming Use: The zoning
board may recommend that the village board permit a nonconforming use to be
changed to another nonconforming use if the board finds:
         a.   That the substitution or addition will not be detrimental to or
tend to alter the character of the neighborhood.
         b.   That the substitution or addition will not increase congestion to
the streets.
         c.   That the new use is no less restricted than the existing use.
(1984 Code § 5-5-5)
      3.   Requirements For Approval Of Enlargement Or Extension Of
Nonconforming Use: Except in a residential district, the zoning board may
recommend that the village board permit the enlargement or extension of a
nonconforming use if the zoning board finds that:
         a.   The enlargement or extension does not cause the area to be
occupied by a nonconforming use to exceed one hundred fifty percent (150%) of
the area occupied by a nonconforming use on the effective date hereof.
         b.   That the enlargement or extension does not exceed the applicable
bulk regulations for the district.
         c.   The applicable off street parking requirements are complied with
for the enlarged portion of the use.
         d.   The enlargement or extension will not be detrimental to or tend
to alter the character of the neighborhood. (1984 Code § 5-5-6)
   E.   Discontinuance Of Use: If a nonconforming use discontinues active or
continuous operations for a period of one year, the building or land where such
nonconforming use existed shall thereafter be occupied and used only for a
conforming use. (1984 Code § 5-5-7)
   F.   Damage Or Destruction: If a building containing a nonconforming use is
by any means destroyed or damaged to the extent of more than sixty percent
(60%) of its value, such building or reconstruction thereof shall thereinafter
be occupied and used only for a conforming use. (1984 Code § 5-5-8)
   G.   Repairs Or Alterations:
      1.   Normal Maintenance: Normal maintenance of a building or other
structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary
nonstructural repairs or incidental alterations.
      2.   Structural Alterations:
         a.   No structural alterations shall be made in a building or other
structure containing a nonconforming use, except:
            (1)   When required by law or by regulatory authority pursuant to
law.
            (2)   When made pursuant to an enlargement or extension permitted
by subsection C, D1 or D3 of this section.
            (3)   When made to accommodate a conforming use.
         b.   However, in any district, a building containing residential
nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve interior livability;
provided, that no structural alterations shall be made which would increase the
number of dwelling units or would create an enlargement or extension of the
building, unless as permitted above. (1984 Code § 5-5-9)
10-8-2: NONCOMPLYING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Continuation Of Use: The use of a noncomplying building or other
structure may be continued, except as otherwise provided in this section. (1984
Code § 5-5-10)
   B.   Damage Or Destruction: If a noncomplying building or other structure is
destroyed or damaged by any means, it may be reconstructed as it existed
previous to said destruction or damage; provided, that such reconstruction
neither creates a new noncompliance of any portion of the building or structure
as it previously existed. (1984 Code § 5-5-11)
   C.   Enlargements: A noncomplying building or other structure may be
enlarged; provided, that no enlargement is permitted which would either create
a new noncompliance or increase the degree of noncompliance of any portion of
the building or structure. (1984 Code § 5-5-12)
   D.   Repairs Or Alterations: Normal maintenance, repairs, or structural
alterations are permitted in a noncomplying building or other structure;
except, that alterations creating enlargements shall be subject to the
provisions of subsection C of this section. (1984 Code § 5-5-13)
CHAPTER 9
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-9-1: Purpose
10-9-2: Required Zoning
10-9-3: Calculation Of Number Of Spaces
10-9-4: Size Of Spaces
10-9-5: Parking Layout Drawing And Design
10-9-6: Stormwater Drainage; Surfacing
10-9-7: Location Of Spaces
10-9-8: Lighting
10-9-9: Landscaping
10-9-10: Use Restrictions
10-9-11: Number Of Parking Spaces
10-9-12: Loading Berth Description
10-9-13: Loading And Unloading Spaces Required
10-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to help increase safety, lessen congestion, and
reduce storage of vehicles in the streets. (1984 Code § 5-6-1)
10-9-2: REQUIRED ZONING:
Required parking spaces and loading/unloading spaces shall be located in a
zoning district having the same zoning prefix, i.e., residential parking in R
districts; except, that industrial parking spaces may also be located in a B
district. (1984 Code § 5-6-2)
10-9-3: CALCULATION OF NUMBER OF SPACES:
   A.   In any determination of total parking requirements, any fraction less
than one-half (1/2) may be dropped and any fraction of one-half (1/2) or more
shall be counted as one parking space. When the number of employees is a factor
in determining the number required off street parking spaces, "employees" means
the maximum number of employees on duty at the same time.
   B.   When a building or structure is erected, the required spaces shall be
recorded. If there is an increase or decrease in number of dwelling units,
gross floor area, seating capacity, number of employees, or other unit of
measurement specified in this chapter for determining the required parking or
loading facilities, and when such increase or decrease results in a requirement
for more or less total parking or loading spaces through application of this
chapter, the parking and loading spaces shall be increased or may be decreased
accordingly. (1984 Code § 5-6-5)
10-9-4: SIZE OF SPACES:
Each parking space shall be at least one hundred eighty (180) square feet in
area and shall be a definitely designated stall adequate for one motor vehicle
so that both doors may be opened. Adequate access to each stall and to the
street shall be provided. (1984 Code § 5-6-6)
10-9-5: PARKING LAYOUT DRAWING AND DESIGN:
   A.   An application for a building permit or zoning certificate for a new or
enlarged building, structure or use which has a parking requirement of more
than four (4) parking spaces shall include therewith a plot plan, drawn to
scale and fully dimensioned, showing any parking or loading facilities to be
provided in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Each off street parking facility of more than four (4) spaces shall be
provided with an appropriate means of vehicular access to a street in a forward
manner only. Such off street parking spaces shall open directly upon an aisle
or driveway of such width and design as to afford adequate ingress and egress.
No driveway shall have a width exceeding thirty five feet (35'), or be nearer
than twenty feet (20') to an intersecting street right of way line. All such
driveways shall be constructed with a Portland cement concrete approach slab
extending from the edge of the roadway to the right of way line. The slab shall
provide for curbing and ramping of sidewalks, where applicable. The design
shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the engineer for the
village. (1984 Code § 5-6-7)
10-9-6: STORMWATER DRAINAGE; SURFACING:
   A.   All open off street parking areas containing more than four (4) parking
spaces shall be improved with an adequate stormwater drainage system, and paved
with a crushed stone base, or equal, not less than six inches (6") thick, and
wearing surface of asphaltic concrete or comparable hard surfaced, all weather
dustless material not less than two inches (2") thick, or Portland cement not
less than six inches (6") thick on a compacted subgrade. All open off street
parking areas containing not more than four (4) parking spaces shall be
surfaced and maintained in such a manner as to make them dust free. (1984 Code
§ 5-6-8)
   B.   All newly constructed or reconstructed residential driveways and off
street parking areas containing less than four (4) parking spaces in the
village shall have either a Portland cement concrete (PCC) or an asphalt cement
(AC) surface from the edge of the street to the entrance of the home garage or
accessory building served by said driveway. PCC pavement shall be a minimum of
four inches (4") thick on a compacted subgrade. AC pavement shall have a
minimum surface thickness of two inches (2") over a minimum of six inches (6")
of compacted crushed stone base or six inches (6") of full depth AC on a
compacted subgrade. The purpose of this subsection is to protect the edges of
the village streets and to minimize dust and standing water nuisances. (Ord.
1998-16, 11-17-1998)
10-9-7: LOCATION OF SPACES:
   A.   No parking space or loading space nor portion thereof established on
the same zoning lot with a building shall be located within a required front
yard.
   B.   No parking space nor portion thereof established on a zoning lot
without a building shall be located closer to any street line than the
established building line on adjacent properties nor closer than the front yard
setback required for the district in which the parking lot is located. (1984
Code § 5-6-12)
10-9-8: LIGHTING:
Any parking lot shall be arranged and maintained so that the lighting is
directed downward and does not shine directly upon any adjacent residence or
street and does not produce excessive glare. (1984 Code § 5-6-11)
10-9-9: LANDSCAPING:
All open off street automobile parking areas either created or redesigned and
rebuilt subsequent to the effective date hereof, containing two (2) or more
rows of parking stalls and an area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or
more, shall provide and maintain canopy type shade trees along with other forms
of vegetation hardy to the region in tree islands and planting strips. (1984
Code § 5-6-13)
10-9-10: USE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Off street parking facilities accessory to a residential use and
developed in any residential district in accordance with the requirements of
this title shall be used solely for the parking of noncommercial vehicles owned
by occupants of the dwelling structures to which such facilities are accessory
or by guests of the occupants. Under no circumstances shall required parking
facilities accessory to residential structures in all other residential zones
be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of
automobiles belonging to the employees, tenants, visitors, or customers of
business or manufacturing establishments. Motor homes, trailers and campers may
be parked in enclosed garages and buildings or in rear yards 1 .
   B.   No motor vehicle repair work of any kind is permitted in any required
accessory off street parking facility. No gasoline or motor oil shall be sold
in conjunction with an accessory off street parking lot, except where such lot
is accessory to a business having such sale as a principal use.
   C.   No off street parking area or space shall be used for the purpose,
incidental or otherwise, of advertising or selling of cars unless the car is
owned by the resident or immediate family member and has a current license
plate. Cars which have a dealer's plate or do not have a title in the name of
an immediate family member are prohibited from being sold from such property.
(1984 Code § 5-6-10)
   D.   If groups of buildings contain uses which vary in their parking
requirements, the number of parking spaces shall be the sum of the individual
requirements for each use. Where peak parking requirements occur at different
times of the day or week as determined by the zoning enforcement officer, joint
facilities may be shared by two (2) or more uses. (1984 Code § 5-6-9; amd. 2010
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  7-2-2B of this code.
10-9-11: NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES:
The following are the minimum required off street parking spaces for the
particular use:
Type Of Use Parking Space Required
Type Of Use                             Parking Space Required
Amusement parks and racetracks          1 per each 500 square feet of lot area
                                        for public use
Aquariums                               1 per 800 square feet of floor area
Art galleries                           1 per 800 square feet of floor area
Auditoriums                             1 per 5 seats
Automobile service stations             1 per each 2 employees, plus 1 per
                                        owner or manager
Bowling alleys                          5 per each alley, plus 3 per each 10
                                        persons accommodated by affiliated uses
                                        1 per 250 square feet of space used per
Business offices and banks              office and 1 per 200 square feet of
                                        space for customers
Business schools                        1 per each 2 employees, plus 1 per each
                                        100 square feet of instruction space
Churches                                1 per 5 seats
Community centers                       3 per each 10 persons accommodated
Cultural and civic institutions         1 per 2 employees, plus 1 per each 800
                                        square feet of public area
Dance halls                             3 per each 10 persons accommodated
Dancing schools                         1 per each 2 employees, plus 1 per each
                                        100 square feet of instruction space
                                        1 per each examining or treatment room,
Dental offices or clinics               plus 1 per doctor, plus 1 per each 3
                                        other employees
Dwelling, multi-family                  11/2 per dwelling unit
Eating and drinking establishments      1 per each 100 square feet of floor
                                        area for public use
Elementary schools                      2 per classroom
Fraternity and sorority houses          1, plus 1 per each 2 persons for whom
                                        living accommodations are provided
Funeral parlors                         1 per funeral vehicle maintained on
                                        premises, plus 10 per chapel or parlor
                                        1 per each 5 employees, plus 1 per 200
Governmental offices                    square feet of floor area for customer,
                                        client or patron use
Gymnasiums                              1 per 5 seats
Health institutions other than          1 per each 4 beds, plus 1 per each
hospitals or clinics                    staff doctor, plus 1 per each other 2
                                        employees
High schools                            3 per classroom
Hospitals                               1 per each 3 beds, plus 1 per staff
                                        doctor, plus 1 per each 4 employees
Hotels and motels                       1 per dwelling or rented unit
Junior high schools                     2 per classroom
Libraries                               1 per 800 square feet of floor area
                                        1 per each examining room or treatment
Medical offices or clinics              room, plus 1 per doctor, plus 1 per
                                        each 3 other employees
Mobile home parks                       2 per mobile home
Museums                                 1 per 800 square feet of floor area
Music schools                           1 per each 100 square feet of
                                        instruction space
Nonbusiness clubs                       1 per each 3 members
                                        1 per each 4 beds, plus 1 per each
Nursing homes                           staff doctor, plus 1 per each other 2
                                        employees
Private clubs and lodges                1, plus 1 per each 2 persons where
                                        living accommodations are provided
                                        2 per each 5 employees, plus 1 per 200
Professional offices                    square feet of floor area for customer,
                                        client or patron use
Retail sales                            2 per 5 employees, plus 1 per each 200
                                        square feet devoted to the public
                                        1 per each 5 employees, plus 1 per 200
Savings and loan associations           square feet of floor area for customer,
                                        client or patron use
Stadiums and grandstands                1 per 5 seats
Swimming pools (public)                 3 per each 10 persons able to be
                                        accommodated
Theaters, indoor                        1 per each 5 seats up to 400, plus 1
                                        per each 3 seats over 400
Tourist homes and cabins                1 per dwelling unit
Trade schools                           1 per each 2 employees, plus 1 per each
                                        100 square feet of instruction space
Wholesale, manufacturing and industrial 1 per 4 employees
plants
                                        2 per each 5 employees, plus 1 per 200
Wholesale offices                       square feet of floor area for customer,
                                        client or patron use
                                        Accessory off street parking spaces
Other uses                              shall be provided as required herein
                                        for the most similar use
 
(1984 Code §§ 5-6-3, 5-6-4; amd. 2010 Code)
10-9-12: LOADING BERTH DESCRIPTION:
An "off street loading berth" shall be a hard surfaced area of land, open or
enclosed, other than a street or a public way, used principally for the
standing, loading or unloading of motor trucks, tractors, and trailers so as to
avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys. A required
loading space shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width, twenty five feet
(25') in length, and fourteen feet (14') in height, exclusive of access aisles
and maneuvering space. (1984 Code § 5-6-15; amd. 2010 Code)
10-9-13: LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACES REQUIRED:
All uses involving receipt or distribution of goods by vehicles shall have
space on the premises for pick up, delivery and service vehicles necessary for
normal daily operation. These spaces shall be in addition to those required
parking spaces in this chapter and shall be subject to sections
10-9-6 and
10-9-7 of this chapter. (1984 Code § 5-6-14)
CHAPTER 10
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-10-1: Purpose
10-10-2: Definitions
10-10-3: Compliance With Provisions; Signs Prohibited On Public Ways
10-10-4: Permit Required
10-10-5: Prohibited In All Districts
10-10-6: Permitted In All Districts Without Permit
10-10-7: Special Event Signs
10-10-8: Temporary Signs
10-10-9: Removal Of Nonconforming And Prohibited Signs
10-10-10: Residential District Regulations
10-10-11: Business District Regulations
10-10-12: Industrial District Regulations
10-10-13: Agricultural District Regulations
10-10-14: Tables
10-10-15: Violations; Notice Requirements
10-10-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The sign regulations, controls and provisions set forth in this chapter
are made in accordance with an overall plan and program for the public safety,
area development, preservation of property values, and the general welfare of
the village, and are intended to aid in traffic control and traffic safety;
preserve and protect property values; lessen congestion of land and air space;
provide against undue concentrations of signs which distract and endanger
traffic safety and traffic flow; establish reasonable standards for commercial
and other advertising through the use of signs in order to maintain and
encourage business activity and area development; avoid uncontrolled
proliferation of signs; recognize the rights of the public in roads, streets,
and highways; preserve the wholesome and attractive character of the village;
and recognize that the general welfare includes a community plan that provides
for a community that shall be beautiful as well as healthful, spacious as well
as clean, and well balanced in its growth and development.
   B.   The sign regulations distinguish between on premises and off premises
business signs. This distinction is based on the finding that other media
(television, radio, newspapers, outdoor advertising sign structures) adequately
present avenues for business advertising. The restriction of off premises
business signs will significantly aid in the realization of the goals and
purposes recited in subsection A of this section.
   C.   The sign regulations expressly exclude from regulations nonbusiness
signs except insofar as necessary to prevent imminent danger to the health or
safety of the public.
   D.   These sign regulations expressly distinguish between outdoor
advertising sign structures and signs based on the specific finding that such
structures are capable of being utilized for and have been and continue to be
utilized for announcements of both a commercial and noncommercial nature, have
been a traditional and lawful use of land in the village, are a unique
communication medium involving nationally standardized signs, which are made
generally available to the public. At the same time, the regulations recognize
that a limitation upon the size and number and spacing of such structures is
consistent with and will further the goals expressed in this chapter. (1984
Code § 5-7-1)
10-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   General Definitions:
    OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN STRUCTURE: A standardized outdoor advertising
display, including the permanent framework, structural members, support or
support foundation, scaffolding and illumination, facing or panels, and
message, which is intended and whose customary use is to mount periodically
changing commercial or noncommercial displays and which is made generally
available for display to the public by the owners on a short term basis. Such
structures shall be limited to three (3) standardized structures:
      1.   The thirty (30) sheet poster panel or painted bulletin whose outside
dimensions, including trim, if any, but excluding a base, apron, supports and
other structural member, is approximately twelve feet by twenty five feet (12'
x 25'), containing approximately three hundred (300) square feet of total
display area;
      2.   The one hundred fifty (150) square foot face, commonly painted
rather than posted; and
      3.   The junior panel, whose outside dimensions, including trim, if any,
but excluding the base, apron, supports and other structural members, is
approximately six feet by twelve feet (6' x 12'), containing approximately
seventy two (72) square feet of total face area.
   SIGN: Shall include any writing including a word or numeral; pictorial
representation including illustration; emblem including device, symbol, or
trademark; flag including the flag(s) of any nation(s) with total area over
forty (40) square feet or banner or pennant; or any figure of similar character
which is used to announce, direct attention to, or advertise and which is a
structure or part thereof, or is attached to, painted on, or in any manner
represented on a building or a structure. This definition shall not include
outdoor advertising sign structures or signs displayed thereon; or writings,
representations or other figures of similar character within a building or
nonpictorial color treatments on the surface of a building which do not include
writing or other direct forms of advertising.
   SIGN OR OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN STRUCTURE, HEIGHT OF: The height of a sign
or outdoor advertising sign structure shall be the distance from the top of the
highest portion of the sign or structure to: 1) the grade at the foundation of
the sign or outdoor advertising sign structure; or 2) the average grade of the
lot, whichever distance is greater.
   SIGN OR OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING: 1. A sign or
outdoor advertising sign structure lawfully erected, constructed, installed or
maintained prior to the effective date hereof, which does not conform to the
standards or requirements for permitted signs and is not specifically
prohibited; or
      2.   A sign or outdoor advertising sign structure lawfully erected,
constructed, installed or maintained after the effective date hereof, which
does not conform to existing standards or requirements for permitted signs
because of annexation, change in zoning districts, or amendments to this
chapter.
   SIGN OR OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN STRUCTURE, SURFACE AREA OF: The surface
area of a sign or surface display area of an outdoor advertising sign structure
shall be the area of the smallest convex geometric figure encompassing the
maximum projected area of the volume on a flat plane which completely encloses
the extreme limits of the surface display area of writing, representation,
emblem or other figure of similar character or potential display area of an
outdoor advertising sign structure, together with any material or color forming
an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign or outdoor
advertising sign structure from the background against which it is placed. Such
measurement shall exclude the necessary supports or uprights on which the sign
is placed, unless the supports or uprights constitute part of the display
because of the predominant overall concept of the sign.
   B.   Signs Defined According To Type Of Message Conveyed:
    SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to or identifies a business
or which directs attention to or identifies a commodity, service or
entertainment to be sold or offered for sale. Any sign displaying the name of a
business enterprise shall be conclusively presumed to be a business sign. Any
sign displayed on a lot occupied by a business enterprise shall be presumed to
be a business sign.
   SIGN, INSTRUCTIONAL OR DIRECTIONAL: A sign conveying instructions or
directions with respect to the lot on which it is located, such as a sign
designating the entrance to or exit from a parking area, a trespassing sign, a
danger sign and signs of a similar character.
   SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the
premises on which it is located, including a subdivision sign.
   SIGN, SPECIAL EVENT: A sign advertising or announcing a special
communitywide event or activity conducted by or sponsored by or on behalf of
local government, schools, a charitable organization or a not for profit
corporation. A "special communitywide event or activity" is one which occurs
not more than twice in any twelve (12) month period and which seeks to attract
donations, participants, or customers throughout the village or surrounding
area.
   C.   Signs And Outdoor Advertising Sign Structures Defined According To
Location And/Or Methods Of Attachment:
    SIGN, BULLETIN BOARD: A sign of permanent character, but with movable
letters, words or numerals, indicating the names of persons associated with or
events conducted upon or products or services offered upon the premises upon
which such sign is maintained.
   SIGN, CANOPY OR AWNING: An on premises business sign other than a projecting
business sign located upon a canopy or awning.
   SIGN, OFF PREMISES: A business sign which is not included in the definition
of "sign, on premises" in this subsection.
   SIGN, ON PREMISES: A business sign which relates solely to a use or business
conducted upon, or to a principal product, service or entertainment sold,
provided, or offered upon, the lot where the sign is located.
   SIGN OR OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN STRUCTURE, FREESTANDING: A sign or outdoor
advertising sign structure secured to the ground and not attached to a
building.
   SIGN OR OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN STRUCTURE, ROOF: A sign or outdoor
advertising sign structure erected upon the roof of any building.
   SIGN OR OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN STRUCTURE, WALL: A sign or outdoor
advertising sign structure attached to, erected against or painted upon the
wall of any building with the exposed face thereof in a plane parallel to the
plane of such wall, and which sign is mounted at a distance measured
perpendicular to such wall, no greater than eighteen inches (18"). A wall sign
shall include a sign suspended from the ceiling of a marquee, canopy or
vestibule where such sign or freestanding sign or freestanding outdoor
advertising sign structure any part of which is parallel to and any part of
which is within twenty four inches (24") of a wall.
   SIGN, PORTABLE: A sign not permanently anchored or secured to either a
building or the ground such as, but not limited to, A-frame, inverted T shaped
signs, and signs affixed to a chassis, which may include wheels for towing,
whether or not such wheels are in place.
   SIGN, PROJECTING YARD: A sign attached to and erected approximately
perpendicular to the wall of a building, including a sign erected at the corner
of a building and projecting into an open space or yard, but not projecting
into the right of way of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public property.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign intended for not more than a thirty (30) day period
of display and that is not actually displayed for any longer than thirty (30)
days.
   SIGN, THEATER MARQUEE: A sign, other than a projecting sign, mounted on the
marquee of any theater.
   D.   Signs Defined According To Degree Of Illumination:
    SIGN, FLASHING: A sign which exhibits artificially changing light or color
effects.
   SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign designed to give forth any artificial light or
reflect such light from an artificial source. (1984 Code § 5-7-2)
10-10-3: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; SIGNS PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC WAYS:
No sign or outdoor advertising sign structure may be erected, constructed,
established, maintained, enlarged or relocated or changed by any person except
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter nor shall any sign or outdoor
advertising structure be erected on a public right of way. (1984 Code § 5-7-4)
10-10-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No sign or outdoor advertising sign structure may be installed, erected,
constructed or placed without a permit from the zoning enforcement officer,
except as specifically provided for by this chapter. The permit fee for any
permitted sign with the exception of outdoor advertising sign structures shall
be at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) per square foot of sign surface area but
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Surface area calculated for permit
fee shall include the sum of each surface containing a message or advertising.
Permit fees for outdoor advertising sign structures shall be as defined in
section
10-10-13 of this chapter. No permit may be issued for a sign or outdoor
advertising sign structure which is not permitted under this chapter or which
is not in compliance with applicable construction codes. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-19-
2010)
10-10-5: PROHIBITED IN ALL DISTRICTS:
The following signs and outdoor advertising sign structures are prohibited in
all zoning districts: (2010 Code)
   A.   Banners, flags, pennants, spinners, portable signs, and streamers
except pursuant to a permit if provided for in this chapter. (1984 Code § 5-7-
5)
   B.   Any illuminated sign whose lighting projects into a residential area or
public right of way, or any flashing sign or any sign which has any visible
moving part, visible revolving parts or visible mechanical movement of any
description; or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical,
electronic or mechanical means, including intermittent electrical pulsations,
or by action of normal wind currents. Illuminated signs which indicate the
time, temperature, weather, or other changing message shall not be considered
flashing or moving signs provided each individual message remains visible for
at least a two and one-half (21/2) second interval before being reset or
replaced with another message. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-19-2010)
   C.   Any sign or outdoor advertising sign structure which:
      1.   Is structurally unsafe; or
      2.   Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment; or
      3.   Is not kept in good repair; or
      4.   Is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in
contact with it.
   D.   Any sign or outdoor advertising sign structure which, by reason of its
size, location, content, coloring or intensity of illumination, constitutes a
traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by obstructing or detracting
from the visibility of any governmentally erected sign or control device.
   E.   Any sign or outdoor advertising sign structure not erected by the
village or its agents which extends over or touches upon any village property
or public right of way unless specifically permitted by this chapter.
   F.   Signs or outdoor advertising sign structures which make use of words
such as "Stop", "Look", "Danger", or any other words, phrases, symbols or
characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
   G.   Any sign or outdoor advertising sign structure which obstructs free
ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape or other
required exitway.
   H.   Any nonconforming sign or outdoor advertising sign structure which
refers to a business no longer in existence or in operation at the location
advertised.
   I.   Business signs advertising nonconforming uses which do not conform to
the sign regulations of the most restrictive district where the nonconforming
use is permitted.
   J.   Any sign or outdoor advertising sign structure unlawfully constructed,
installed, erected or maintained.
   K.   Any roof sign. (1984 Code § 5-7-5)
10-10-6: PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS WITHOUT PERMIT:
Signs specified in this section are in addition to the signs permitted in the
respective use districts and shall not require a permit. Such signs are subject
to the conditions and limitations set forth in this section:
   A.   Nonbusiness Sign: Any sign not defined as a "business sign" and not
specifically prohibited by section
10-10-5 of this chapter or regulated by this section.
   B.   Instructional Or Directional Sign: Instructional or directional signs
which do not exceed a total of fifteen (15) square feet in surface area for all
such signs on any premises and which signs do not exceed four feet (4') in
height.
   C.   Real Estate Sign: One real estate sign may be placed on the lot if the
total surface area of the sign does not exceed twelve (12) square feet.
   D.   Construction Sites: Signs identifying architects, engineers, developers
or contractors when placed on construction sites shall not exceed thirty five
(35) square feet in area. Such signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days
from completion of the construction.
   E.   Addresses: Signs used to identify the street address of a commercial
building and not exceeding five (5) square feet in area.
   F.   Auctions And Garage Sales: Signs announcing auctions and garage sales
not exceeding five (5) square feet in area shall be posted not more than two
(2) days before and shall be removed two (2) days following the event, with a
total time of display not to exceed six (6) days. Such signs shall be confined
to private property and shall not be attached to or located on public property.
   G.   Campaign Signs: Political campaign signs announcing candidates seeking
public office and/or political issues and other pertinent information shall be
confined to private property and shall not be attached to or located on public
property. In any residential district, political campaign signs shall not
exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. In other districts, political campaign
signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet. Said signs shall be removed
within seven (7) days after the election to which they pertain.
   H.   Flags: Flags of any country, state, or unit of local government shall
not exceed forty (40) square feet in size. (1984 Code § 5-7-6)
10-10-7: SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS:
   A.   Permit And Insurance Required: No special event sign shall be erected
or maintained on or over any property owned or controlled by the village or any
public right of way by any person without first obtaining a permit issued by
the zoning enforcement officer, who shall consider the requirements and
restrictions of section
10-10-5 of this chapter and this section in approving or disapproving the
method of display, location, number and sizes of signs. The zoning enforcement
officer shall require evidence as to general liability insurance or its
equivalent which names the village as an additional insured in amounts of not
less than combined property damage and personal injury limits of five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) prior to issuance of a permit.
   B.   Number And Size Of Signs:
      1.   Permits shall be granted for no more than ten (10) special event
signs to be displayed on any day. Where approved applications are received from
more than one organization for such signs to be displayed on the same day, and
the total number exceeds the maximum provided in this section, each
organization shall receive a permit for a pro rata number of such signs.
      2.   Special event signs shall be no larger than fifty (50) square feet
in surface area.
   C.   Length Of Time Of Display:
      1.   Special event signs shall be displayed for not more than a
consecutive thirty (30) day period.
      2.   No more than two (2) days following the special event for which a
sign permit is granted pursuant to this section, such special event signs shall
be removed, and the area where such signs have been displayed shall be cleaned
and restored to its condition prior to display of such signs. (1984 Code § 5-7-
7)
10-10-8: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   A.   A business shall be permitted to display one temporary or portable sign
per business frontage advertising or announcing a new on site business for a
period of not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date the business was
started. A business shall also be permitted to display one temporary sign or
portable sign advertising on premises activities for not more than a total of
four (4) weeks per calendar year with no period of display being less than one
week. Temporary signs shall conform with the provisions of the table of
standards for the on premises business signs in the B-2 district in subsection
10-10-14A of this chapter.
   B.   The permit for a temporary sign shall stipulate the number and type of
temporary signs and dates of display. (1984 Code § 5-7-14)
10-10-9: REMOVAL OF NONCONFORMING AND PROHIBITED SIGNS:
Nonconforming and prohibited signs shall be removed or altered so as to conform
with this chapter subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Nonconforming Signs: Nonconforming signs which are nonconforming
because of size, number, height, setback or off premises nature, except theater
marquee signs, shall be removed or made conforming within five (5) years from
the date the sign became nonconforming under this chapter.
   B.   Nonconforming Outdoor Advertising Sign Structures: Nonconforming
outdoor advertising sign structures shall be removed or made conforming within
five (5) years of April 30, 1988; provided, however, that:
      1.   Nonconforming outdoor advertising sign structures parallel and
attached to walls or parallel and freestanding, any part of which is within
three feet (3') of a wall, may continue to be rebuilt or maintained, but not
enlarged or increased in height.
      2.   Nonconforming outdoor advertising sign structures which are
freestanding may continue in existence or may be rebuilt or maintained but not
enlarged or increased in height; provided, that such structures shall be
limited:
         a.   To a maximum of three hundred (300) square feet of display space
in the B-1 and B-2 zones (back to back 300 square foot display areas shall be
permitted).
         b.   To a maximum of three hundred (300) square feet of display in all
I zones; provided, however, that outdoor advertising sign structures which are
currently in existence but which are removed pursuant to this section may be
removed and relocated to any new site which is in an I zone. Such relocated
nonconforming outdoor advertising sign structures shall not exceed three
hundred (300) square feet in surface display nor be located within five hundred
feet (500') of another outdoor advertising sign structure measured along the
same side of the street. Relocated nonconforming outdoor advertising sign
structures shall also meet separation, height and setback restrictions of the
table of standards for outdoor advertising sign structures in subsection
10-10-14B of this chapter. The relocation of such outdoor advertising sign
structures shall occur within not more than twenty four (24) months following
their removal. Such relocated outdoor advertising sign structures shall be
deemed conforming when relocated in compliance with this subsection.
   C.   Prohibited Signs Or Outdoor Advertising Sign Structures: Specifically
prohibited signs or outdoor advertising sign structures shall be removed or
modified immediately.
   D.   Discontinued Businesses: Signs which refer to businesses no longer in
existence or operation at the locations advertised shall be removed sixty (60)
days from the effective date of discontinuance of the business at the location
advertised. (1984 Code § 5-7-8)
10-10-10: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
   A.   R-1 Single-Family And R-2 Single-Family And Two-Family Residential
Districts: One nonilluminated business on premises sign, not exceeding one
square foot in total surface area, may be displayed in connection with a home
occupation.
   B.   R-3 General Residence District And R-4 Single-Family Mobile Home
District: The regulations pertaining to signs in the R-3 and R-4 districts are
the same as in the R-1 district except for the addition of the following
permitted sign: One nonilluminated business on premises sign constructed as
follows: (1984 Code § 5-7-10; amd. 2010 Code)
      1.   Sign with incised letters on stone background set as part of the
building.
      2.   Wall sign or freestanding sign in the front or side yard; provided,
that the total height of the freestanding sign shall not exceed six feet (6')
and the total area shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet. (1984 Code §
5-7-10)
10-10-11: BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
On premises business signs shall be permitted subject to the limitations as
provided for in this chapter and as specified in the table of standards for on
premises business signs in business and industrial districts at subsection
10-10-14A of this chapter. (1984 Code § 5-7-11)
10-10-12: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
Regulations pertaining to signs and outdoor advertising sign structures in the
industrial districts are the same as in the B-2 district; except, that
freestanding signs not mounted on a pole may have a maximum area of one hundred
(100) square feet and shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. (1984 Code § 5-
7-12)
10-10-13: AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Outdoor advertising sign structures shall be permitted in the AG
agricultural district subject to the limitations as provided for in this
chapter and as specified in the table of standards for outdoor advertising sign
structures, subsection
10-10-14B of this chapter.
   B.   Outdoor advertising sign structures in the AG agricultural district
shall be not closer than three hundred feet (300') to the nearest highway right
of way or five hundred feet (500') to the nearest residential or public or
semipublic property. Permits shall be valid for not longer than five (5) years.
(1984 Code § 5-7-13; amd. 2010 Code)
   C.   Such structures shall be subject to a permit fee of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) with annual renewal of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
year (first year, $1,500.00). (1984 Code § 5-7-13)
10-10-14: TABLES:
   A.      On Premises Business Signs In Business And Industrial Districts:
   TABLE OF STANDARDS FOR ON PREMISES BUSINESS SIGNS IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS:
 
Type Of5     Maximum       Maximum     Maximum       Maximum      Miscellaneous
Sign1        Number        Area        Height        Projection   Provisions
             Permitted
                                       25 feet if
             1 per         1 square    sign is at
             frontage per  foot per    property
             business;     linear foot line, 1 foot
             provided,     of lot      additional    Not to
Freestanding that no       frontage up height per 2  project over  
             theater       to a        feet          any public
             marquee sign  maximum of  additional    right of way
             exists on the 150 square  setback
             same frontage feet        thereafter up
                                       to a maximum
                                       of 35 feet
                           10 percent
             1 per         of wall     Wall facing
             frontage per  area for    street not    18 inches
             business if   any wall up above second  maximum
Wall         no fascia     to 150      story; wall   projection    
             mounted       square feet perpendicular from wall
             canopy        of total    to street not surface
             business sign sign area   above roof
             exists        per
                           business
             1 per theater Up to 100
             marquee       square feet
             structure     changeable                Theater      Minimum
             facing (3     copy                      marquee      clearance
             maximum)      (billing)   Shall not     structure    from sidewalk
Theater      provided that per theater extend above  not to       to bottom of
marquee      no on         marquee     second story  project      sign must be
             premises      structure,  or roofline   within 2     in compliance
             freestanding  plus 75                   feet of any  with village
             or canopy     square feet               curb line    building
             business sign permanent                              codes
             exists on the signage
             same frontage
                           Under
             If no         canopy of
             freestanding, 10 square                 Must be
             marquee,      feet: 1                   totally      Minimum
             projecting,   square foot               within       clearance
             or roof sign  per linear  Shall not     surface area from sidewalk
Canopy or    exists, 1     foot        extend above  of canopy    to bottom of
awning2      under canopy  frontage up second story  structure,   sign must be
             per business, to a        or roofline   not to       in compliance
             plus 1 fascia maximum of                project      with village
             mounted if no 50 square                 within 2     building
             wall sign     feet for                  feet of any  codes
             exists        fascia                    curb line
                           mounted
                           sign
             1 per         1 square                               Shall be
             business if   foot per                               pinned
             no            foot of     Shall not     4 feet       directly to
Projecting   freestanding, frontage    extend above  maximum      building; 50
yard         marquee,      not to      second story  projection   foot minimum
             canopy or     exceed 30   or roofline                sign
             roof sign     square feet                            separation
             exists
 
Notes:
   1.    No roof signs are permitted.
   2.    Signs at ends of canopy or awning (maximum of 2) may be substituted
for suspended sign.
(1984 Code § 5-7-15; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.         Outdoor Advertising Sign Structures (OASS):
   TABLE OF STANDARDS FOR OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN STRUCTURES (OASS)1
 
Type         Number       Maximum     Maximum    Minimum      Separation   Miscellaneous
                          Area        Height     Setback
             2 per wall;              Not to
Wall or      provided, no             project    Not to
freestanding other wall               above      project
within 3     signs on     300 feet    roofline   beyond edges
feet of and  display wall per         of wall    of wall upon None          
parallel to  or           structure   upon which which
wall         freestanding             OASS is    structure is
             OASS on same             mounted    mounted
             lot
                                                 10 feet from 250 feet
                                                 the curb     between
                                                 line of      freestanding
                                                 public       OASS,
                                                 streets      measured
                                                             along same
                                                 If located   side of
                          300 square  25 feet at within 150   street5
                          feet (back  setback    feet of       
                          to back2    line, plus existing     50 feet
                          300 square  1 foot per freestanding between OASS
Freestanding             foot        additional sign,3 shall and           
                          displays    2 foot     not be       residential
                          shall be    setback to located      zoning
                          deemed to   a maximum  closer to    district
                          be single   of 35 feet public right  
                          structures) in height  of way than  50 foot
                                                 any part of  minimum
                                                 such         separation
                                                 freestanding between
                                                 sign within  freestanding
                                                 such         OASS3 and
                                                 distance4    freestanding
                                                              signs4
 
Notes:
   1.    No outdoor advertising sign structures erected on a roof shall be
permitted.
   2.    "Back to back" shall mean faces erected at no greater than a 45 degree
angle to each other.
   3.    "Freestanding sign" here excludes instructional or directional signs,
for sale signs, temporary signs, portable signs, and noncommercial signs.
   4.    Separation measurements on same side of street from closest projection
of OASS on ground to closest projection of freestanding sign on ground.
   5.    At the intersection of 2 streets, the separation requirement shall be
measured along perpendicular right of way lines.
(1984 Code § 5-7-16)
10-10-15: VIOLATIONS; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever it shall appear to the zoning enforcement officer that any sign has
been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of any of the
terms of this chapter, or after a permit for a sign has been revoked or become
void, or that a sign is unsafe or in such condition as to be a hazard to the
safety of the public, the zoning enforcement officer is empowered to issue a
notice in writing to the owner or lessee of the sign or the owner of the
premises of which the sign is erected or maintained. Such notice shall inform
such person of the violation and shall direct him/her to make such alteration,
repair or removal as is necessary to secure compliance with this chapter within
a reasonable time limit, which shall not be more than sixty (60) days. The
person receiving such notice shall comply with the terms thereof. (1984 Code §
5-7-9)
CHAPTER 11
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Compliance With Provisions; Enforcement
10-11-2: Noise
10-11-3: Vibrations
10-11-4: Smoke And Particulate Matter
10-11-5: Toxic And Noxious Matter
10-11-6: Odorous Matter
10-11-7: Fire And Explosive Hazards
10-11-8: Glare And Heat
10-11-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Generally: Any new uses established in any zoning district after the
effective date hereof shall be so operated as to comply with the performance
standards governing: 1) noise; 2) vibration; 3) smoke and particulate matter;
4) toxic and noxious matter; 5) odorous matter; 6) fire and explosive hazards;
and 7) glare and heat, as set forth hereinafter for the district in which such
use shall be located. No use already established on the effective date hereof
shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with,
the applicable performance standards established hereinafter for the district
in which such use is located.
   B.   Industrial Districts: An application for a building permit in an I-
1 and I-2 district, when required by the use regulations, shall be accompanied
by a certification from an engineer or scientific testing laboratory approved
by the village board indicating that the use of the land and all processing
either does or will comply with the applicable performance standards.
   C.   Investigation For Noncompliance: Complaints by an individual or
individuals of noncompliance with these standards shall be investigated by the
zoning enforcement officer. Upon completion of his investigation, if scientific
test and investigation is deemed desirable, he shall so inform the board of
appeals who shall evaluate the recommendation and subsequently recommend to the
village board that a scientific test be carried out. This test shall be carried
out by qualified professionals. If such test reveals violation of the
performance standards, the village board shall take the prudent actions
necessary to assure compliance by any violator with the performance standards
and other pertinent provisions of this title. (1984 Code § 5-8-1)
10-11-2: NOISE:
   A.   Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated
octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by the
American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat
network of the sound level meter. Impulse type noises shall be subject to the
performance standards hereinafter prescribed; provided, that such noises that
shall be capable of being so measured, for the purpose of this title, shall be
those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level
meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two (±2) decibels. Noise
incapable of being so measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent
nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent
properties.
   B.   At no point on the boundary of property shall the sound pressure level
of any operation other than background noises not directly under the control of
the property owner exceed the decibel limits in the octave bands designated
below: (1984 Code § 5-8-2; amd. 2010 Code)
Octave Band Frequency (Cycles Along Residence District Along Business District
Per Second)                   Boundaries               Boundaries
Octave Band Frequency (Cycles Along Residence District Along Business District
Per Second)                   Boundaries               Boundaries
0 to 75                       72                       79
75 to 150                     67                       74
150 to 300                    59                       66
300 to 600                    52                       59
600 to 1,200                  46                       53
1,200 to 2,400                40                       47
2,400 to 4,800                34                       41
Over 4,800                    32                       39
 
(1984 Code § 5-8-2)
10-11-3: VIBRATIONS:
   A.   Vibrations within a district shall be controlled so as not to become a
nuisance to adjacent uses.
   B.   No operation or activity (except those not under the direct control of
the property owner) shall cause at any time ground transmitted vibrations in
excess of the limits set forth below. Vibrations shall be measured at any point
along a property boundary line of the owner with a three (3) component
measuring instrument approved by the zoning enforcement officer and shall be
expressed as displacement in inches.
 
Frequency           Maximum Permitted Displacement Along Residence Boundaries
(Cycles Per Second) (Inches)
0 to 10             0.0008
10 to 20            0.0005
20 to 30            0.0002
30 to 40            0.0002
40 and over         0.0001
 
   (1984 Code § 5-8-3)
10-11-4: SMOKE AND PARTICULATE MATTER:
   A.   Any use already established on the effective date hereof shall be
permitted to be altered, enlarged, expanded or modified; provided, that new
sources of smoke and/or particulate matter conform to the performance standards
established hereinafter for the district in which such use is located. The
total emission weight of particulate matter from all sources within the
boundaries of the lot shall not exceed the net amount permitted in the district
in which the use is located after such alteration, enlargement, expansion or
modification.
   B.   In addition to the performance standards specified hereinafter, the
emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or quantity as to be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall henceforth be unlawful.
   C.   For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann chart,
published and used by the United States bureau of mines, shall be employed. The
emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density equal to no. 2 on the
Ringelmann chart is prohibited at all times, except as otherwise provided
hereinafter.
   D.   The emission, from all sources within any lot area, of particulate
matter containing more than five percent (5%) by weight of particles having a
particle diameter larger than forty four (44) microns is prohibited.
   E.   Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from such
sources as storage areas, yards, roads, and so forth, within lot boundaries
shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, or other
acceptable means. Emission of particulate matter from such sources in excess of
the weight limitations specified hereinafter for the district in which such use
shall be located is prohibited.
   F.   1. In the I-1 and I-2 districts, all uses shall comply with the state
environmental protection agency air pollution control regulations dated
December 1976 or updated versions as they occur after December 1976.
      2.   Particulate emission standard and limitations rule 203 of the state
standards shall apply to all I-1 and I-2 districts as follows and as excerpted
from the state air pollution regulations referred to above:
Rule 203: Particulate emission standards and limitations.
Particulate emission standards and limitations for new process emission
sources.
Except as further provided in this rule 203, no person shall cause or allow the
emission of particulate matter into the atmosphere in any one hour period from
any new process emission source which, either alone or in combination with the
emission of particulate matter from all other similar new process emission
sources at a plant or premises, exceeds the allowable emission rates specified
in table 2.1.
   TABLE 2.1
   STANDARDS FOR NEW PROCESS EMISSION SOURCES
Process Weight Rate Pounds Process Weight Rate Tons Per Allowable Emission Rate
Per Hour                   Hour                         Pounds Per Hour
Process Weight Rate Pounds Process Weight Rate Tons Per Allowable Emission Rate
Per Hour                   Hour                         Pounds Per Hour
   100                     0.05                      0.55
   200                     0.10                      0.77
   400                     0.20                      1.10
   600                     0.30                      1.35
   800                     0.40                      1.58
   1,000                   0.50                      1.75
   1,500                   0.75                      2.40
   2,000                   1.00                      2.60
   4,000                   2.00                      3.70
   6,000                   3.00                      4.60
   8,000                   4.00                      5.35
   10,000                  5.00                      6.00
   20,000                  10.00                     8.70
   30,000                  15.00                     10.80
   40,000                  20.00                     12.50
   50,000                  25.00                     14.00
   60,000                  30.00                     15.60
   70,000                  35.00                     17.00
   80,000                  40.00                     18.20
   90,000                  45.00                     19.20
   100,000                 50.00                     20.50
   200,000                 100.00                    29.50
   300,000                 150.00                    37.00
   400,000                 200.00                    43.00
   500,000                 250.00                    48.50
   600,000                 300.00                    53.00
   700,000                 350.00                    58.00
   800,000                 400.00                    62.00
   900,000                 450.00                    66.00
   1,000,000               500.00                    67.00
 
Interpolated and extrapolated (up to process weight rates of 450 tons per hour)
values of the data in table 2.1 shall be determined by using the equation:
 
E = 2.54(P)0.534
Where:
E = allowable emission rate in pounds per hour, and
P = process weight rate in tons per hour
 
Interpolated and extrapolated values of the data of table 2.1 for process
weight greater than or equal to 450 tons per hour shall be determined using the
equation:
 
E = 24.8(P)0.16
Where:
E = allowable emission rate in pounds per hour, and
P = process weight rate in tons per hour
 
   (1984 Code § 5-8-4)
10-11-5: TOXIC AND NOXIOUS MATTER:
No activity or operation shall cause, at any time, the discharge of toxic or
noxious matter across lot lines in such concentration as to be detrimental to
or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare or cause injury or
damage to property or business. (1984 Code § 5-8-5)
10-11-6: ODOROUS MATTER:
   A.   The emission of odorous matter of a quantity as to be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance and shall henceforth be unlawful.
   B.   No activity or operation shall cause, at any time, the discharge of
odorous matter in such concentrations as to be detectable without the use of
instruments at any point along lot lines. (1984 Code § 5-8-6)
10-11-7: FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS:
   A.   Compliance With National Standards: The manufacture, utilization or
storage of pyrophoric and explosive dusts shall be in accordance with the
safety codes of the National Fire Protection Association. Such dusts include,
but are not limited to: aluminum, bronze and magnesium powder, powdered coal,
powdered plastics, flour and feed, spices, starches, sugar, cocoa, sulphur,
grain (storage) and wood flour.
   B.   I-1 District: In the I-1 district, the following additional regulations
shall apply:
      1.   The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted.
      2.   The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted,
provided the following condition is met: Said materials shall be stored,
utilized, or manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having
incombustible exterior walls, or protected throughout by an automatic fire
extinguishing system, or said materials may be stored outdoors in conformance
with the regulations of the state department of public safety, and such storage
shall have fifty foot (50') clearance from all property lines.
   C.   I-2 District: In the I-2 district, the following additional regulations
shall apply:
      1.   The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials ranging
from incombustible to intense burning are permitted, subject to applicable
rules and regulations of the state department of public safety.
      2.   The storage and utilization of flammable liquids or materials which
produce flammable or explosive vapors or bases shall be permitted in accordance
with the regulations of the state department of public safety. (1984 Code § 5-
8-7)
10-11-8: GLARE AND HEAT:
Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within a
completely enclosed building in such manner as not to create a public nuisance
or hazard along lot lines. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded so as not
to create a nuisance across lot lines. (1984 Code § 5-8-8)
CHAPTER 12
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Screening
10-12-2: Refuse
10-12-3: Residential Swimming Pools
10-12-4: Outdoor Lighting
10-12-5: Horses; Private Stables
10-12-6: Satellite Receiving Dishes
10-12-7: Solar Energy Systems
10-12-8: Mailboxes
10-12-9: Cemeteries
10-12-10: Airports And Landing Strips
10-12-11: Streets And Railroads
10-12-12: Animal Hospitals
10-12-13: Agricultural Processing Plants
10-12-14: Country Clubs And Golf Courses
10-12-15: Golf Driving Ranges And Amusement Parks
10-12-16: Amusement Centers
10-12-17: Drive-In Theaters
10-12-18: Nursing Homes
10-12-19: Family And Commercial Daycare Homes
10-12-20: Home Occupations
10-12-21: Retail Sales For Guests Only
10-12-22: Junkyards And Salvage Yards
10-12-23: Temporary Tract Offices
10-12-1: SCREENING:
Where outdoor storage of materials, goods and products exists within business
or industrial districts, such storage shall be effectively screened by a solid
fence, compact hedge or similar opaque landscaped element located on the
property of the party storing the material, goods, and products. Such screening
shall not extend within fifteen feet (15') of any street or driveway. The
screening shall be placed along property lines or, in the case of screening
along a street, fifteen feet (15') from the street right of way line with
landscaping between the screening and pavement. A louvered fence shall be
considered solid if it blocks direct vision. (1984 Code § 5-9-1)
10-12-2: REFUSE:
All waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage not disposed of through the
public sanitary sewerage system shall be kept in an enclosed building or
contained on the property in a closed container designed for such purposes. The
owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping such land free of refuse.
(1984 Code § 5-9-2)
10-12-3: RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOLS:
   A.   Definition: A "residential swimming pool" is any structure that is
capable of containing water of twenty four inches (24") (610 mm) or more in
depth, which is used or intended to be used for swimming or recreational
bathing, and which is available only to the family and guests of the
householder. This includes inground, aboveground and onground swimming pools.
   B.   Building Permit And Compliance Required: This section requires a
building permit for all pools over twenty four inches (24") deep that are
installed after the effective date hereof. It shall be unlawful to construct,
maintain, install or enlarge any residential swimming pool in the village
except in compliance with the provisions of this section.
   C.   Use Restriction: The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the
enjoyment of the occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is
located.
   D.   Location: The pool, including any walks, paved area or accessory
structures adjacent thereto, may not be closer than ten feet (10') to any
adjacent residential property line; except, when the pool is screened by a
privacy fence, then the pool may be located five feet (5') from a property
line.
   E.   Lighting: Lights used to illuminate swimming pools shall be arranged as
to reflect light away from adjoining premises and away from the vision of
passing motorists.
   F.   Fencing And Gates:
      1.   Inground swimming pools shall be enclosed with fencing with self-
closing gates which are to be kept locked when the pool is not in use. Such
fencing shall be at least four feet (4') in height above the surrounding grade
level.
      2.   Aboveground swimming pools shall be either fenced in the same manner
as inground swimming pools, or if they have rigid sides at least forty eight
inches (48") above the ground, they shall be equipped with removable ladders.
Aboveground swimming pools with decks that do not have removable ladders or
steps shall be equipped with locking gates or shall be fenced as required for
inground swimming pools.
      3.   Fencing existing prior to the effective date hereof that is at least
forty two inches (42") tall will be grandfathered and allowed. Existing
swimming pools shall have until August 5, 2005, to comply with this subsection.
   G.   Draining, Dismantling Pools: The owner shall be responsible for
draining inground pools and for draining and dismantling aboveground pools when
any one of the following conditions exists:
      1.   The property becomes vacant for three (3) consecutive weeks.
      2.   Odor is detectable at property lines resulting from algae or some
other substance.
      3.   Insufficient water level in the pool causing the pool sides to shift
or collapse. (Ord. 2005-10, 7-5-2005)
   H.   Penalty: Failure to comply with this section will result in a fine as
provided in section
10-3-10 of this title. (Ord. 2005-10, 7-5-2005; amd. 2010 Code)
10-12-4: OUTDOOR LIGHTING:
Whenever outdoor lighting is to be used on a property, the light fixture shall
be so placed that the light rays are generally directed downward and/or away
from properties and from the vision of passing motorists. (1984 Code § 5-9-6)
10-12-5: HORSES; PRIVATE STABLES:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area upon which a horse may be kept
is one acre, and two (2) horses may be kept for each twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet by which the parcel of land exceeds one acre.
   B.   Location Of Stables: Private stables and paddocks shall be located on
the rear half of the lot and not closer than twenty feet (20') to any property
line, nor closer than forty feet (40') from any dwelling on the same or
adjoining property. (1984 Code § 5-9-12)
10-12-6: SATELLITE RECEIVING DISHES:
   A.   Location: Satellite receiving dishes shall not be located in a required
front yard or in a side yard which adjoins a street or road. Satellite
receiving dish posts or legs may not be any closer to any side or rear property
line than the diameter of the dish.
   B.   Height Limit: Ground mounted dishes may be no greater than fifteen feet
(15') in height. Roof mounted dishes and dishes mounted on poles which are
bolted to principal buildings must conform to the zoning district height limit.
   C.   Advertising Prohibited: No form of advertising or identification is
allowed on the dish or framework other than the manufacturer's small
identification plates or other identifying marks which shall not exceed one
square foot in size.
   D.   Color: Satellite receiving dishes must be neutral in color. (1984 Code
§ 5-9-21)
10-12-7: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
Solar energy systems shall not project above the ridge line of the roof on any
building in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and B-1 districts. (1984 Code § 5-9-22)
10-12-8: MAILBOXES:
The clustering of groups of mailboxes is hereby prohibited. It shall be illegal
to place more than two (2) mailboxes upon any parcel of real estate, except
where more than two (2) mailboxes are necessary to serve apartments, single-
family residences or businesses actually located upon the parcel where the
mailboxes are located. This section shall not apply to clustered groups of
mailboxes existing January 1, 1991. (Ord. 1991-1, 1-2-1991)
10-12-9: CEMETERIES:
Cemeteries, crematories, and mausoleums shall provide an entrance on a major
street or road with ingress or egress so designed as to minimize traffic
congestion, shall provide required off street parking space and shall provide a
minimum size six foot (6') high wall; or minimum three foot (3') thick, six
foot (6') high evergreen hedge; or provide a minimum twenty feet (20') of
permanently maintained planting strip on all property lines abutting any
residential district. (1984 Code § 5-9-10; amd. 2010 Code)
10-12-10: AIRPORTS AND LANDING STRIPS:
Airports or heliports or landing strips for aircraft shall be located no closer
than two thousand feet (2,000') from any dwelling and shall be located so that
air and land traffic shall not constitute a nuisance to neighboring uses.
Proponents shall show that the field in question comes up to the standards of
the federal aviation administration for the particular class of field. (1984
Code § 5-9-11)
10-12-11: STREETS AND RAILROADS:
Streets and railroads are permitted in all zoning districts. (1984 Code § 5-9-
23)
10-12-12: ANIMAL HOSPITALS:
Animal hospitals without outside runs shall be located no closer than one
hundred feet (100') to any residential district, restaurant, hotel or motel in
any district and shall show that reasonable measures and controls shall be
taken to prevent offensive noise and odor. No incineration of refuse shall be
permitted on the premises. (1984 Code § 5-9-4)
10-12-13: AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING PLANTS:
Agricultural processing plants in any district which processes agricultural
products produced on the premises or within a contiguous area shall be so
located as to provide convenient trucking access with a minimum of interference
to normal traffic and shall provide parking and loading spaces. The proponent
shall show that adequate measures shall be taken to control odor, dust, noise,
and waste disposal so as not to constitute a nuisance, and shall show that the
proposed source of water will not deprive others of normal supply. Such a
processing plant shall not be closer than five thousand feet (5,000') from a
residential district. (1984 Code § 5-9-7)
10-12-14: COUNTRY CLUBS AND GOLF COURSES:
   A.   Building Location: No building shall be located within one hundred feet
(100') of any property line.
   B.   Swimming Pools, Tennis Courts, Etc.: Swimming pools, tennis courts and
the like shall be located not less than twenty five feet (25') from any
property line, and adjoining property in any residence or business district
shall be effectively protected by a wall, hedge and/or screen planting.
   C.   Additional Uses Permitted: Facilities such as restaurants and bars may
be permitted when conducted and entered from within the building. (1984 Code §
5-9-5)
10-12-15: GOLF DRIVING RANGES AND AMUSEMENT PARKS:
   A.   Location:
      1.   Golf driving ranges and amusement parks shall be located on major or
secondary thoroughfares or nonresidential streets.
      2.   Golf driving platforms shall be not less than two hundred feet
(200') from any adjacent residence district or existing dwelling.
      3.   With the exception of a golf driving range, no amusement park shall
be closer than two thousand feet (2,000') to any residential district.
   B.   Lighting: Floodlights used to illuminate the premises shall be so
directed and shielded as not be an annoyance to any developed residential
property. (1984 Code § 5-9-9; amd. 2010 Code)
10-12-16: AMUSEMENT CENTERS:
Amusement centers, arcades, bowling alleys, dance halls and similar places of
amusement shall provide parking with ingress and egress designed so as to
minimize traffic congestion. Such parking shall not be less than twenty feet
(20') from any property line, shall provide on its property a minimum six foot
(6') solid board fence, masonry wall or dense hedge separating the parking area
from abutting residential property and shall show that adequate controls or
measures will be taken to prevent offensive noises and vibration. (1984 Code §
5-9-15)
10-12-17: DRIVE-IN THEATERS:
Drive-in theaters shall be located only on major or secondary thoroughfares,
shall provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion,
shall be located sufficiently distanced from any residence district or existing
dwelling, shall be screened from the street and dwelling units so that the view
shall not disturb residents and shall maintain lighted signs and other lights
diffused downward and only in such a way as not to disturb neighboring
residents. In no case shall a drive-in theater be located closer than two
thousand feet (2,000') from a residential district. (1984 Code § 5-9-8)
10-12-18: NURSING HOMES:
Approval for a nursing home must be obtained from proper agencies concerning
health and safety conditions, and such home must be licensed by such agencies.
(1984 Code § 5-9-13)
10-12-19: FAMILY AND COMMERCIAL DAYCARE HOMES:
   A.   Family Daycare Homes: Family daycare homes are permitted uses in the
AG, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts, provided the daycare home does not employ
more than one person outside of the immediate family members. (1984 Code § 5-9-
16; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Commercial Daycare Centers: Commercial daycare centers shall only be
permitted on lots or parcels that have a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet, and the playgrounds shall be screened from the street by a
nonobtrusive fence. (1984 Code § 5-9-16)
10-12-20: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Specifications: A "home occupation", as defined in section
10-2-2 of this title, shall comply with the following: (2010 Code)
      1.   The home occupation does not result in any alteration of the
appearance of the dwelling unit.
      2.   The home occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the
primary use of the property for residential purposes.
      3.   There is no exterior storage of materials and no exterior indication
of the home occupation except for a sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in
size, nonilluminated, and attached to the principal building.
      4.   The home occupation does not result in the production of any
additional noise, vibration, light, odor, dust, fumes, smoke, traffic, or other
audibly or visually noticeable productions detectible to the normal senses of
human beings outside the dwelling unit.
      5.   The home occupation does not involve the storage of goods or
materials in excess of an area twenty five (25) square feet in size.
      6.   There is no retail sales of stock, merchandise, supplies, or
products except those incidental to the home occupation.
      7.   The home occupation is limited to an area of the residence not
exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in size, including storage.
   B.   Permitted Home Occupations: Uses permitted as home occupations (that
meet the criteria listed in subsection A of this section) include, but are not
limited to:
Authors.
Composers.
Home and healthcare products for off site sale.
Home crafts for off site sale.
Independent contractors, involving no storage of contractors' equipment.
Mail order operations.
One chair beauty parlors and barbershops.
Professional offices maintained as an adjunct to a primary office maintained
off premises.
Telephone solicitation work.
Tutoring, limited to no more than eight (8) students per day without any use of
electronically amplified sound.
Other similar uses.
   C.   Registration Required: Home occupations are to be registered with the
zoning enforcement officer. (1984 Code § 5-9-18)
10-12-21: RETAIL SALES FOR GUESTS ONLY:
Community buildings, private clubs, lodges and social or recreational
establishments may have accessory retail sales for guests. The sales must be
clearly incidental to the principal use, and signs advertising such sales are
prohibited. (1984 Code § 5-9-14)
10-12-22: JUNKYARDS AND SALVAGE YARDS:
Any outside use conditionally permitted or permitted to be used as a salvage
yard storage area or junkyard shall be surrounded by an eight foot (8') fence
which blocks one hundred percent (100%) of the view of the contents inside the
perimeter. The fencing shall be set in place no less than six feet (6') from
the property line and shall completely enclose the facility. The fence shall be
constructed of standard fencing material and shall be consistent in color and
appearance. The fence shall be kept in good condition. Any repairs ordered by
the zoning enforcement officer shall be completed by the owner or operator
within seven (7) days. Junkyards and salvage yards existing on the effective
date hereof shall have until January 1, 1990, to comply with this section.
(1984 Code § 5-9-19)
10-12-23: TEMPORARY TRACT OFFICES:
Temporary subdivision offices are permitted in any district and shall be
located on the property which is being developed and/or sold. Tract offices are
limited to a six (6) month period, at which time the applicant may request an
additional six (6) months of operation. Otherwise, the subdivision office shall
be removed at the expense of the owner. The office shall meet all yard
requirements of the district in which it is located. (1984 Code § 5-9-17)
ARTICLE A. LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENTS 1
SECTION:
10-12A-1: Plans Required
10-12A-2: Permitted Uses Only
10-12A-3: Site And Structure Requirements
10-12A-4: Required Improvements And Minimum Design Standards
10-12A-5: Special Requirements For Mobile Home Parks
10-12A-6: Procedure
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  11-3B-6 of this code.
10-12A-1: PLANS REQUIRED:
Whenever a development in the village is proposed which: a) is a mobile home
park; or b) would involve more than one principal structure on a lot or parcel,
the developer/builder must present his physical development plans to the
planning committee for review and recommendations to the village. The plans
shall be prepared at a scale of thirty feet (30') to forty feet (40') per inch
and shall be prepared by an Illinois registered surveyor, architect or
engineer. The required plans and supporting documentation may be submitted on
one or more sheets of paper and must clearly indicate the following: (1984 Code
§ 5-9-20; amd. 2010 Code)
   A.   The boundaries of the property.
   B.   Existing and proposed easements.
   C.   The owner(s) of the property.
   D.   On site vehicular circulation.
   E.   Vehicular parking.
   F.   Sidewalks.
   G.   The location and size of sanitary sewers and water mains if public
facilities or approved community facilities are available. If public facilities
are not available, the location of on site systems shall be shown.
   H.   Proposed site grading.
   I.   Stormwater drainage.
   J.   The location of structures.
   K.   The location of fire hydrants.
   L.   Letters from serving utility companies indicating availability and
adequacy of utility service for the development. (1984 Code § 5-9-20)
10-12A-2: PERMITTED USES ONLY:
No building or land may be used and no building may be erected, converted,
enlarged or structurally altered in a large scale development except for a
permitted use listed in the district for which the large scale development is
applied. (1984 Code § 5-9-20)
10-12A-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Spacing And Yards:
      1.   In lieu of front, side, and rear yard requirements, buildings twenty
five feet (25') or less in height shall be no closer than ten feet (10') to any
other building, street or parking area. For buildings over twenty five feet
(25') in height, spacing shall be increased two feet (2') for every four feet
(4') or fraction thereof by which the building height exceeds twenty five feet
(25').
      2.   A twenty five foot (25') yard shall be provided around the perimeter
of the development. In addition, where a commercial or industrial development
adjoins a residential district, an additional ten feet (10') shall be provided.
No additional yard shall be required for a residential district across a street
from a large scale development.
   B.   Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: The required lot area per dwelling unit for
the zoning district in which the proposed large scale development is located
shall apply. Public streets, easements of access, and parking areas shall not
be included in the calculation.
   C.   Height: The permitted height regulations of the zoning district in
which the proposed large scale development is located shall apply.
   D.   Off Street Parking: The off street parking regulations of chapter 9 of
this title shall apply. (1984 Code § 5-9-20)
10-12A-4: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS:
All of the plans for drives, sidewalks, water mains, etc., referenced herein
shall be designed and engineered in accordance with the minimum design and
layout standards and the required improvements sections of the village
subdivision regulations; except, that private drives may be reduced in width.
However, private drives must be of sufficient width to accommodate fire
vehicles. Alternate pavement designs may be presented to the engineer for the
village for consideration. (1984 Code § 5-9-20)
10-12A-5: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS:
The following regulations shall apply to mobile home parks:
   A.   Site And Lot Areas; Water And Sewer Facilities: Each mobile home park
shall have a minimum area of five (5) acres. Public or Illinois environmental
protection agency approved community sewer and water facilities shall be
available for each mobile home, and each existing mobile home lot shall contain
at least three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area, unless a larger lot
area is required by the department of public health or the environmental
protection agency. (1984 Code § 5-9-20; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Open Space: All mobile home parks shall provide an overall site area of
one thousand (1,000) square feet per mobile home for access roads, utility
structures, parking space, and other community facilities. This space is to be
in addition to the minimum three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area
mentioned in subsection A of this section. In addition, eight percent (8%) of
the gross area of the mobile home park shall be set aside for recreational use.
   C.   Parks Abutting Residential Districts: Where a mobile home park abuts
another residential district and there is no street, alley, railway, natural
ditch, creek or river separating the mobile home park from the adjacent
residential district, a twenty five foot (25') yard shall be provided along
said district abutments.
   D.   Ingress And Egress: A separate way of ingress or egress to a public
street shall be provided for each one hundred (100) mobile homes contained in
every mobile home park.
   E.   Mobile Homes In Parks:
      1.   Location:
         a.   Mobile homes shall be so located on each space so that there
shall be at least a twenty foot (20') clearance between mobile homes on all
four (4) sides. No mobile home shall be located closer than fifteen feet (15')
to any building within the park or to any property line of the mobile home park
which does not abut a public street or highway.
         b.   Mobile homes shall be set back at least twenty five feet (25')
from the right of way of public streets or alleys.
      2.   Pads And Patios: Each mobile home shall be provided with a Portland
cement concrete stand or pads and a paved outdoor patio of at least one hundred
eighty (180) square feet located at the main entrance to the mobile home.
      3.   Anchors And Tie Downs: Anchors or tie downs for mobile homes shall
be installed at the corners of the pad. Each anchor shall be capable of
withstanding a vertical tension force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800)
pounds. (1984 Code § 5-9-20)
10-12A-6: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Filing Plans; Fee: The plan or plans and any supporting documentation
shall be filed with the village clerk along with a filing fee as provided in
subsection
10-3-7C of this title. (Ord. 1990-13, 6-5-1990; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Planning Committee Action:
      1.   The clerk shall transmit the material to the planning committee.
Within seven (7) days, the planning committee shall transmit copies of the
proposed large scale development to the engineer for the village, along with
notification of the date, time, and location of a meeting to review the
development and to determine if the project conforms to village standards.
      2.   The planning committee shall not approve any large scale development
except after a public hearing before the planning committee, of which there
shall be a notice of the time and place of the hearing published at least once,
not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the
hearing, in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the
village.
      3.   If the committee determines that the plans do conform to village
standards, the planning committee shall transmit a copy of the proposed large
scale development to the village board, along with a recommendation that the
board approve the proposed large scale development, subject to certification by
the engineer for the village that a certified check, letter of credit or
satisfactory bond guaranteeing completion of construction of all required
improvements has been filed in accordance with the procedures and requirements
of the land subdivision regulations. The committee shall also send a copy of
the approved plan or plans for the large scale development to the Williamsville
school district and the Sherman fire protection district, together with a
notice of the date at which the village board intends to take action on
approval or disapproval of the plan or plans. (Ord. 1990-13, 6-5-1990)
      4.   If the committee finds that the proposed large scale development
does not meet the requirements of the village, the planning committee shall in
writing note any deficiencies in the plan to the developer. Once the deficiency
is corrected, the planning committee shall transmit the proposed large scale
development to the village board.
   C.   Village Board Approval: When the village board determines that the
large scale development has been recommended for approval by the planning
committee and that the engineer for the village has certified that the required
improvements either have been installed in the manner specified by the land
subdivision regulations or that said surety bonds or certified checks are in a
form and amount sufficient to assure completion, the village board may approve
the large scale plan. (1984 Code § 5-9-20)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Short Title
11-1-2: Purpose And Intent
11-1-3: Jurisdiction
11-1-3-1: Plat; When Required
11-1-4: Definitions
11-1-5: Compliance With Provisions
11-1-6: Record Of Plats
11-1-7: Violation; Penalty
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known, referred to and cited as the 1984 LAND SUBDIVISION
ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF SHERMAN, ILLINOIS. (1984 Code §
6-1-1)
11-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The purpose of this title is to regulate and control the division of
land within the plat approval jurisdiction of the village, to prevent the
subdivision of land for uses to which the land is not suited, and to prevent
serious hazards and problems to the citizens of the community. This title will
provide for the improvement of the public health and safety; the harmonious
development of the village and its environs; the coordination of streets,
public areas, and other features of the official village plan; and the
protection of the community's taxable resources by requiring that subdivisions
be designed and developed so as not to impose excessive maintenance burdens on
the community, but at the same time allow for reasonable development costs for
the developer and homeowner.
   B.   This title is intended to establish regulations specifically needed to:
      1.   Provide for the orderly division of land by requiring the proper
description, monumentation, and recording of subdivided lands.
      2.   Provide reasonable protection and conservation of those natural
resources (land, air, vegetation, water) upon which the continued prosperity,
safety, health, and welfare of the community may depend.
      3.   Prevent scattered development beyond the reasonable service area of
the community facilities and utilities.
   C.   It is also the intention of this title that any land divided hereunder
shall result in the creation of lots that are of sufficient size and shape to
be practically used and that will serve the public in a reasonable fashion over
a long period of time. (1984 Code §
6-1-3)
11-1-3: JURISDICTION:
The plat jurisdiction of the village shall include all land within the
corporate limits of the village and all unincorporated land within one and one-
half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the village, except when a
contractual agreement has been established between Sherman and other
municipalities concerning jurisdictional powers in the one and one-half (11/2)
mile overlap areas between the two (2) municipalities. The village will then
have subdivision control in that portion of the overlap area established by the
agreement. (1984 Code §
6-1-2)
11-1-3-1: PLAT; WHEN REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for a subdivider of land within the subdivision
jurisdiction of the Village of Sherman to subdivide land into lots, blocks,
streets, alleys, or public open space unless by plat in accordance with the
laws of the State of Illinois and the provisions of this title. It shall be
unlawful to divide land without obtaining tract survey approval, when required.
   A.   The provisions of this title shall not apply, except as noted with
respect to tract surveys, and no plat is required in any of the following
instances:
      1.   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five
(5) acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements
of access;
      2.   The division of lots or blocks less than one acre in any recorded
subdivision which does not involve any new streets, easements of access or
drainage and utility easements;
      3.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land where the transfer results in the same number of parcels;
      4.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for the use
as a right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other
pipe lines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
      5.   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
      6.   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or
grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
      7.   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances;
      8.   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the
division into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or tract of
land existing on July 17,1959 and not involving any new streets or easements of
access. If a division is made prior to 10-1-73 for which an exemption is
claimed pursuant to this subsection (A)(8), and the division results in one
part being greater than five (5) acres and the other part being less than five
(5) acres, then the subsequent division of the part greater than five (5) acres
shall qualify for the exemption set forth in subsection (A)(9) of this Section.
If a division is made on or after 10-1-73 for which an exemption is claimed
pursuant to this subsection (A)(8), and the division results in one part being
greater than five (5) acres and the other part being less than five (5) acres
then the subsequent division of the part greater than five (5) acres shall not
qualify for the exemption set forth in subsection (A)(9);
      9.   The sale of a single tract less than five (5) acres from a tract of
five (5) acres or larger when a survey is made by a registered land surveyor;
provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to the sale of any
subsequent lots from the same larger tract of land, as determined by the
dimensions and configuration of the larger tract on October 1,1973, and
provided that this exemption does not invalidate any other local requirements
applicable to the subdivision of the land. For the purpose of this subsection
(A)(9), if a tract of five (5) acres or greater existed prior to 10-1-73, its
division on or after 10-1-73 into two (2) parts, each of which is less than
five (5) acres, shall nevertheless qualify for the exemption set forth in this
subsection (A)(9).
   B.   A tract survey shall be required for a division or subdivision of land
for which no plat is required under subsection (A) for exceptions (1), (2),
(3), (8) and (9). A survey may not be required if the resulting parcel is ten
(10) acres or more and can be described as a fractional part in increments of
quarter or half sections. A survey may also not be required under (A)(3) if the
conveyance can be described by lineal feet of road frontage or lot line and
with the portion perpendicular to the frontage being parallel to the common
lot. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain words, phrases and terms shall be
construed as follows:
ALLEY: A public way used primarily as a service access to the rear or side of a
property which abuts one street.
AS BUILT PLANS: Final plans showing all changes in the proposed plans,
indicating in detail how the project was constructed.
BLOCK: The distance as measured along a street between intersecting streets
from centerline to centerline; and where the context requires, the term also
means the enclosed area within the perimeter of the streets or property lines
enclosing it.
BUILDING LINE: A line so designated on the preliminary plan which delineates
the minimum open space required between the front or side of a structure and
the street right of way.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street of relatively short length that serves as a
connection between a major or secondary thoroughfare and several minor streets.
The term includes the principal entrance streets of a residential development
and streets for major circulation within such a development.
CONSTRUCTION: The performance of all things necessary to build, rebuild or
improve a road or street.
CONSTRUCTION PLANS: The drawings prepared in the manner and containing the
data, documents and information required by chapter 3, article C of this title.
CUL-DE-SAC: A short street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and
having the other end permanently terminated by a turnaround for vehicles.
CURB AND GUTTER: The rim forming the edge of a street, plus the channel for
leading off surface water, constructed of poured concrete as a single facility.
DEAD END STREET: See definition of Cul-De-Sac.
DRAINAGE COURSE: A natural watercourse, swale, gully, dry stream or ditch which
naturally carries stormwater runoff or which is fed by street or building
gutters or by stormwater sewers.
EASEMENT: A nonprofitable interest in land owned by another that entitles its
holder the right to use the land, but only for a limited and specifically named
purpose.
ENGINEER FOR THE VILLAGE: The engineer for the village of Sherman.
FINAL PLAT: The final survey and drawings with supporting material indicating
the subdivider's plan of the subdivision which, if approved, shall be filed
with the Sangamon County recorder of deeds.
HIGHWAY: Includes rights of way, roadbeds, bridges, drainage structures, signs,
guardrails, protective structures and other structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicular traffic.
INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL STREET: A street of relatively short length and
limited continuity that provides direct access to an industrial or commercial
district and is designed to discourage use by through traffic.
LOCATION MAP: A preliminary drawing of a proposed subdivision indicating the
outline of the area to be subdivided with approximate boundary dimensions and
total acreage along with any existing and proposed roads, utilities, and other
public facilities expected to service the area.
LOT: A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision intended as a unit for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or development.
A "lot" may or may not coincide with a "lot of record".
LOT, CORNER: A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut for their
full length upon a street.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot line abutting a dedicated state highway, county
highway, township road, district road, street or federal aid highway.
LOT LINE, REAR: An interior lot line which is not a front lot line or a side
lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot boundary which is not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut
two (2) approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall be considered
front lot lines.
MAINTENANCE: The performance of all things necessary to keep a highway in
serviceable condition for vehicular traffic. Maintenance includes the plowing
of snow.
OWNER: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, trust, corporation or
other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to
be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under
this title.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A public right of way across or within a block designed
primarily for use by pedestrian traffic.
PERSON: Any agent, individual, firm, association, organization, partnership,
corporate body or similar entity.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: Any area or tract of land of ten (10) acres or more
under single or common ownership to be developed as a single entity and
classified as a conditional permitted use in a residential district.
PRELIMINARY PLAN: Refers to a preliminary survey, drawings, and supportive
material indicating the proposed layout of a subdivision.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Refers to site grading, or any street, curb and gutter,
sidewalk, drainage ditch, sewer, catch basin, pedestrianway, street name and
traffic control sign, or other facility necessary for the general use of
property owners in a subdivision.
RECORDER: The recorder of deeds for Sangamon County.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts entered into between private parties and
constitute a restriction on the use of all private property within a
subdivision for the benefit of property owners, and to provide mutual
protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to
impair stability of values and shall be required to accompany the final plat at
the time of recording.
ROADBED: The graded portion between edge of shoulder and edge of shoulder.
SANITARY SEWER: A constructed conduit for the collection and carrying of liquid
and solid sewage wastes, other than stormwaters, to a sewage treatment plant.
SERVICE ACCESS STREET: A street parallel to and adjacent to a controlled access
thoroughfare which serves abutting properties.
SEWAGE SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL: A system of piping, tanks and other facilities
serving only one lot.
SIDEWALK: A paved pedestrianway intended for pedestrian use.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: The standard specifications for road and bridge
construction, adopted by the department of transportation, state of Illinois,
latest revision, at time of construction plan approval.
STORM SEWER: A constructed conduit for carrying stormwaters to a drainage
course.
STREET AND THOROUGHFARE PLAN: The portion of the official village plan
providing and planning for the present and future system of streets for the
village.
SUBDIVIDER: Any owner, agent or person controlling land who commences, under
this title, proceedings by submitting a location map to the planning committee.
SUBDIVISION OF LAND:
   A.   The division of land into two (2) or more parts, any of which is less
than five (5) acres in size (see
11-1-3-1 for exemptions);
   B.   The dedication of streets or easements of access.
   C.   Creation of a planned unit development
   D.   Creation of a large scale development; or
   E.   Actions resulting in a new description of land not previously recorded.
SURETY: A bonding agency that is financially qualified to do business in the
state of Illinois.
TOWNSHIP HIGHWAY COMMISSIONER: The township highway commissioner for the
township(s) in which the subdivision is located.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE: Any signs, signals, markings and devices placed on or
adjacent to a street or highway by authority of the village of Sherman, the
state of Illinois, department of transportation or the Sangamon County
superintendent of highways.
VILLAGE CLERK: The village clerk of the village of Sherman. (1984 Code § 6-2-1;
amd. Ord. 1999-26, 9-7-1999; 2010 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-1-5: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any subdivider of land within the corporate
limits of the village, or in an unincorporated area within one and one-half
(11/2) miles of the corporate limits, to subdivide land into lots, blocks,
streets, alleys or public open space unless by plat in accordance with the laws
of the state and the provisions of this title. (1984 Code §
6-1-4)
   B.   No plat of any subdivision may be entitled to be recorded in the county
recorder's office or have any validity until it shall have been approved in a
manner prescribed in this title. (1984 Code §
6-1-6)
11-1-6: RECORD OF PLATS:
All plats of subdivisions, after the same have been submitted and approved as
provided in this title, shall be filed and kept by the village clerk in the
records of the village. (1984 Code § 6-1-7)
11-1-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any subdivider who shall violate any of the provisions of this title shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in
any sum not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). A separate offense shall
be deemed committed for each day that a violation hereof shall continue and
shall be punishable as such. (1984 Code §
6-1-5)
CHAPTER 2
LOCATION MAP
SECTION:
11-2-1: Purpose
11-2-2: Submission
11-2-3: Requirements
11-2-4: Review
11-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of a location map is to determine the relationship of the area
proposed for subdividing with the official village plan and other official
plans or public improvements that might affect the area. (1984 Code §
6-3-1)
11-2-2: SUBMISSION:
Before preparation of a preliminary plan, the subdivider shall submit three (3)
prints of a location map to the chair of the planning committee for review and
advice concerning the relationship of the official plan to the proposed
subdivision. The subdivider shall include with the location map a letter from
the Illinois department of natural resources (IDNR) stating that the IDNR does
not require the subdivider to consult with the Illinois department of natural
resources or the village prior to development of the property as a subdivision.
(Ord. 2002-14, 6-4-2002)
11-2-3: REQUIREMENTS:
The location map shall consist of data added to an existing base map, such as a
United States geological survey map, or a township base map that can be secured
from the Springfield Sangamon County planning commission office, or other base
map to a suitable scale, covering an area of at least one mile radius from the
tract proposed for development. The location map shall show the following
information:
   A.   The outline of the area to be subdivided with approximate boundary
dimensions and total acreage.
   B.   Existing streets and roads and principal utility lines of adjacent
properties expected to serve the area to be subdivided.
   C.   North point, scale and date.
   D.   Present and proposed zoning classification of the property to be
subdivided.
   E.   Title of the proposed subdivision along with the names and addresses of
the owner(s) or subdivider(s), engineer and land surveyor. (1984 Code § 6-3-3)
11-2-4: REVIEW:
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a location map or any
amendment thereof, the chair of the planning committee shall return one print
of said map to the subdivider, either with a certificate indicating that the
location map is sufficient and the area is suitable for subdividing, or with an
itemized statement of deficiencies in said map or specific reasons why said
area or parts thereof may not be subdivided.
   B.   Whenever possible, the subdivision site shall be inspected by a member
of the planning committee with the developer prior to submission of the
preliminary plan.
   C.   Suitability for development depends upon the severity and available
solutions to problems concerning, but not limited to:
      1.   Location of the property on the floodplain of a river or stream.
      2.   Unusual topographic or drainage problems.
      3.   Land proposed for public use according to the official village plan.
      4.   Poor access or no public road near enough to provide reasonable
access.
      5.   The availability of a water supply necessary to provide both
ordinary domestic water and emergency water for firefighting purposes.
      6.   Undesirable soil conditions, tanks, building construction, etc.
      7.   Other hazards that may render the site unsafe such as close
proximity to airplane flight paths, manufacturing operations, mining
operations, etc.
   D.   The subdivider may submit amended location maps or present arguments on
the sufficiency of a location map directly to the committee for decision. If
the subdivider wishes to appeal an adverse decision by the chair, he may
petition the planning committee directly for review of the chair's decision.
This review shall be acted on by the committee within thirty (30) days after
receipt of the request. A certification approving a location map does not
constitute an acceptance of any preliminary plan or final plat. (1984 Code § 6-
3-4)
CHAPTER 3
PLANS AND PLATS
ARTICLE A. PLAT APPROVAL OFFICER; FEES
SECTION:
11-3A-1: Plat Approval Officer Designated; Duties
11-3A-2: Fees
11-3A-1: PLAT APPROVAL OFFICER DESIGNATED; DUTIES:
The village zoning enforcement officer is hereby designated as plat approval
officer for the village. He is authorized and directed to review and approve
all plats, condominium declarations, party wall agreements or other documents
relating to the partition or subdivision of land and to approve or disapprove
said document on behalf of the village. If the zoning enforcement officer is
unavailable or unable to exercise the duties authorized and directed by this
section, then said duties shall be executed by the village attorney. (Ord.
2002-25, 9-17-2002; amd. 2010 Code)
11-3A-2: FEES:
A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per acre, not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00), shall be paid to the village clerk at the time of submission
of the preliminary plan. A fee of five dollars ($5.00) per lot shall be paid to
the village clerk at the time of submission of the final plan. There shall be
no refund or rebate of any portion of such fees. (1984 Code § 6-4-10)
ARTICLE B. PRELIMINARY PLAN
SECTION:
11-3B-1: Purpose
11-3B-2: Submission
11-3B-3: Requirements
11-3B-4: Planning Committee Hearing And Action
11-3B-5: Village Board Approval
11-3B-6: Large Scale Developments
11-3B-7: Validity Of Preliminary Plan; Reaffirmation Of Preliminary Plan
11-3B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the preliminary plan is to determine if the proposed lots will
serve the intention of this title. (1984 Code § 6-4-1; amd. Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-
2017)
11-3B-2: SUBMISSION:
Within one year after obtaining approval of the location map, the subdivider
shall file the original and seven (7) prints of a preliminary plan of the
proposed subdivision with the village clerk. The village clerk shall deliver
one print to the trustee for health and safety, one print to the trustee for
streets and alleys, one print to the engineer for the village and three (3)
prints and the original to the chair of the planning committee, and retain one
print on file. (1984 Code § 6-4-2; amd. Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-3B-3: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The preliminary plan shall show the following information on sheets of
a maximum size of twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") with
matching lines if two (2) or more sheets are used:
      1.   The location of all present property lines, section lines, streets,
buildings, watercourses, and other existing features within the area to be
subdivided, and similar information (except buildings and property lines)
regarding land within a minimum of two hundred feet (200'). Also, any future
development adjacent to the area to be subdivided that might affect the design
of sanitary sewers, drainage facilities, streets or other important
improvements.
      2.   The location and width to the nearest foot of all proposed streets,
alleys, lots, setback lines, utility and drainage easements and areas to be
reserved for public use.
      3.   Lot numbers.
      4.   The proposed location of sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems.
      5.   Proof of acquisition or application for a 404 permit if any
dredging, riprapping, fill work or similar activities will be conducted in or
around streams.
      6.   Where possible, existing utilities, drainage courses and culverts
within the area to be subdivided or on the land thereto, along with the
location and size of the nearest water and/or sanitary sewer mains.
      7.   The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded;
the names of the engineer, registered land surveyor, subdivider, and owners of
the tract, with the addresses where any notice is to be sent.
      8.   Contours referring to the United States geological survey datum with
intervals of two feet (2') or less unless a greater interval is required
because of terrain.
      9.   The north point, a minimum scale of one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" = 100') and the date.
      10.   The acreage and proposed zoning classification, in sketch form, of
land to be subdivided.
      11.   A note stating "Preliminary Plan - Not To Be Recorded By Recorder
Of Deeds".
      12.   If the land to be subdivided is subject to periodic flooding or
contains extremely poor drainage facilities, the subdivider must submit factual
data along with the preliminary plan to show that additional improvements will
make the area completely safe for residential occupancy, and will provide
adequate drainage. (1984 Code § 6-4-3)
      13.   A list of requested variances, if any. (1984 Code § 6-4-3)
   B.   1. During the preliminary platting process, the developer shall take
all actions necessary to assure that the subdivision and each dwelling unit
contained therein shall be eligible for United States mail delivery and shall
meet United States postal service delivery requirements. The address or
addresses assigned to each lot shall be designated on the preliminary plan.
      2.   Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the village board, the
clerk shall transmit a copy of the preliminary plan showing the address or
addresses assigned to each lot to the United States postal service in care of
the village of Sherman post office and to the Sherman fire protection district.
(Ord. 1990-5, 4-3-1990; amd. Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-3B-4: PLANNING COMMITTEE HEARING AND ACTION:
   A.   Hearing: A public hearing upon such proposal for subdivision as stated
in the preliminary plan shall be heard before the planning committee no later
than thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of the plan by the committee.
Notice thereof shall be given by the village clerk on behalf of the committee
by publication of notice of said hearing in a newspaper of general circulation
in the village, for at least one insertion, not less than seven (7) days prior
to the date of said hearing, and by mailing a notice to the person or persons
who filed the preliminary plan to the address set forth in the filed papers.
Subsequent to the public meeting, the committee shall render a decision within
seven (7) calendar days in accordance with subsections B, C and D of this
section. (1984 Code § 6-4-4; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Approval:
      1.   If the committee shall find that the proposed plan satisfies the
requirements of this title, the chair of the planning committee shall endorse
approval thereon in substantially the following language:
The proposed plan of subdivision as shown herein is recommended to the Village
Board for approval. This is not an approval of the final plat.
               Dated:    
         By:    
      2.   One print so endorsed shall be retained on file by the planning
committee, and one print and the original so endorsed shall be transmitted to
the village clerk for immediate reference to the village board at its next
regular session. (1984 Code § 6-4-5)
   C.   Tentative Approval:
      1.   If the planning committee approves the preliminary plan subject to
minor revisions, the planning committee shall return the original and one print
of the preliminary plan, along with a written description of the required
revisions, to the subdivider for resubmission.
      2.   The original and seven (7) prints of the revised preliminary plan
shall be resubmitted to the chair of the planning committee to determine that
the revisions satisfy the conditions of approval. If the revised preliminary
plan is found to conform to the requested revision, the original and one print
shall be transmitted to the village clerk for reference to the village board as
called for in subsection B of this section. (1984 Code § 6-4-6)
   D.   Disapproval:
      1.   If the committee shall find that the proposed plan does not satisfy
the requirements of this title, it shall specify its disapproval in writing and
state the conditions to be met and specific changes needed before the plan can
be resubmitted.
      2.   One print of the proposed preliminary plan, together with the
written findings and order of the committee disapproving the preliminary plan,
shall be retained by the committee, and the original and one print with said
findings and order shall be delivered to the subdivider in person or by mail.
      3.   The subdivider may submit an amended preliminary plan to the
committee. (1984 Code § 6-4-7; amd. Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-3B-5: VILLAGE BOARD APPROVAL:
   A.   When all the requirements have been met, the village board may, by
resolution, approve the preliminary plan and authorize the president to sign
the plan for and in the name of the village, with the village clerk attesting
the same. The original of the preliminary plan, so signed, shall be delivered
to the subdivider in person or by mail. The village clerk shall retain one
print on file. (1984 Code § 6-4-8)
   B.   Village board approval of a preliminary plan will be valid for one
year, and the expiration date shall be indicated on the approved plan. (1984
Code § 6-4-9; amd. Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-3B-6: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENTS 1  :
   A.   Plans Required: Whenever a large multi-family development, commercial
development or mobile home park is proposed in the village to be developed on
one or more acres of land in an area not zoned R-1, and whenever there is to be
an internal circulation system of drives and/or parking lots and an internal
water distribution system serving more than one building, the developer/builder
must present his physical development plans and letters from servicing utility
companies indicating availability and adequacy of utility service for the
development to the village clerk for review by appropriate committees/agencies
and finding that the plans and utility services do meet village standards and
are adequate for the scale of the proposed development. The plans must comply
with the standards contained in this title and the village zoning ordinance.
   B.   Fees: Filing fees shall be as follows:
      1.   Preliminary plan: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per acre of land to
be developed, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      2.   Final plan: Five dollars ($5.00) per one-fourth (1/4) acre of land
to be developed. (1984 Code § 6-4-11; amd. Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 10, chapter 12, article A of this code.
11-3B-7: VALIDITY OF PRELIMINARY PLAN; REAFFIRMATION OF PRELIMINARY PLAN:
   A.   The preliminary plan shall be valid for a period of three years after
Village Board approval. If the final plat has not been submitted to the
Planning Commission within said three (3)-year period, or if submitted, no
final plat is approved, the preliminary plan shall expire.
   B.   If the subdivider will not have submitted a final plat within three (3)
years after preliminary plan approval, but wishes to avoid expiration of the
plan, the subdivider shall seek reaffirmation of the plan by submitting prints
to the Village Clerk for review according to the review schedule established by
the Planning Commission in accordance with
11-3B-2,
11-3B-4 and
11-3B-5 no later than thirty five (35) months after the initial Village Board
approval. If the subdivider has submitted a final plat within said three (3)-
year period, but it is not approved during or after said three (3)-year period,
the subdivider may avoid expiration of the preliminary plan by making the same
preliminary plan reaffirmation submission described above, provided that if the
disapproval of the final plat occurs during or after the 35th month, the
submission required shall be made within one month of such disapproval.
   C.   Where reaffirmation of the preliminary plan is sought the Planning
Commission shall recommend, and the Village Board shall require, any changes in
the plan it deems necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. If the
subdivider has not resubmitted the preliminary plan with the required changes
to the Village Board within thirty (30) days after the Village Board meeting
requiring changes, or if the resubmitted plan is disapproved, the plan shall
expire at that time or at the end of any appeal process provided for in this
chapter, whichever is later.
   D.   A preliminary plan may be reaffirmed one time. If a final plat has not
been submitted to the Planning Commission within three years from the date of
the reaffirmation, or if submitted, is not approved, the plan shall expire.
   E.   Final plat approval shall extend the validity of the preliminary plan
for three years from the date of final plat approval, provided that the
Planning Commission may require any changes necessary to meet the requirements
of this chapter, and in such an event, the provisions of division (C) of this
section with respect to resubmission shall apply. The preliminary plan may be
reaffirmed one time after each final plat approval, if another final plat has
not been resubmitted within three years from the date of the reaffirmation, the
preliminary plan shall expire. In the event a preliminary plan expires, a
subdivider wishing to proceed with, subdivision of the land involved must
resubmit a location and sketch map for review and proceed as in the case of an
original submittal. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
ARTICLE C. CONSTRUCTION PLANS
SECTION:
11-3C-1: Purpose
11-3C-2: Submission
11-3C-3: Requirements
11-3C-4: Review
11-3C-5: Approval
11-3C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the construction plans is to provide working drawings for the
construction contractor to follow to assure that all subdivision improvements
are built in accordance with this title. (1984 Code §
6-5-1)
11-3C-2: SUBMISSION:
Upon receipt of the approved preliminary plan, the subdivider or his engineer
shall submit three (3) sets of construction plans to the engineer for the
village. The engineer for the village will in turn provide one set to the
trustee for public health and environment, and one set to the trustee for
public works. The construction plans should be for the area to be covered in
the final plat except when specific additional information is requested by the
engineer for the village. (1984 Code §
6-5-2; amd. 2010 Code)
11-3C-3: REQUIREMENTS:
The construction plans shall be submitted on sheets of twenty four inches by
thirty six inches (24" x 36") and to a minimum scale of one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100'). Construction plans shall contain the following
information:
   A.   A cover sheet containing the location of the development; symbols that
are used; index to sheets; summary of quantities; scales that are used;
appropriate place for approval of the engineer for the village; and the
signature and seal of a registered professional engineer.
   B.   North arrow and bench marks with their elevations noted. Bench marks
shall be referenced to mean sea level datum as determined by the United States
geological survey.
   C.   Plan sheets showing the locations of all existing and proposed streets,
right of way (ROW) lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, sidewalks, drainage
ditches, easements, rear lot drainage, direction of storm drainage flow, survey
monuments, water mains, fire hydrants, street signs, streetlights, and any
other appurtenances or structures that might influence design considerations.
   D.   Profile sheets indicating the existing ground line and proposed grades
and elevations for all proposed streets, sanitary sewers, drainage structures,
drainage ditches, and rear lot drainage. Elevations shall be referenced to the
United States geological survey datum.
   E.   Typical sections showing right of way lines, proposed pavement widths,
pavement thickness, base thickness, subbase thickness, subgrade, crown, curbs
and gutters, sidewalks, and design data as required.
   F.   Detail sheets showing the details of manholes, inlets, catch basins,
curb and gutters, drainage structures, and any other structure or appurtenance
to be constructed, or reference made to the "Standard Specifications For Road
And Bridge Construction" and highway standards published by the Illinois
department of transportation (IDOT) or "Standard Specifications For Water And
Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" available from the Illinois society of
professional engineers.
   G.   Plans for a public sewage system showing sanitary locations, sizes,
invert elevations, slopes, manhole locations, lift stations (size, capacity and
type), force mains and points of discharge.
      1.   Whenever a public sanitary sewage system of sufficient capacity is
accessible to a proposed subdivision site and available for connection (i.e.,
750 feet of the proposed subdivision 1 ), the subdivider shall extend said
public sewage system throughout the subdivision and provide each platted lot
with a connection to the system at the lot line.
      2.   In areas where the public sanitary sewage system is not reasonably
accessible (as defined in subsection G1 of this section), but where plans for
the installation of said system have been approved by the Illinois
environmental protection agency, the developer shall provide sanitary sewers in
accordance with such plans and cap them.
      3.   In either subsection G1 or G2 of this section, the subdivider must
submit a copy of the Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA)
construction permit.
   H.   Private sewage disposal systems shall be required where a public
sanitary sewage system is not available to serve the area proposed for
subdividing. Any subdivider who proposes to sell lots which will require the
installation of a private sewage disposal system shall:
      1.   Perform at least one percolation test for each lot in the site
proposed to be subdivided. More tests may be required where the soil structure
varies or where large disposal areas are needed. The approximate location and
elevation of percolation tests (i.e., test hole locations) shall be indicated
on the plans submitted to the engineer for the village.
      2.   Where grading is to be done, percolation tests shall be performed
after "finish grading" has been completed. Tests shall not be made in frozen
ground, or in filled ground unless the soil has been compacted or allowed to
settle. (1984 Code §
6-5-3)
      3.   All percolation tests shall be conducted in conformance with the
standards outlined in the Illinois private sewage licensing act and code 2 .
All percolation test results shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or Illinois department of public health inspector. (1984 Code §
6-5-3; amd. 2010 Code)
   I.   Design computations for storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains,
special structures, and pavement designs if requested by the engineer for the
village.
   J.   When access to a township, county or state highway is involved, proof
of acquisition of an access permit from the appropriate highway department.
(1984 Code §
6-5-3)
 
Notes
  1. See also subsection
1 8-3-2D of this code and section
  11-5-8 of this title.
2 1. 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.
11-3C-4: REVIEW:
Basic review of the construction plans shall be completed by the engineer for
the village within thirty (30) days of the submission date, and if construction
plans have to be resubmitted, they will be rereviewed and returned to the
developer's engineer within fourteen (14) days, unless a review time is
extended by the engineer for the village in a letter listing reasons for the
extension. This letter will be sent to the developer's engineer. (1984 Code §
6-5-4)
11-3C-5: APPROVAL:
The engineer for the village shall notify the subdivider when the construction
plans are approved and shall send copies of such approval to the subdivider's
engineer and the village board. When the construction plans have been approved
by the engineer for the village, the subdivider may install the required public
improvements. (See chapter 4 of this title.) (1984 Code §
6-5-5)
ARTICLE D. FINAL PLAT
SECTION:
11-3D-1: Purpose
11-3D-2: Submission
11-3D-3: Requirements
11-3D-4: Engineer Review And Approval
11-3D-5: Submission To Village Board; Action On Final Plat
11-3D-6: Recordation Of Final Plat
11-3D-7: Appendices
11-3D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the final plat is to serve as the legal documentation of the
subdivision of land. This document is recorded with the County Recorder of
Deeds and provides the basis for the sale of land within the subdivision
boundaries. Lots within the subdivision may not be legally sold until this
document is approved by the Village Board and recorded. (1984 Code § 6-6-1;
amd. Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-3D-2: SUBMISSION:
Within one year after receiving approval of the construction plans by the
Engineer for the Village, the final plat shall be submitted to the Engineer for
the Village who shall review it and recommend to the Village Board of Trustees
his approval or disapproval of the final plat. The subdivider shall submit to
the Engineer for the Village the original tracing and seven (7) prints of the
final plat which must retain the overall characteristics of the preliminary
plan and which may include all or a part of the area shown on the preliminary
plan. The Engineer for the Village shall supply prints of the final plat to the
appropriate Village Trustees and/or employees. (1984 Code § 6-6-3; amd. 2010
Code; Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-3D-3: REQUIREMENTS:
The final plat shall be an accurate drawing designating specifically the land
to be subdivided, and particularly describing the portions of the property to
be dedicated for public use. The final plat shall be drawn in black or blue ink
to a scale of not more than one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100') from an
accurate survey. It shall contain one or more sheets, at least eight and one-
half inches by fourteen inches (81/2" x 14") and not more than thirty inches by
thirty six inches (30" x 36"). If more than two (2) sheets are used, an index
sheet shall be attached showing the entire subdivision on one sheet and the
component areas on the remaining sheets. The final plat and accompanying
documents shall contain the following information: (1984 Code § 6-6-3; amd.
2010 Code)
   A.   Boundary lines with accurate distances and angles.
   B.   General and legal description of the plat with total acreage.
   C.   An accurate outline of any portions of the property intended to be
dedicated for public use.
   D.   Lines of all proposed streets with their widths and names.
   E.   The line of departure of one street from another.
   F.   The names and widths of streets adjoining the subdivision.
   G.   All lots designated by numbers and other grounds designated by names
and numbers.
   H.   Proof of acquisition of an access permit from either the State of
Illinois or the County Highway Department, whichever applies.
   I.   The location of all easements provided for public use, services or
utilities. Easements shall include anchor space for pole lines.
   J.   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating the
boundaries of the subdivision, lots, streets, easements, and other areas for
public or private use. Linear dimensions are to be given to the nearest one-
hundredth (1/100) of a foot.
   K.   Radii, arcs, chords, points of tangency and central angles for all
curvilinear streets, and radii for rounded corners. (1984 Code § 6-6-3)
   L.   Location of all survey monuments and their descriptions. Monuments
shall be of ferrous material and a minimum of twenty four inches (24") long. At
least two (2) of the monuments shall be of stone or reinforced concrete. (1984
Code § 6-6-3; amd. 2010 Code)
   M.   The names of the owner or owners and/or subdividers, and the date of
preparation. If the owner is a trust, the beneficiaries of the trust shall be
listed.
   N.   The certificate of a registered Illinois land surveyor attesting the
accuracy of the survey and the location of all monuments shown. The certificate
may be filed as a supplement to the final plat. See subsection 11-3D-7A of this
article for acceptable format.
   O.   Notarized acknowledgment of the plat by the owner or owners, or a duly
authorized attorney. This item may be a separate document if no space is
available on the plat itself. See subsection 11-3D-7B of this article for
acceptable format for the owner's certification.
   P.   Any protective covenants or restrictions which will apply to the
subdivision.
   Q.   A final plat supplement shall be submitted containing the following
information: a signed statement of a registered professional engineer and the
owner of the land or his duly authorized attorney to the effect that to the
best of their knowledge and belief, the drainage of surface waters will not be
changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part thereof, or that,
if such surface water drainage will be changed, reasonable provision has been
made for collection and diversion of such surface waters into public areas, or
drains which the subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters
will be planned for in accordance with generally accepted engineering practices
so as to reduce the likelihood of damage to the adjoining property because of
the construction of the subdivision. (1984 Code § 6-6-3)
   R.   A list of approved variances, if any. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-3D-4: ENGINEER REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   Review: The Engineer for the Village shall review the proposed final
plat within thirty (30) days to determine if it conforms to the previously
approved preliminary plan, including any conditions which may have been
required by the Planning Committee in approving said preliminary plan and that
it meets the requirements of this title. (1984 Code § 6-6-4)
   B.   Approval:
      1.   When the Engineer for the Village has determined that the final plat
meets the requirements of this title, then the following shall be printed or
stamped upon the original plat and prints thereof, and signed by the Engineer
for the Village.
The Final Plat of this subdivision is recommended to the Village Board for
approval subject to the certifications set forth in Section
11-3D-2 and Subsection 11-3D-4B of the Subdivision Ordinance of the Village
Code of Sherman, Illinois, 1985, as amended.
         Dated:    
         By:    
      2.   The Engineer for the Village shall then transmit the endorsed
original plat and seven (7) prints thereof to the Village Clerk for immediate
reference to the Village Board. One print of the final plat so endorsed shall
remain on file with the Engineer for the Village. (1984 Code § 6-6-5)
11-3D-5: SUBMISSION TO VILLAGE BOARD; ACTION ON FINAL PLAT:
Upon receipt of a final plat and prints thereof so endorsed by the Engineer for
the Village, the Village Clerk shall deliver the final plat with said letter of
transmittal to the Village Board at its next regular meeting after receipt of
said documents by the Clerk. Thereupon, said plat shall be placed on the agenda
of the Village Board for approval. If approved, the final plat may not be
recorded until subdivider has filed with the Village Clerk, with the approval
of the Engineer for the Village, a security in an amount equal to the estimated
cost of such public improvements, plus twenty five percent (25%) of the cost of
such improvements, to assure completion of said public improvements within a
reasonable time without cost to the Village. The format of the completion bond
shall be as shown in subsection 11-3D-7C of this article. Such security shall
be deposited with the Village in the form of either: a) cash; b) check or
certificate of deposit issued by a bank maintaining a business office within
Sangamon County; or c) a completion bond with a financially qualified corporate
surety; or d) an irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank maintaining a
business office within Sangamon County. The form of any bond, certificate of
deposit, or letter of credit shall be subject to approval by the Village
Attorney. Upon approval of the form of security by the Village Attorney, the
final plat shall be recorded with the County. This security shall remain in
effect until released by the Engineer for the Village. The release of such
security bond will be subject to final inspection, receipt of the as built
plans as described above, and receipt of the signed statement of a registered
professional engineer stating that the public improvements have been observed
during construction and installed to the specifications shown on the
construction plans. (Ord. 2012-15, 9-4-2012)
11-3D-6: RECORDATION OF FINAL PLAT:
   A.   When the final plat has been approved by the Village Board and signed
by the President and the Village Clerk, the original tracing may be recorded by
the subdivider in the Office of Recorder of Deeds of Sangamon County in
Springfield, Illinois.
   B.   If the final plat is not recorded within one year after approval by the
Village Board, the plat must be resubmitted to the Village Board to determine
if adjustments in the final plat are needed to meet changes that have occurred
near the plat area that would affect the proper functioning of the subdivision.
(1984 Code § 6-6-9)
11-3D-7: APPENDICES:
   A.   Appendix A:
   SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS      )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF SANGAMON   )
I,                               , a Registered Illinois Land Surveyor No.
     , do hereby certify that I have surveyed in accordance with the laws and
usages of the State of Illinois, and with the laws of Sangamon County,
Illinois, for                               , the following described property
to wit:
(LEGAL DESCRIPTION)
I further certify that I have subdivided the same into       lots and streets
as shown on the attached plat.
Iron pipes (rods-pins) identify all lot corners as shown on said plat and all
measurements are given in feet and decimals thereof. All streets and drives and
easements designated on said plat are intended for public use.
Said Subdivision is to be known as                              , Sangamon
County, Illinois.
I further certify that the foregoing plat accompanying this certificate
correctly represents the said premises as subdivided.
            Registered Land Surveyor No.    
   B.   Appendix B:
   OWNER'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS      )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF SANGAMON   )
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: That we, the undersigned, hereby certify that
we are the owners of all the premises embodied in the attached Plat of
                               Subdivision to Sangamon County, and Village of
Sherman, Illinois, and that we have caused said plat to be made and that it is
a true and correct plat of                                Subdivision to
Sangamon County and Sherman, Illinois, as laid off into lots and streets by
                              , Registered Illinois Land Surveyor Number
          ; and we, the undersigned, hereby dedicate to the Village of Sherman,
Sangamon County, Illinois and set apart for the use of the general public
forever all of the streets and thoroughfares as indicated and shown on said
Plat; and we further dedicate easements within the rights-of-way of such
streets and thoroughfares to the applicable public utility companies for those
utility installations that are permitted by this and other resolutions and
codes of the County to be installed in street or thoroughfare rights-of-way.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF we have hereunto set our hands and affixed our seals that
           day of                          , 20   .
               (SEAL)
NOTE - If the owner is a trust, the beneficiaries of the trust shall be listed.
   NOTARY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS      )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF SANGAMON   )
I, the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for said County and State aforesaid,
do hereby certify that                                is (are) personally known
to me to be the same person (persons) whose name (names) is (are) subscribed to
the foregoing instrument, appeared before me this day in person and
acknowledged that he (she-they) signed, sealed, and delivered the said
instrument as his (her-their) free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes
therein set forth, including the release and waiver of Homestead, and also
including the dedication of all streets and highways to the use of the general
public forever, and including the grant of certain general utility easements to
the applicable public utility companies.
Given under my hand and notarial seal this            day of                ,
20   .
            Notary Public
   C.   Appendix C:
   SUBDIVISION COMPLETION BOND
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, THAT WE,                                as
Principal, and                                as Surety, are held and firmly
bound unto the Village of Sherman, Illinois, in the penal sum of
                     lawful money of the United States, for the payment of
which, well and truly to be made, we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors and
administrators, jointly and severally, firmly by these presents:
WHEREAS, the said principal has on file with the Village Clerk of the Village
of Sherman a plat of
"                                                                                               "
which plat has been recommended for approval as a final plat by the Engineer
for the Village, and
WHEREAS, the Principal has submitted Plans and Specifications prepared by his
Engineering Consultant,
                                                                                          
providing for the construction of public improvements in said subdivision plat
all in accordance with The Land Subdivision Ordinance of The Village of
Sherman, Illinois.
WHEREAS, the Engineer for the Village of Sherman, has approved said
construction plans and specifications by letter dated                      a
copy of which is attached hereto and made a part hereof, and
WHEREAS, said Engineer for the Village has estimated the total cost of said
public improvements to be $           and that a bond in the amount of
$           is required of the Principal, pursuant to said Land Subdivision
Ordinance, a copy of which estimate is attached hereto and made a part hereof,
and
WHEREAS, the Principal has not at this time completed the construction work on
said Subdivision as required by said Land Subdivision Ordinance, and
WHEREAS, it is the desire of the Principal, the subdivider of said Subdivision,
to have said final Plat approved and filed for record at this time and to
guarantee and assure the Village of Sherman, the full and complete construction
of said required improvements;
NOW THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the said
Principal shall complete or cause to be completed the aforesaid public
improvements within the operation of            years from this date, then this
obligation to be void; otherwise to remain in full force and effect.
All parties hereto agree that the obligation hereunder may be reduced in amount
or released only upon the written authorization of the Engineer for the Village
of Sherman.
It is further agreed if the Principal fails to complete said public
improvements or to correct defects in materials and/or workmanship within
thirty calendar days after being notified of such defects in writing by said
Engineer for the Village, the Surety shall undertake such work within thirty
calendar days after being notified by said Engineer for the Village in writing
of the Principal's failure to perform. With the concurrence of the Surety, the
Village of Sherman may complete the improvements or correct defects at the
expense of the Surety. In no event shall the obligation of the Surety exceed
the amount first stated above less subsequent authorized reductions.
Signed and sealed this             day of                , 20   .
            By       
               Principal
            By       
               Surety
Witness: 
   D.   Appendix D:
   COUNTY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS      )
               ) SS
COUNTY OF SANGAMON   )
I,                               , County Clerk of Sangamon County, State of
Illinois do hereby certify that on the          day of                 20   ,
there were no delinquent general taxes unpaid, special assessments, or
delinquent special assessments against the tract of land shown on the plat
attached to this certificate and described in the Certificate of the Surveyor
attached hereto and to said plat.
            County Clerk, Sangamon County, Illinois
(SEAL OF SAID COUNTY)
   E.   Appendix E:
RESOLUTION APPROVING THE FINAL PLAT OF                          
WHEREAS, The Engineer for the Village has given final approval to the final
plat of                             , as prepared by
                              .
WHEREAS, The Engineer for the Village recommended the final plat of
                               be approved by the Village Board; and
WHEREAS, all requirements of Chapters 2 and 3 of Title 11 of the Sherman
Village Code have been met;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE VILLAGE BOARD OF THE VILLAGE OF SHERMAN,
ILLINOIS:
Section 1: The plat of                               , is hereby accepted and
approved by the Village Board of the Village of Sherman, Illinois.
Section 2: The President is authorized to sign and the Village Clerk to attest
approval of said plat for and in the name of the Village.
Section 3: This resolution shall take effect immediately upon its passage.
PASSED:                , 20    SIGNED:                , 20   
RECORDED:                , 20          
            PRESIDENT
ATTEST:                                        
         VILLAGE CLERK
(1984 Code § 6-6-10)
CHAPTER 4
CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Notices To Engineer
11-4-2: Inspections Generally
11-4-3: Presence Of Certain Persons During Construction
11-4-4: Pavement Cores
11-4-5: Final Inspection; Deficiencies
11-4-6: As Built Plans
11-4-1: NOTICES TO ENGINEER:
   A.   Construction: The engineer for the village shall be notified at least
forty eight (48) hours prior to commencement of construction. The notification
of construction shall include a written notice of the start of construction
date and an oral discussion with the engineer for the village concerning the
proposed construction plan and schedule. (1984 Code § 6-7-1)
   B.   Plan And Schedule Changes: The engineer for the village shall be
notified in writing of any changes to the proposed plan of construction or
schedule at least twenty four (24) hours before the changes are implemented.
(1984 Code § 6-7-2)
11-4-2: INSPECTIONS GENERALLY:
   A.   Right Of Inspection; Stop Work Order: The village reserves the right to
inspect the progress of the construction work to ensure the approved plans and
specifications are being followed. The subdivider/contractor will be notified
with a stop order of any work found to be unacceptable subsequent to inspection
(s) by village representative(s). Proceeding in violation of a stop order is a
violation of this title. (1984 Code § 6-7-3)
   B.   Inspection Of Materials; Certificates: Materials to be used on the job
may be subject to inspection at the source or at the construction site.
Construction work may be inspected at the time of construction and also
following construction. All material which becomes a permanent part of the
subdivision improvements must be certified, by the manufacturer or by tests, to
meet specifications. Documentation of these certifications is the
responsibility of the subdivider's engineer. (1984 Code § 6-7-6)
11-4-3: PRESENCE OF CERTAIN PERSONS DURING CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   The subdivider's engineer shall have a full time, qualified resident
observer present on the construction site for the following:
      1.   Approval of the subgrade prior to paving.
      2.   Continuous observation of all phases of the paving operation,
construction of sanitary sewer mains and appurtenances, and construction of
storm sewers and appurtenances. (1984 Code § 6-7-4)
   B.   The subdivider's contractor shall have a superintendent on the job site
at all times while construction is in progress. The superintendent shall be
responsible for the entire construction procedure. In his absence, the
superintendent shall indicate to the subdivider's observer the person
temporarily responsible for the conduct of the work. (1984 Code § 6-7-5)
11-4-4: PAVEMENT CORES:
Newly constructed pavements shall be cored at the subdivider's expense. Two (2)
cores shall be provided every five hundred feet (500') on alternative sides of
the pavement to check the thickness of the paving. Location of the cores to be
taken shall be as directed by the engineer for the village. If thin pavement
sections are discovered, additional cores shall be taken to determine the
extent of the thin area(s). (1984 Code § 6-7-7)
11-4-5: FINAL INSPECTION; DEFICIENCIES:
   A.   The subdivider and/or his engineer, in the accompaniment of the
engineer for the village, shall make a final inspection of all improvements
constructed in conjunction with the subdivision to determine final acceptance
by the village. (1984 Code § 6-7-8)
   B.   If the final inspection indicates no deficient items, the village shall
take formal action to accept the completed streets for maintenance. (1984 Code
§ 6-7-9)
   C.   Should any item need correction or repair, the subdivider will be
notified in writing of each deficiency. No street(s) will be accepted in a
subdivision until all streets comply with the village requirements to the
satisfaction of the engineer for the village and the trustee for public works.
   D.   Should the subdivider fail to properly correct any of the deficiencies,
he shall be responsible for all maintenance until such time as the streets are
completely acceptable to the village. Under this situation, the subdivider's
maintenance responsibility shall be construed to include, but not be limited
to, snow and ice control, regular mowing of the parkways, periodic cleaning of
storm sewers and catch basins, etc. Should the subdivider fail to discharge any
of these responsibilities, he will be notified to rectify the situation(s) by
the village clerk. Failure to take the necessary remedial action(s) within
thirty (30) calendar days after such notification may result in a fine not to
exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) with a similar such fine for every
fourteen (14) calendar day period beyond the initial thirty (30) days during
which the necessary repairs/maintenance activities are not completed. (1984
Code § 6-7-9; amd. 2010 Code)
   E.   It should be noted that regardless of whether or not the street(s) has
been accepted by the village for maintenance, no occupancy permits shall be
issued for any residential structure(s) until such time as the builder has
cleaned all debris and mud from the pavement, gutter, etc., in the nearby
vicinity of the subject structure. (1984 Code § 6-7-9)
11-4-6: AS BUILT PLANS:
Subsequent to the satisfactory inspection of the completed improvements, the
subdivider shall have prepared a set of as built plans for each of the
improvements constructed. Such plans shall show all public facilities as built
on the surface and underground, both on public property and on easements, and
shall also indicate all private utility locations that are known. The as built
plans shall carry the seal of a registered professional engineer, who shall
certify that construction was completed and material used was in conformance
with the plans and specifications. These plans shall be submitted to the
village clerk within sixty (60) days of the date of the final inspection. (1984
Code § 6-7-10)
CHAPTER 5
DESIGN AND LAYOUT STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-5-1: General Requirements
11-5-2: Lots
11-5-3: Subdivision Layout
11-5-4: Street And Alley Improvements
11-5-5: Drainage And Storm Sewers
11-5-6: Grading And Clearing
11-5-7: Water Distribution System
11-5-8: Sanitary Sewer Facilities
11-5-9: Appendices
11-5-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Streets, storm drainage, sanitary sewer systems, and water treatment
and distribution represent the four (4) major public investments in a
community. Obviously, these improvements should be permanent enduring assets to
a community. In order to assure that these improvements in a subdivision are
worthy of acceptance by the village, this chapter sets forth the appropriate
design and construction standards necessary to achieve that goal.
   B.   The design and improvement standards set forth herein shall be deemed
minimum requirements for public health, safety, and general welfare. Nothing
contained in these standards shall be construed to mean that the subdivider
cannot construct additional improvements of a higher quality.
   C.   Any tract of land that is unsuitable for development due to probable
flooding, poor drainage, rough topography, adverse soil conditions, excessive
noise, or other conditions, which, in the opinion of the village board, will
prove detrimental to the health, safety and/or general welfare of future
inhabitants of that tract and/or adjacent parcels shall not be subdivided
unless the developer formulates plans/methods which the village board deems
adequate to solve the potential problems engendered by said adverse land
conditions.
   D.   The standards and requirements of this chapter shall apply to all new
subdivisions of land, and they shall be interpreted to encourage and facilitate
better physical quality of land development in the village. (1984 Code § 6-8-1)
   E.   The use of jetting for trench backfill for the construction of sewers,
water main, or other utilities shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-5-2: LOTS:
   A.   Monuments: Reference monuments shall be set, in the field, at the
corners of all lots platted in accordance with the plat act, 765 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 205/0.01 et seq., as amended from time to time. (1984 Code §
6-8-2; amd. 2010 Code)
   B.   Size And Configuration:
      1.   Lot Size: All lots shall have the minimum width and areas required
by the village zoning ordinance; except, that where on site sewage disposal is
proposed, the following additional requirements regarding lot width and area
must be observed to protect the public health and welfare: lots for single-
family detached dwellings shall have a minimum size of twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet (excluding easements) and a minimum lot frontage of one hundred
feet (100') at the building line, provided the subdivider can prove to the
satisfaction of the planning committee that the soil and the lot area for the
septic system is suitable for the absorption of septic tank effluent without
contamination of any drinking water supply or creating undesirable sanitary
conditions. The soil must have an acceptable percolation rate without
interference from groundwater or impervious strata below the level of the
absorption system. In every such case, the septic system shall conform to the
requirements of the Illinois department of public health in effect at the time
of the submission of the preliminary plan. Unless these conditions are met, the
engineer for the village may deem that the site is unsuitable for subsurface
sewage disposal systems.
      2.   Building Setbacks: The building setback lines shall conform to the
front yard and side yard setback lines set forth in the village zoning
ordinance.
      3.   Through Lots: Double frontage lots shall not be permitted except by
planning committee approval in instances where: a) lots back upon a
thoroughfare; and b) topographic or other conditions make subdividing otherwise
unreasonable, then such double frontage lots shall have an additional depth of
at least twenty feet (20') for a protective screen planting on one frontage.
Every lot having multiple frontages (e.g., corner lots, through lots) shall be
large enough to permit compliance with the zoning ordinance front setback
requirement on every side of the lot abutting a street.
      4.   Length/Width Ratio: Generally, in the interest of "good planning",
the length of any lot should not be greater than three (3) times the width of
said lot, unless topography or other conditions dictate otherwise.
      5.   Lot Remnants: All lot remnants shall be added to adjacent lots to
avoid the creation of nonconforming lots.
      6.   Relationship Of Side Lot Lines To Street Lines: All side lot lines
should be approximately at right angles to straight street right of way lines
and radial to curved street right of way lines except where a deviation from
this rule will result in a better street/lot design. Along curvilinear street
lines, side lines of lots formed by converging radial projections shall form a
lot having not less than twenty feet (20') across the rear property line.
      7.   Access: Land shall be subdivided in such away that each lot has
direct access to a public street.
      8.   Satisfactory Building Sites: The design and arrangement of lots
should be such that each lot will provide a satisfactory building site. Lots
abutting upon watercourses, drainageways, channels, or streams shall have an
additional depth or width as required to provide an acceptable building site.
   C.   Natural/Historical Features: Whenever any tract is to be subdivided,
the most restrictive measures consistent with the anticipated development of
the tract should be taken to protect such natural features as tree growth,
wetlands, steep slopes, watercourses, and any historically or archaeologically
significant structures/sites.
   D.   Numbering Lots: Lots shall be numbered consecutively throughout all
phases or additions of the subdivision, and the same basic subdivision name
shall be given to all parts thereof. (1984 Code § 6-8-2)
11-5-3: SUBDIVISION LAYOUT:
   A.   Sizes Of Blocks: In residential subdivisions, blocks shall not be less
than four hundred feet (400') nor more than one thousand two hundred feet
(1,200') in length, measured along the greatest dimensions of the enclosed
block area. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow lots of minimum depth of one
hundred feet (100').
   B.   Street Plan:
      1.   General Requirements: The arrangement, character, extension, width
and location of all streets shall be considered in their relationship to
existing and planned streets; to reasonable circulation of traffic within the
subdivision and adjoining lands; to topographic conditions; to runoff of
stormwater; to public convenience and safety; and in their appropriate
relationship to the proposed uses of the area to be served. It is the policy of
the village to encourage internal circulation in new subdivisions. Plats
showing single lot access to state/county highways will not be approved without
written assurance from the state/county highway department that access permits
will be granted.
      2.   Plan/Profile Specifications: Contained below in table 5.1 are the
minimum street specifications that apply specifically to residential
subdivisions. At the recommendation of the engineer for the village, the
village board may require higher standards consistent with accepted engineering
practices for streets in nonresidential subdivisions. Appropriate street
classifications shall be determined and/or verified by the engineer for the
village and/or village board at the time of submittal of the preliminary plat.
   TABLE 5.1: MINIMUM DESIGN PARAMETERS
   FOR RESIDENTIAL STREETS
 
               Minimum Right Minimum Pavement
Street         Of Way Width  Surface Width    Maximum Gradient Minimum Gradient
Classification (Feet)        Including C/G    (Percent)        (Percent)
                             (Feet)
Alley          25            15               7                0.50
Land access/   50            31               7                0.40
local
Collector      60            31               5                0.40
Arterial       70            38               5                0.40
Pedestrianways 10            4                5                0.00
 
      3.   Horizontal Curves:
         a.   Where there is curvilinear horizontal alignment utilized for
subdivision streets, the minimum centerline radius to be used shall be as
indicated below:
 
Land access and local streets 150 feet
Collector street              300 feet
Arterial street               300 feet
 
         b.   If reserve curves are to be utilized, and the radii are less than
three hundred feet (300'), a tangent at least one hundred feet (100') long
should be introduced between the curves on collector streets and arterial
streets.
      4.   Vertical Curves: All grade changes shall be connected by vertical
curves. The length of vertical curves on major thoroughfares shall not be less
than thirty (30) times the algebraic difference in rates of grade, and not less
than fifteen (15) times the algebraic difference in rates of grade on all other
streets. The minimum length of vertical curves on all types of streets shall be
ten feet (10').
      5.   Topographical Considerations: Grades of streets shall conform as
closely as possible to the natural topography, but shall not exceed the maximum
grade nor be less than the minimum grade specified in table 5.1 of this
section. All streets shall be arranged so that as many as possible of the
potential building sites are at or above street grade.
      6.   Traffic Flow: Land access/local streets shall be laid out in such a
manner as to discourage use by through traffic. To effect a more desirable
street layout, the use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, or U-shaped streets
is encouraged. Rigid rectangular gridiron street patterns should be avoided for
land access and local streets.
      7.   Additional Width Of Existing Streets: Subdivisions that adjoin
existing streets shall dedicate additional right of way if necessary to meet
the minimum street width requirements set forth in this section as follows:
         a.   The entire additional right of way shall be provided where the
subdivision is on both sides of the existing street.
         b.   When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing
street, one-half (1/2) or more of the required additional right of way shall be
provided as deemed necessary by the planning committee or village board.
      8.   Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited except where
essential to reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with other
requirements of this title and when the planning committee finds that it will
be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided.
      9.   Private Streets And Reserve Strips: There shall be no private
streets platted in any subdivision. Every subdivided lot shall be served from a
dedicated street. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to
streets, and there shall be no reserve strips or areas enabling access to
interior lots from streets in residential subdivisions.
      10.   Dead End Streets: Dead end streets shall be either temporary stub
streets or permanent cul-de-sac streets.
         a.   Temporary Stub Streets: Streets shall be so arranged as to
provide the continuation of collector streets between adjacent properties when
such continuation is consistent with good transportation planning and/or is
necessary for adequate traffic circulation, effective fire and police
protection, and efficient provision of utilities. If a street must dead end
temporarily because the adjacent property is undeveloped, the right of way
shall be extended to the property line, and no strip that would prevent
connections with future streets shall be reserved. A temporary all weather
surface turnabout with a minimum radius of thirty feet (30') shall be provided
at the terminus of any temporary dead end street that serves more than four (4)
lots.
         b.   Permanent Cul-De-Sac Streets: The terminus of a permanent cul-
de-sac street shall not be closer than one hundred feet (100') to the boundary
of an adjacent tract. A cul-de-sac turnaround, having a minimum right of way
radius of sixty feet (60') and a minimum pavement radius of fifty feet (50')
(measured to the back of curb and/or gutter) shall be provided at the end of
every permanent cul-de-sac street. Cul-de-sacs shall not be more than five
hundred feet (500') in length (measured from street of origin to end of right
of way) unless necessitated by some unusual conditions of topography.
      11.   Alleys: Alleys are not permitted in residential areas unless deemed
necessary by the planning committee.
      12.   Pedestrianways: Pedestrianways with a minimum width of ten feet
(10') may be provided to facilitate pedestrian movement in the neighborhood.
Such way is recommended in all blocks that are more than eight hundred feet
(800') long and for access to community facilities that do not have pedestrian
access from two (2) or more streets.
      13.   Street Names: Every proposed street which is obviously in alignment
with an existing named street shall be given the same name as the existing
street. The name assigned to any proposed street which is not in alignment with
an existing named street shall not duplicate nor be phonetically similar to the
name of any existing street regardless of any difference in designation such as
"Avenue", "Boulevard", "Drive", "Place", "Court", etc. (1984 Code § 6-8-3)
      14.   Street Numbers: Street numbers in any block of any proposed
subdivision shall correspond and conform with the numerical grid system set
forth in exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein which is hereby
adopted by the village for purposes of assigning address numbers to residences,
commercial buildings and other structures located within the village.
Residences, commercial buildings and other structures located along the north
and west sides of any street shall be odd numbered; residences, commercial
buildings and other structures located along the south and east sides of any
street shall be even numbered. Street signs placed at corners within any
subdivision shall bear, in addition to the requirements contained in subsection
11-5-4E of this chapter, a number indicating the corresponding location of the
particular block with respect to the grid system adopted in exhibit A attached
to the ordinance codified herein.
   C.   Intersections:
      1.   Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point.
Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. In no case shall two (2) streets intersect at an angle of less than
seventy degrees (70°). An oblique (less than 70 degrees) street shall be curved
approaching an intersection and shall be approximately at right angles with
said intersection for at least one hundred feet (100') therefrom, unless the
subdivider's engineer recommends, and the engineer for the village concurs,
that a lesser distance would be in accordance with safe and accepted traffic
engineering practices.
      2.   Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street
shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersection on the
opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than
one hundred twenty five feet (125') are prohibited unless the intersected
street has divided lanes without median breaks at either intersection.
      3.   Returns at intersections shall be made concentric and shall be
rounded by a radius of not less than twenty feet (20') at the right of way
line, and not less than thirty feet (30') at the back of curb line.
      4.   An area having no greater than a three percent (3%) slope for a
distance of seventy five feet (75') from the centerline of the intersection
should be provided for any approach to an intersection.
      5.   The cross slope on all streets, including intersections, should not
exceed three percent (3%).
      6.   Whenever any proposed intersection involves earth banks or existing
vegetation within fifty feet (50') of the intersection of curb lines, such
ground and/or vegetation shall be cut in conjunction with the grading of the
public right of way to the extent necessary to provide an adequate sight
distance 1 .
   D.   Easements: At locations within the subdivision where utilities and
drainage facilities are not to be constructed within public rights of way, the
subdivider shall make provision for easements for such installations.
Preliminary plats shall be submitted to the electric, gas, and telephone
companies for their input regarding easements.
      1.   Utility Easements: Utility easements, not less than twenty feet
(20') wide for sanitary sewers and not less than ten feet (10') wide for water
mains, gas, electric, telephone and cable TV, shall be provided where
necessary. Normally, in the case of abutting lots, an equal amount should be
taken from each lot. Property owners may (at their own risk) plant shrubbery or
hedges or install fences on the easement areas. Utilities (private and public),
however, in order to have access for repair, shall have the election to destroy
said improvements and restore the area only by grading and seeding or to have
alternate access through the owner's property.
      2.   Drainage Easements: Easements of adequate width for stormwater
drainage (surface or storm sewer) shall be provided as necessary for
satisfactory disposal of stormwater runoff. In no case shall such easements be
less than ten feet (10') in width. Easements for drainage retention shall be
provided as necessary.
      3.   Electric, Telephone, And Cable Television Lines: Electric,
telephone, and cable television (if any) service lines shall be installed
underground throughout every residential subdivision whenever feasible.
Underground service connections shall be provided at the property line of each
platted lot. All such conduits or cables shall be located within easements or
public rights of way in such a manner that they do not interfere with other
underground services/utilities. No underground utilities shall be constructed
until their physical location is approved in writing by the village board.
Utility companies shall submit the proposed layout of their facilities on paper
to the village for use in the approval process.
      4.   Ground Subject To Periodic Flooding: Where a subdivision is
traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be
provided a drainage easement conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse. It shall include an additional area, ten feet (10') wide,
adjoining both edges of the established area that would be affected by the 100-
year storm, as certified by the subdivider or his engineer.
   E.   Dedication/Reservation Of Right Of Way:
      1.   Dedicated Right Of Way Required:
         a.   The subdivider shall dedicate at least the minimum right of way
indicated in table 5.1 of this section whenever he proposes to build any of the
listed streets.
         b.   Whenever the subdivider proposes to build any of the listed
streets, he shall dedicate the right of way in excess of the stated minimum
where, in the professional opinion of the engineer for the village:
            (1)   Due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide
adequate sight lines; and
            (2)   Due to the location of streams, railroad tracks, etc.,
additional width is needed to construct bridges, underpasses, and/or safe
approaches thereto.
      2.   Reservation Of Right Of Way: The subdivider shall reserve the right
of way whenever the subdivision abuts an existing street that does not meet the
standards set forth in table 5.1 of this section. The subdivider shall reserve
sufficient right of way along the side of the street abutting the subdivision
so that, when additional right of way is acquired on the other side, it will be
possible to comply with said standards.
      3.   Right Of Way Part Of Minimum Setback: Any land that is dedicated or
reserved for public right of way shall not be counted in determining compliance
with the lot size and setback requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance.
   F.   Reservation Of Land For Public Purposes: When a school board, park
board, municipality, or the county has gone on record as desiring to purchase a
parcel(s) in a proposed subdivision for school, park, or other public purpose,
the owner or subdivider shall reserve said parcel(s) for acquisition of such
public entity for a period of twelve (12) months beginning on the date the
final plat is recorded. If, within this twelve (12) month period, an
acquisition price cannot be agreed upon or condemnation proceedings have not
been instituted, the owner or subdivider may sell, subdivide, or otherwise
dispose of said parcel(s). (1984 Code § 6-8-3)
   G.   Dedication Of Park Land Or Payment Of Fees In Lieu Thereof: As a
condition of approval of a preliminary plan of a subdivision or large scale
development, each subdivider or developer will be required to dedicate land for
park and recreational purposes to serve the immediate and future needs of the
residents of the development and village or to distribute cash in lieu of
actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the village,
in accordance with the following criteria and formula:
      1.   Criteria For Requiring Park And Recreation Land Dedication:
         a.   Requirement And Population Ratio: For purposes of this dedication
requirement, the developer shall dedicate to the village one thousand four
hundred fifty (1,450) square feet of real estate per dwelling unit in the
proposed development.
         b.   Credit For Private Open Spaces And Recreation Areas:
            (1)   Where private open space for park and recreational purposes
is provided in a proposed subdivision, and such space is to be owned and
maintained by the residents of that residential development, such areas shall
be credited against the requirements of dedication for park and recreation
purposes. In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks
will imply a substantial degree of improvement and the installation of
recreational facilities, including equipment, by the developer as part of his
obligation. When the private open space includes improvements and the
installation of recreation facilities, one-half (1/2) of the land area which
would be required for dedication under this title shall be sufficient for
credit for private open space.
            (2)   Detailed plans for private open space, including
specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by the village,
and before any credit is given, the subdivider or developer must guarantee that
these private recreation areas will be permanently maintained for such use by
the execution of the appropriate legal documents. Private swimming clubs are
included in this provision.
            (3)   If the amount of private open space is less than the amount
required for credit for private open space, the remainder shall be made up in
land dedication or fees.
      2.   Determination Of Land Dedication Or Fees In Lieu Thereof: Whether
the board accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu
thereof, or a combination, shall be determined by consideration of the
following:
         a.   Size and share of the residential development and land available
for dedication.
         b.   Topography, geology, access and location of land in the
subdivision.
         c.   The determination of the village board of trustees as to whether
land shall be dedicated or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination
thereof, shall be final and conclusive.
      3.   Procedure:
         a.   Action Of Village: At the time of preliminary plan approval for
the subdivision, the board shall determine, as part of such approval, whether
to require a dedication of land within the subdivision, payment of a fee in
lieu thereof, a combination of both, or if private open space is adequate. If
land is to be dedicated, the preliminary plan of subdivision shall indicate
such dedications. If cash dedications are to be used in lieu of land
dedications, the amount of cash dedications and the computations that resulted
in determining said amount shall be submitted in writing by the developer at
the time the preliminary plan of subdivision is filed. It shall be the
responsibility of the planning committee to make recommendations to the village
board regarding the adequacy of the proposed land dedication or cash donation
in lieu of land dedication.
         b.   Prerequisites For Approval Of Final Plat: Where dedication is
required, it shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of
Illinois Compiled Statutes. Where fees are required, the same shall be
deposited with the village clerk prior to board approval of the final plat of
subdivision. Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities
shall be submitted to the village prior to final approval and shall be recorded
contemporaneously with the final plat.
         c.   Determination Of Amount Of Fees: The cash contributions in lieu
of land shall be based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the
residential development under consideration that otherwise would have been
dedicated as a park.
         d.   Determination Of Fair Market Value: Fair market value shall be
determined as of the time of filing the final plat of subdivision in accordance
with the following:
            (1)   The fair market value as determined by the village board
based upon current appraisals; or
            (2)   If the subdivider or developer objects to such amount of
evaluation, he may, at his expense, obtain an appraisal of the property by a
qualified real estate appraiser approved by the village, which appraisal may be
accepted by the village board of trustees if found reasonable; or
            (3)   The village and subdivider may agree as to the fair market
value.
      4.   Uses Of Fees In Lieu:
         a.   Parks: Cash contributions in lieu of park and recreation land
dedication shall be held in trust by the village, or other public body
designated by the village, solely for the acquisition of park and recreation
land which will be available to serve immediate or future needs of the
residents of that subdivision or development, or for the improvement of the
existing local park and recreation land which already serves such needs.
         b.   Refunded Fees In Lieu: If any portion of a cash contribution is
not expended within fifteen (15) years from the date of receipt, it shall be
refunded to the developer who made such contribution. (1984 Code § 6-8-3)
   H.   Off Site Improvements: As a condition of approval of any preliminary or
final plat of subdivision, the village, at its discretion, may require any off
site improvements to adjacent streets, feeder streets, street curbs, water
mains, sanitary sewers, drains or other facilities for sewers and drains,
roadways, traffic signals or similar improvements as permitted by the laws of
the state, as amended from time to time. In addition, the village may enter
into an agreement with the developer or developers for the construction of off
site improvements and the apportionment of the cost of said off site
improvements between the developer's property and other properties benefited by
the improvements, and may agree to collect the proportionate share of such
costs for off site improvements from the developer or developers of other
properties benefited by the improvements as permitted by the statutes or the
laws of the state, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 1990-1, 2-6-1990; amd.
Ord. 1990-12, 6-5-1990; Ord. 1994-11, 5-3-1994; amd. 2010 Code; Ord. 2017-4, 3-
21-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10-7-4 of this code.
11-5-4: STREET AND ALLEY IMPROVEMENTS:
All streets and alleys shall be improved solely at the expense of the
subdivider in accordance with the requirements set forth herein. Typical
roadway and pavement sections are shown in subsection
11-5-9A of this chapter. Unless stated otherwise in this title, all
construction shall be performed in accordance with state standard
specifications for road and bridge construction adopted October 1, 1983, or the
latest revised edition adopted by the Illinois department of transportation.
   A.   Pavement Structure: All streets and alleys shall be paved across the
entire surface width specified in table 5.1 of this chapter. The structural
composition of the pavement shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth
in table 5.2 below. Design requirements for both rigid and flexible pavements
are set forth hereinafter. Should the engineer for the village or the
developer's engineer determine that the minimal standards are not adequate for
a given condition (i.e., traffic volume, size of loads, subgrade support,
drainage, etc.), the required pavement thickness will be designed in accordance
with the latest edition or revision thereof of the design manual of the state
department of transportation bureau of design.
   TABLE 5.2: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR
   STRUCTURAL COMPOSITION OF SUBDIVISION PAVEMENT
Street Class Flexible Pavements      Rigid Pavements
             Alternate 1 Alternate 2 Alternate 1 Alternate 2
Street Class     Flexible Pavements               Rigid Pavements
                 Alternate 1     Alternate 2      Alternate 1  Alternate 2
                 4" BAM             ---        6" PCC
Alley            2" 1-11 surface    ---        (15' plain      ---
                                                  joints)
                                 8" crushed stone
Land access      4" BAM          11/2" 1-11       6" PCC
Residential 30   2" 1-11 surface binder           (15' plain      ---
units                            11/2" 1-11       joints)
                                 surface
Local                            8" crushed stone 6" PCC
Residential 30-  5" BAM          2" 1-11 binder   (15' dowel      ---
100 units        2" 1-11 surface 11/2" 1-11       joints)
                                 surface
                 4" BAM                                        6" PCC
Collector        21/2" 1-11      8" crushed stone 6" SRPCC     4" crushed
Residential 100  binder          3" BAM           (40' dowel   stone/
units            11/2" 1-11      2" 1-11 surface  joints)      underlayment
                 surface                                       (15' dowel
                                                               joints)
Arterial or                      8" crushed stone 8" SRPCC
industrial       8" BAM          5" BAM           6" crushed
Interconnecting  2" 1-11 binder  2" 1-11 binder   stone/          ---
streets or heavy 11/2" 1-11      11/2" 1-11       underlayment
truck traffic    surface         surface          (40' dowel
                                                  joints)
                                                               6" PCC
                 4" BAM          8" crushed stone 6" SRPCC     4" crushed
Local            2" 1-11 binder  3" BAM           (40' dowel   stone/
Commercial       11/2" 1-11      2" 1-11 surface  joints)      underlayment
                 surface                                       (15' dowel
                                                               joints)
                 6" BAM          8" crushed stone 7" SRPCC
                 21/2" 1-11      4" BAM           (40' dowel
Collector        binder          11/2" 1-11       joints)         ---
Commercial       11/2" 1-11      binder           4" crushed
                 surface         11/2" 1-11       stone/
                                 surface          underlayment
 
Note: Equivalent pavements in addition to those shown above shall be approved
by the engineer for the village. Should the total pavement thickness exceed 8
inches, the granular base/subbase shall extend under the curb/gutter.
Abbreviations:
BAM = Bituminous aggregate mixture
PCC = Unreinforced Portland cement concrete
SRPCC = Standard reinforced Portland cement concrete
Maximum lift thickness:
Crushed stone = 8 inches
BAM = 6 inches
1-11 Binder = 21/2 inches
1-11 Surface = 2 inches
      1.   Flexible Pavements: Flexible pavements are to be constructed as
multilayered structures combining hot mix bituminous concrete/bituminous base/
crushed stone base/subbase. Each layer of material is to be constructed in
lifts not to exceed the maximum lift thickness (compacted) specified in table
5.2 of this section. The minimum width of any single pass for any lift/layer of
bituminous mixture shall be ten feet (10'). There are alternate designs for
either deep strength asphalt or bituminous concrete on a crushed stone base/
subbase.
      2.   Rigid Pavements: Rigid pavements are specified as either reinforced
or unreinforced Portland cement concrete to be constructed either on the earth
subgrade or on a crushed stone subbase or underlayment. Alternate designs are
shown for two (2) of the seven (7) street classifications. The underlayment is
to be one-fourth inch (1/4") thick fabric such as "Bidim" or "Petromat", or
equal.
         a.   Contraction Joints:
            (1)   Contraction joints are to be provided at the spacings shown
in table 5.2 of this section for each of the various alternates. These
transverse joints are to be sawed joints that are one- eighth inch (1/8") to
one-fourth inch (1/4") wide with a depth equal to one-fourth (1/4) of the
pavement thickness. Sawed contraction joints are to be sawed within twenty four
(24) hours of placement of the concrete. All contraction joints are to be
dowelled with the exception of alleys and land access residential streets.
Dowel sizes and spacing shall comply with the following requirements:
 
Pavement  Minimum Dowel Diameter Minimum Dowel Length Minimum Dowel Spacing
Thickness
6"        5/8"                   12"                  12"
7"        3/4"                   15"                  15"
8"        1"                     15"                  12"
 
            (2)   The dowel units are to be smooth, plain round bars placed at
mid height of the pavement with an expansion cap at one end. The bars, or
assemblies, shall be placed so that the bars are parallel to the centerline and
to the pavement surface and shall be treated to prevent bonding with the
concrete.
         b.   Longitudinal Joints:
            (1)   Longitudinal joints shall be constructed no closer than eight
feet (8') and no farther apart than fifteen feet (15'). The longitudinal joints
may be either "construction" joints or "sawed" joints. In either case, there
shall be transverse no. 4 deformed tie bars, thirty inches (30") long, spaced
at thirty inch (30") centers along all longitudinal joints. This includes the
joint between the pavement and curb/gutter if the curb/gutter is not
constructed integral with the pavement. As an option to tie bars, either a half
round or trapezoidal preformed keyway meeting the following dimensions may be
used on longitudinal joints, excluding the gutter joint:
 
Pavement Thickness Half Round Diameter Edge Height Trapezoidal
                                                   Depth Inside Height
6"                 2"                  2"          1"    11/4"
7"                 2"                  21/4"       1"    11/4"
8"                 21/2"               21/4"       1"    11/4"
 
            (2)   Sawed longitudinal joints shall be sawed within ten (10) days
of concrete placement and prior to any traffic or vehicles traveling on the
surface.
         c.   Transverse Construction Joints: Transverse construction joints
shall be constructed at the end of each day's run or at locations where a
"cold" joint will occur due to a delay or interruption in placement operations.
All transverse construction joints shall be "tied" with no. 4 deformed bars,
thirty six inches (36") long, spaced at twelve inch (12") centers. Construction
joints must be at least five feet (5') from a contraction joint.
         d.   Pavement Reinforcement: Pavement reinforcement shall be used in
all rigid pavements designated as SRPCC in table 5.2 of this section.
Reinforcement shall be welded wire fabric six inches by twelve inches (6" x
12") with W 4 wire transversely and W 5.5 wire longitudinally weighing
approximately fifty four (54) pounds per one hundred (100) square feet. The
fabric shall be lapped twelve inches (12") on transverse laps and six inches
(6") on longitudinal laps. Reinforcement shall be placed on the subgrade and
supported by proper chairs and spacers, prior to paving, at the heights
specified below:
 
Pavement Thickness Depth Below Pavement Surface
   6"           2" minimum; 3" maximum
   7"           21/2" minimum; 31/2" maximum
   8"           3" minimum; 4" maximum
 
   B.   Curb And Gutter:
      1.   All streets, except alleys, shall be constructed with Portland
cement concrete combination curb and gutter and/or V-type gutter in accordance
with the dimensions and specifications shown therefor in subsection
11-5-9A of this chapter. Either combination curb and gutter or V-type gutter,
at the developer's option, may be used on land access, local, and collector
streets. Only combination curb and gutter shall be used on arterial streets.
      2.   Curb and/or gutter may be constructed either integrally or
separately in conjunction with Portland cement concrete pavement. If
constructed separately, the gutter flag shall be "tied" to PCC pavement with
thirty inch (30") long no. 4 reinforcing bars spaced at thirty inch (30")
centers.
   C.   Unpaved Areas: All unpaved areas within the dedicated street area shall
be graded and seeded in an approved manner.
   D.   Curb Radii: All curb corners shall have a minimum radius of not less
than thirty feet (30').
   E.   Street Name Signs: A four-way metal street sign shall be installed at
each street intersection. Signs shall be flat, reflectorized, and yellow with
black letters. The letters shall be at least three and one-half inches (31/2")
high. Numerals shall be used for numbered streets. The post shall be not less
than two inches (2") inside diameter galvanized iron, or equal, ten feet (10')
long. They shall be installed at a height not less than seven feet (7'), and
shall be placed not less than one foot (1') nor more than ten feet (10') from
the edge of the pavement.
   F.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of each street
and they shall conform to the requirements specified herein:
      1.   Dimensions:
   Width = Four feet (4') (minimum)
   Thickness = Four feet (4') (minimum)
      2.   Location (at village board discretion):
         a.   One foot (1') in from the property line.
      3.   Grade: Parallel with the street grade.
      4.   Materials: Concrete.
      5.   Contraction joints: With joint tool at five foot (5') centers.
      6.   Expansion joints: One-half inch (1/2") premolded joint filler where
abutting back of curb/gutter. (1984 Code § 6-8-4)
   G.   Streetlights: The developer shall comply with the following policy
concerning street lighting in any subdivision proposed for approval by the
village:
      1.   Lights using two hundred (200) watt high pressure sodium bulbs shall
be provided at every intersection.
      2.   Lights using one hundred fifty (150) watt high pressure sodium bulbs
shall be provided at every other lot line on alternating sides of the street.
      3.   The location of the lights shall be shown on the construction plans
reviewed and approved by the engineer for the village.
      4.   If the developer uses lights provided by CILCO or Menard Electric,
they shall use their decorative poles. Any additional costs for decorative
poles shall be paid by the developer.
      5.   If the developer chooses to supply his own decorative lighting on
decorative poles, the following standards shall apply:
         a.   Mounting height of the luminaires from the base of poles to
center of bulb shall be sixteen feet (16'), plus or minus, depending on the
design of the luminaires. Poles shall be designed for eighty (80) miles per
hour wind loading.
         b.   Acorn type polycarbonate or polyacryl luminaires shall be used.
         c.   A type III lighting pattern shall be provided as defined in the
American national standard practice for roadway lighting (RP-8), appendix E,
section E3.2.3.
      6.   If the developer chooses to use decorative lighting on decorative
poles, the developer shall provide catalog cuts on the proposed lighting
equipment to the engineer for the village for approval before any equipment is
ordered.
      7.   a. The developer is responsible for maintenance of streetlights and
poles for one year after the subdivision plat is accepted by the village.
         b.   The village, in conjunction with the utility (CILCO or Menard
Electric), will maintain all streetlights, including decorative lights, after
the expiration of the one year period from acceptance by the village.
      8.   Streetlights shall be installed and operative within sixty (60) days
of the time the curbs are completed or the electrical service lines are
installed, whichever occurs last.
   H.   Addresses: Upon completion of construction of streets and curbs in any
subdivision within the village, where construction is completed after the
effective date hereof, the developer shall paint yellow numerals at least three
and one-half inches (31/2") in height on a six inch by twelve inch (6" x 12")
black background at the center of each lot on the surface of the curb or gutter
fronting each lot, indicating the street address or addresses established under
the provisions of this title.
   I.   Direct Burial Light Pole Foundations: Where direct burial light pole
foundations are used, the following standards shall apply:
      1.   The embedment depth of the pole shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations, but shall not be less than five feet (5').
      2.   The diameter of the embedment hole shall be in accordance with the
pole manufacturer's recommendations, but shall not be less than two feet (2')
larger in diameter than the buried portion of the pole.
      3.   The butt end of the pole shall be placed in the embedment hole and
as a minimum, the bottom two feet (2') of the hole shall be filled with
concrete. The remainder of the hole shall be filled with compacted earth
backfill. (Ord. 1990-5, 4-3-1990; amd. Ord. 2002-7, 3-19-2002; Ord. 2010-6, 5-
4-2010; Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-5-5: DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS:
Every residential subdivision shall be provided with drainage facilities which
can satisfactorily accommodate the stormwater surface runoff incident to the
10-year design storm. The drainage facilities in any commercial or industrial
subdivision shall be designed to handle stormwater runoff from the 15-year
design storm. These minimal design requirements shall not be construed to
relieve the subdivider of any legal responsibilities for downstream/upstream
stormwater damages inflicted by runoff or backup from the development.
   A.   General Design Considerations: The plans and specifications shall
include provisions to show compliance with the drainage laws of the state and
any subdivision thereof in effect at that time. By requiring that the
subdivider evidence compliance with drainage law(s), the village assumes no
responsibility to landowners or others for damage caused by noncompliance with
such law(s).
      1.   Storm Sewers: Properly sized storm sewers shall be provided to carry
surface runoff from streets and curb and/or gutters. Such storm sewers shall be
of sufficient length that they shall transport the runoff to rear lot lines or
existing natural drainageways or swales, provided their location does not
encroach upon the building site.
      2.   Drainage Swales: Natural drainage swales may be utilized to
accommodate surface runoff, provided they are located near lot lines and the
flows induced therein do not pose health or safety hazards for residents.
      3.   Accommodation Of Upstream Drainage Areas: Drainage facilities shall
be adequate to accommodate potential runoff from the entire drainage area
upstream of the proposed subdivision. Potential runoff shall be determined on
the basis of maximum land use of the upstream area that is consistent with
current zoning or adjacent land use trends.
      4.   Drainage Detention: In order to protect downstream property from
potential damages by increased flows or greater velocities, it may be necessary
for the subdivider to provide for drainage detention facilities. The village
reserves the right to require such installations where it is deemed necessary
in the interest of public safety and welfare. Drainage detention facilities
should be designed so that the post-development release rate does not exceed
the pre-development conditions for the 10-year and 100-year design storm.
      5.   Discharge From Groundwater Sumps 1 : All lots on which proposed
buildings will require the use of groundwater sumps to protect foundations and
floors from leaking must be provided with underground storm sewers designed to
carry the sump pump discharge to the street storm sewer system or surface
drainage easements. In no case will groundwater sump discharge be allowed to
drain either directly or indirectly onto village streets.
   B.   Technical Requirements: Storm drainage facilities shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the criteria set forth and the standards
contained in subsection
11-5-9B of this chapter.
      1.   Pipe/Storm Sewers: All pipe sewers shall be determined by
utilization of either the rational method, or the SCS method, or both, for the
design storm(s) previously specified.
         a.   The minimum diameter permitted shall be twelve inches (12")
except as indicated in subsection B1d of this section.
         b.   Pipes/storm sewers located under paved surfaces shall be
reinforced concrete pipe with rubber gasket joints and sufficient wall
thickness and reinforcement to carry the intended loading with the materials
meeting the requirements of ASTM C-76 and ASTM C-443.
         c.   Pipes/storm sewers located outside paved surfaces and under
nominal fill loading may be of any of the following materials:
            (1)   Plastic truss pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM D-2680.
            (2)   Corrugated aluminum pipe meeting the requirements of AASHTO
M-196, minimum plate thickness of 14-gauge for D = 12 inches to 27 inches; 12-
gauge for D = 30 inches and up.
            (3)   Reinforced concrete pipe with sufficient wall thickness and
reinforcement to carry the intended loading and meeting the requirements of
ASTM C-76.
            (4)   Bituminous coated corrugated galvanized steel pipe meeting
the requirements of AASHTO M-36 and M-190, minimum plate thickness of 16-gauge
for D = 12 inches to 21 inches; 14-gauge for D = 24 inches and up.
            (5)   Pipe types not listed shall be approved in writing by the
engineer for the village before use.
            (6)   The subdivider shall be responsible for increasing minimum
plate gauges as the final loading dictates.
         d.   For sump pump drainage only, four inch (4") corrugated plastic
drainage pipe may be used, provided design calculations indicate adequate
capacity. In addition, a four inch (4") cleanout meeting the approval of the
engineer for the village shall be provided at the intersection of the sump
discharge pipe and the four inch (4") drain pipe.
         e.   Installation shall be in accordance with "good practice". All
trenches for pipes/storm sewers that are located under paved surfaces and all
trenches outside of the subgrade where the inner edge of the trench is closer
than two feet (2') to the edge of the proposed pavement shall be properly
backfilled with fine aggregate, one hundred percent (100%) of which shall pass
the three-eighths inch (3/8") sieve.
      2.   Inlets/Catch Basins: The spacings for inlets/catch basins shall be
calculated such that the runoff from the design storm shall not encroach upon
the pavement by more than six feet (6'). Under no circumstances shall the
spacing exceed four hundred feet (400'). Inlets/catch basins shall be
constructed in accordance with the standards in subsection
11-5-9B of this chapter.
      3.   Drainage Grades: Minimum/maximum gradients of pipes/storm sewers and
earth drainageways/swales shall conform to the following criteria:
         a.   Pipes/storm sewers:
 
Minimum grade = 0.3%
Maximum grade = None; riprap and/or energy dissipators shall be utilized as
                needed at discharge points to minimize erosion
 
         b.   Earth drainage/swales:
 
Minimum grade = 0.5% - may reduce to 0.35% if they are paved with concrete
Maximum grade = 3.0% with no protection other than sod
              12.0% with paving, riprap and/or energy dissipators, etc.
 
      4.   Manholes: Manholes conforming to the requirements set forth in
subsection
11-5-9B of this chapter shall be installed to all changes in vertical grade or
horizontal alignment of storm sewers if at locations other than inlets/catch
basins. (Ord. 2001-35, 12-4-2001; amd. Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  8-3-8 of this code.
11-5-6: GRADING AND CLEARING:
Grading and clearing necessitated by the construction of roadway and drainage
facilities shall be done in such a manner as to assure uniform subgrade support
with adequate bearing capacity to properly support the loading/structures to be
superimposed. In order to help achieve this result, the subdivider shall comply
with the following requirements:
   A.   Clearing And Grubbing: Prior to grading within the limits of the right
of way, the entire area to be affected with improvements (i.e., pavement,
water, sewer, drainage, etc.) shall be cleared of all tree stumps, roots,
brush, and other objectional materials and of all trees not intended for
preservation.
   B.   Embankments: Embankments to be constructed within the roadway right of
way by the subdivider shall be done in a manner compatible with good road
construction practices and in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Construction: Fills shall be constructed in lifts not to exceed
twelve inches (12") loose. No wood, trash, or other objectionable material
shall be placed in fills.
      2.   Compaction: Each lift shall be properly compacted to a density not
less than ninety percent (90%) of the maximum standard lab density as
determined by AASHTO T-99. The upper six inches (6") of embankment shall be
compacted to a minimum of ninety five percent (95%) of maximum standard lab
density. Large clods and excessively wet fill material shall be disked and/or
aerated as required to achieve the minimum required density and result in a
stable embankment. Compaction shall be achieved with a roller capable of
properly compacting the given type of embankment material. In the case of fine
grained soils, a sheepsfoot roller shall be deemed suitable.
      3.   Compaction Tests: The village may require the subdivider to furnish,
at his expense, results of field compaction tests for verification of proper
construction. Such tests shall be performed and certified by a respectable
testing lab or engineering firm.
   C.   Subgrades: In areas where embankment is to be placed, the material
shall be properly compacted up to subgrade elevation. In the case of cut
sections, the subgrade shall be cleared of all unsuitable material, including,
but not limited to, vegetation; tree stumps and roots; trash; debris; soft,
spongy soil; etc., for a minimum depth of eighteen inches (18") below subgrade
elevation. The upper six inches (6") of the entire length of subgrade (cut or
fill) shall be compacted to at least ninety five percent (95%) of maximum
standard lab density.
   D.   Erosion Control: The design of every subdivision shall be consistent
with the natural limitations presented by topography and soil so as to create
the least potential for soil erosion. Soil shall be exposed during construction
for the shortest feasible period of time.
      1.   Temporary Erosion Control: The subdivider shall be required to
install temporary erosion measures to prevent siltation of adjacent streams,
roads, private property, etc.
      2.   Permanent Installation:
         a.   The subdivider shall be required to incorporate the appropriate
permanent devices to prevent long term erosion and siltation. Such
installations may include sediment basins, desilting basins, riprap, energy
dissipators, etc.
         b.   All development and improvements to be made within any
subdivision shall be subject to any village ordinance(s), county regulations,
or state laws relative to soil erosion and sediment control, insofar as they
are applicable.
   E.   Vegetation Preservation: Existing vegetation, especially trees having a
diameter of four inches (4") or more when measured at a point twelve inches
(12") above the ground, should be retained and protected to the maximum extent
consistent with development of the site. (1984 Code § 6-8-6)
11-5-7: WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
   A.   It is the responsibility of the subdivider to install, or have
installed, the necessary water mains to serve his subdivision. Prior to actual
field installation of said facilities, it shall be necessary for the
subdivider's engineer to prepare detailed construction plans, determine a
complete bill of materials, and complete the necessary papers for the
environmental protection agency permit in accordance with the appropriate
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the Village of
Williamsville. All plans shall be approved by the Village of Williamsville
prior to the planning committee’s final approval and submittal to the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency. All design and construction shall be in
accordance with the applicable portions of the current edition of the "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" unless
otherwise directed by the Village of Williamsville.
   B.   Final Acceptance: Occupancy permits for new dwelling units served by
extended water mains will not be issued until the Williamsville water
department has accepted maintenance responsibility for the newly constructed
water mains. (1984 Code § 6-8-7; amd. Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-5-8: SANITARY SEWER FACILITIES:
It is the sole responsibility of the subdivider to provide a sewage disposal
system complying with the regulations of the Illinois department of public
health (private sewage disposal licensing act and code 1 ), the Illinois
environmental protection agency, and the operator of the public sewer system to
be expanded. If the public sanitary sewer system is within seven hundred fifty
feet (750') of the proposed subdivision 2 , and said system has the available
capacity, the subdivider shall extend the existing system and sewer his entire
proposed development at his own expense.
   A.   Extension Of Existing Mains:
      1.   Plans Required: Whenever the existing public sanitary sewer system
is to be extended for a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall have
detailed construction plans prepared by a professional engineer registered in
the state of Illinois. The plans and necessary permit application papers
required by the Illinois environmental protection agency shall be submitted to
the village for approval by the engineer for the village and the chair of the
planning committee.
      2.   Scope Of Extension: The subdivider shall extend the sanitary sewer
system throughout the subdivision in such a manner as to service every lot. No
lot may remain unserved unless such exemption is made in writing by the village
clerk and specifically referenced by subdivision lot number.
      3.   Construction Requirements: The subdivider shall install a four inch
(4") service tap for each lot to be served with sufficient four inch (4")
service line to place the service a minimum of five feet (5') beyond the lot
lines of each lot. All design and construction shall be in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the current edition of the "Standard Specifications
For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". All principal sanitary
sewer lines shall be located within the street right of way or public easement.
      4.   Inspection: Subsequent to completion of construction, the subdivider
and/or contractor shall provide a television inspection of the installed main.
      5.   Maintenance: The subdivider shall be responsible for all maintenance
of the sewer main, manholes, lift station(s), and service connections until
such time as the engineer for the village accepts the paving and the grading
adjacent to the sewer as complete and accepted by the village.
      6.   Warranty: The subdivider shall be responsible for a one year period
after the village has received notice of beginning of operation of a sanitary
sewer system for all defective mains, manholes, lift stations, sewer taps,
backfill settlement, etc.
   B.   Alternate Methods Of Disposal:
      1.   In the event it is not possible or feasible for the subdivider to
extend the public sewer system into the proposed subdivision, for whatever
reason, the subdivider has the right to petition the village to install an
alternative method of sewage disposal. Any such petition shall be considered on
an individual basis with each case standing on its own merit. No subdivision
shall be approved without the village approval of the method of sewage
disposal.
      2.   Upon written approval of the village board, the subdivider may
install individual sewage disposal systems, provided the lot size is in excess
of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. If such installations are permitted,
they shall be designed and installed in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the requirements and regulations of the private sewage disposal
licensing act 1 and code of the Illinois department of public health. (1984
Code § 6-8-8; amd. Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.
2 2. See also subsection
  8-3-2D of this code and subsection 11-3C-3G1 of this title.
1 1. 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.
11-5-9: APPENDICES:
   A.   Streets And Pavements:
   TYPICAL LAND ACCESS AND LOCAL RESIDENTIAL STREETS
   Note: See table 5.2 in section
11-5-4A of this chapter for pavement design
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-993.gif]
 
TYPICAL COLLECTOR RESIDENTIAL STREET
Note: See table 5.2 in section
11-5-4A of this chapter for pavement design
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-995.gif]
 
TYPICAL ARTERIAL STREET
Note: See table 5.2 in section
11-5-4A of this chapter for pavement design
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-997.gif]
 
   COMBINATION CURB & GUTTER V-TYPE GUTTER DETAILS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-999.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1001.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1003.gif]
 
   PAVED DRAINAGEWAY, PAVED DITCH & MEDIAN CURB DETAILS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1005.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1007.gif]
Note: Toe walls 18" deep shall be placed at a max. Spacing of 100'.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1009.gif]
Note: Asphalt surface to be furnished flush with curb flag.
   B.   Sewer Facilities:
   STANDARD CATCH BASIN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1011.gif]
 
Note:   A 4" sand cushion shall be used under precast bases.
Precast bases may be monolithic with the barrel section.
Minimum inside dimensions to be increased as required for larger pipe. Openings
for pipe to be recessed into sides and base 2" to 3" such that pipe flow line
is flush with the flow line of the base.
   TYPE 1 STORM SEWER MANHOLE
   FOR USE WITHIN PAVED SURFACES
NOTE:   The top section may be either the concentric type shown, or the
eccentric type, as field conditions warrant. At locations where vertical
clearance does not permit the use of a cone, a properly reinforced concrete
flat top lid may be used in lieu of the cone.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1013.gif]
 
   TYPE 2 STORM SEWER MANHOLE
   FOR USE OUTSIDE PAVED SURFACES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1015.gif]
 
    STANDARD GUTTER OUTLETS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1017.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae243da33b9b69a047765078fbdc44ba16184a85/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1019.gif]
 
(1984 Code § 6-8-9)
CHAPTER 6
MINOR SUBDIVISION
SECTION:
11-6-1:    Purpose   
11-6-2:    Location Map
11-6-3:    Final Plat Submission Requirements
11-6-4:    Review Process
11-6-5:    Submission Of Minor Subdivision Plat To The Village Board
11-6-6:    Village Board Approval
11-6-7:    Recording The Minor Subdivision Plat
11-6-8:    Limitations On Minor Subdivisions
11-6-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   A minor subdivision is the creation of a total of up to four (4) lots
(counting the remainder of the original tract from which the lots are created)
which front along a public road from which access is permitted.
   B.   The minor subdivision is designed to allow an abbreviated approval
process. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-6-2: LOCATION MAP:
   A.   Location Map Submission Requirements: The location map shall consist of
data added to an existing base map of a suitable scale, covering an area of at
least one mile radius from the tract proposed for development. The location map
shall show the following information:
      1.   Title of proposed subdivision.
      2.   North point, scale and date.
      3.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, subdivider,
engineer and registered land surveyor with the name, address and phone number
of the contact person to whom any notice is to be sent.
      4.   Outline of the entire area owned or controlled by the subdivider
with approximate boundary dimensions and total acreage.
      5.   General land legal description of the area.
      6.   Existing streets and roads expected to serve the area to be
subdivided.
      7.   Existing utility lines expected to serve the area to be subdivided.
      8.   Existing and proposed zoning.
      9.   Method of sewage disposal.
      10.   Method of water supply.
      11.   Electric service provider.
      12.   Fire protection district.
      13.   School district.
      14.   Soils analysis if private sewage systems are proposed.
      15.   Test well data.
      16.   Plan to upgrade adjacent roads if applicable.
      17.   Sketch of proposed lot layout.
      18.   Location of the one hundred (100) year floodplain.
      19.   Location of any outstanding natural features.
   B.   Location Map Review Process:
      1. The subdivider shall submit nineteen (19) prints of the location map
to the Village Clerk. Subdivision documents must be submitted seven (7)
calendar days prior to a regularly scheduled planning commission meeting to be
considered by the commission at that meeting.
      2.   The Village Clerk shall retain one print and distribute the
remaining prints as follows:
         a.   Seven (7) prints to the Planning Committee;
         b.   One print to the Zoning Administrator;
         c.   One print to the Village Engineer;
         d.   One print to the fire protection district;
         e.   One print to the Village of Williamsville Water Department;
         f.   One print to the Sangamon County Water Reclamation District;
         g.   One print to the Township Highway Commissioner; if applicable;
         h.   One print to the Sangamon County Superintendent, if applicable;
         i.   One print to the Sangamon County Soil and Water Conservation
District;
         j.   One print to the appropriate school district; and
         k.   Two (2) prints to be retained by the planning commission for
transmittal to effected utilities or agencies serving the area to be
subdivided.
      3.   The entities listed in subsection (B)(2) shall transmit their
comments on suitability of the site in writing to the planning commission staff
within one week of receipt.
      4.   The planning commission shall review the suitability of the site
based on comments received and the suitability criteria outlined in
11-2-4 . The planning commission shall either approve or disapprove the
location map based on the suitability of the site at its next regularly
scheduled meeting after the plan was filed. If the location map is disapproved,
the owners shall be informed in writing of the noncompliance found.
      5.   A location map shall be valid for a period of one year after
approval. If a final plat has not been submitted within the one year period,
approval of the location map shall expire. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-6-3: FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Final Plat Submission Requirements: The final plat shall be consistent
with the current zoning district classification of the property. The following
shall be submitted on a plan drawn to a scale of not more than one hundred feet
(100') to the inch or in accompanying documents:
      1.   North point, scale, and date of preparation and any revisions.
      2.   Names and addresses of the owner, engineer and registered land
surveyor.
      3.   Total acreage.
      4.   Lot numbers.
      5.   Existing utilities and drainage courses within and adjacent to the
site.
      6.   Location of all present property lines, section lines, streets,
buildings and watercourses within the area and within one hundred feet (100')
of the area.
      7.   Location of proposed lots, setback lines and utility easements.
      8.   Contours referring to the United States Geological Survey datum with
intervals of two feet (2') or less unless a greater interval is required
because of terrain.
      9.   If applicable, a note on the final plat stating: "Approval of this
final plat by the Village of Sherman does not constitute a guarantee that well
water is of adequate quantity or quality for residential needs or that a
suitable sewage disposal system can be constructed on each lot." Any guarantees
are the subdivider's responsibility.
      10.   Elevation and location of floodplain with location of required
monuments.
      11.   A statement indicating whether or not any part of the plat is
located in a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
      12.   A notation stating any setback required through covenants if the
different from those of the appropriate zoning district.
      13.   Percolation test results, if necessary.
      14.   Seal and signature of Illinois Professional Land Surveyor with
appropriate statement that the plat meets the standards of practice of the
Illinois Professional Land Surveyors Act.
      15.   A list of requested variances, if any.
   B.   Accompanying Documents: The following documents shall accompany the
final plat:
      1.   Exhibit showing the location of wells and seepage field areas on
each lot.
      2.   Any covenants or restrictions relating to the requirements of this
title.
      3.   Exhibits showing half of an acres private sewage disposal system
area.
      4.   Exhibit showing areas restricted from private sewage disposal system
use. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-6-4: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   The subdivider shall submit fifteen (15) prints of the final plat of
the minor subdivision to the Village Clerk accompanied by any requested
variances and a receipt for the filing fee. The subdivision documents must be
submitted seven (7) calendar days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning
Commission Meeting to be considered by the Commission at that meeting.
   B.   The Village Clerk shall retain one print and distribute the remaining
prints as follows:
      1.   Seven (7) prints to the Planning Committee;
      2.   One print to the Zoning Administrator;
      3.   One print to the Village Engineer;
      4.   One print to the Village of Williamsville Water Department;
      5.   One print to the fire protection district;
      6.   One print to the Sangamon County Water Reclamation District;
      7.   One print to the Township Highway Commissioner; if applicable; and
      8.   One print to the Sangamon County Superintendent, if applicable.
   C.   The reviewing entities shall transmit any comments or requirements to
the Planning Commission within seven (7) calendar days of receipt.
   D.   The Planning Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval no
later than its second regularly scheduled meeting after the plan was filed with
Village Clerk. Failure to act by the end of said second regularly scheduled
meeting shall constitute a recommendation of disapproval.
      1.   Disapproval: If the Planning Commission finds that the minor
subdivision plat does not meet the requirements of this chapter, it shall
specify its disapproval in writing and state the noncompliance found.
      2.   Approval: If the Planning Commission finds that the minor
subdivision plat meets the requirements of this chapter, the subdivider shall
submit the original and three (3) prints to the Planning Commission. The
following shall be printed or stamped on the original plat and prints and
signed by the Chairman of the Planning Commission:
   The Plat of this subdivision is recommended to the Village Board for
approval by the Sherman Planning Commission subject to the certifications set
forth in
11-6-5 .
   By:                                                          
   Chairman
   Dated:                                                     
   Sherman Planning Commission
   E.   The Planning Commission shall transmit the endorsed original plat and
two (2) prints to the Zoning Administrator for immediate reference to the
Village Board. One print of the endorsed minor subdivision plat shall remain on
file in the Planning Commission office. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-6-5: SUBMISSION OF MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT TO THE VILLAGE BOARD:
   A.   Certificates: The following documents shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission before a final plat is transmitted to the Village Clerk.
      1.   A certificate provided by the subdivider from the Sangamon County
Clerk indicating that payment of taxes is not delinquent.
      2.   A signed statement of a registered professional engineer and the
owner of the land, or his duly authorized attorney, as required by state
statutes concerning drainage.
      3.   Notarized acknowledgment of the plat by the owner or a duly
authorized attorney. This item may be a separate document or on the plat
itself.
      4.   The certificate of an Illinois Professional Land Surveyor attesting
to the accuracy of the survey and the location of all monuments shown. The
certificate may be filed as a supplement to the final plat.
      5.   Notarized statement by owner indicating the school district(s) in
which the subdivision is located.
      6.   Executed covenants, if required.
   B.   If the requirements of this section have not been met within two (2)
years from Planning Commission approval, the existing approvals and
recommendations shall expire and a new location map shall be submitted if the
subdivider wishes to continue. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-6-6: VILLAGE BOARD APPROVAL:
When the requirements of
11-6-5 have been met, the Village Board may by resolution approve the minor
subdivision plat and authorize the Mayor to sign the plat for and in the name
of the Village of Sherman with the Village Clerk attesting to it. The Village
Clerk shall retain one print on file. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-6-7: RECORDING THE MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT:
   A.   When the minor subdivision plat has been approved by the Village Board
and signed by the Mayor and Village Clerk, the original shall be recorded in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Sangamon County, Illinois by the
subdivider. The subdivider will deliver a copy of the recorded final plat
(containing the document number assigned by the county) to the village.
   B.   If the minor subdivision plat is not recorded within two (2) years
after approval by the Village Board, the plat must be resubmitted to the
Planning Commission to determine if any changes in the plat are needed to meet
the requirements of this title. No title to any lots shall be conveyed until
the original is recorded. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-6-8: LIMITATIONS ON MINOR SUBDIVISIONS:
Only one minor subdivision shall be allowed for any parcel of record. If four
(4) lots have been created from a parcel of record after May 8, 2001, all
additional divisions at a later time shall follow conventional subdivision
procedures. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
CHAPTER 7
TRACT SURVEY
SECTION:
11-7-1:    Purpose
11-7-2:    Submission Requirements
11-7-3:    Review Process
11-7-4:    Recording The Tract Survey
11-7-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Tract survey approval shall be required as set forth in
11-1-3-1 .
   B.   Tract survey approval is designed to ensure that all divisions of land
comply with the State Plats Act, right-of-way and lot area and lot
configuration requirements of this title, and the appropriate zoning
ordinances. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-7-2: SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
When a tract survey is required by this title, the following shall be
submitted:
   A.   North arrow, scale and date.
   B.   Name, address and phone number of the land surveyor and owner.
   C.   Land survey showing right-of-way dedication in fee simple in
conformance with the Arterial Roadway Network Plan.
   D.   A certificate provided by the subdivider from the Sangamon County Clerk
indicating that payment of taxes is not delinquent.
   E.   Certification by an Illinois Professional Land Surveyor, together with
the surveyor's seal, attesting to the accuracy of the survey.
   F.   Owner's written acknowledgment of the survey and right-of-way or
easement dedication in fee simple on the final plat.
   G.   Statement indicating whether or not any part of the land surveyed is
located in a Special Flood Hazard Area.
   H.   Location of one hundred (100) year floodplain, if applicable.
   I.   Location of all buildings and their distances from front, rear and side
property lines.
   J.   Parcel identification number. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
11-7-3: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   One original and four (4) copies of the tract survey shall be submitted
to the Plat Officer accompanied by the appropriate fee.
   B.   The Plat Officer shall review the survey to ensure that it conforms to
the pertinent requirements of this title and Title 10. The owner shall be
notified of tract survey approval or disapproval within seven (7) working days.
      1.   Disapproval: If the Plat Officer finds that the tract survey does
not meet the requirements of this code, the disapproval and noncompliance found
shall be specified in writing.
      2.   Approval: If the Plat Officer finds that the tract survey does meet
the requirements of this code, the following shall be printed or stamped on the
original and prints and signed by the Plat Officer:
County of Sangamon )
               )ss
State of Illinois       )
I, the Village of Sherman Plat officer, do hereby approve this tract survey in
accordance with the provisions of this section and in accordance with the
provisions of the Subdivision Regulations of the Village of Sherman, Illinois,
this             day of                        , 20          .
                                                         
Village of Sherman Plat Officer
   C.   The Plats Officer shall keep one copy and return the original and three
(3) copies of the approved tract survey to the owner for recording. (Ord. 2017-
4, 3-21-2017)
11-7-4: RECORDING THE TRACT SURVEY:
After the tract survey has been approved, the original shall be recorded in the
office of the recorder of deeds of Sangamon County, Illinois. If the tract
survey is not recorded within one hundred and eighty (180) days of Plats
Officer approval, the approval shall be null and void. (Ord. 2017-4, 3-21-2017)
