VILLAGE CODE
of
SOUTH BARRINGTON, ILLINOIS
1992
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-1449, passed 10-9-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the Village of South Barrington, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-1449, passed October 9, 2025.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 0-93-413
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE VILLAGE CODE OF SOUTH BARRINGTON, ILLINOIS
   BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
South Barrington, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
   Section 1. From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the Village
Code of the Village of South Barrington, Illinois, prepared by Sterling
Codifiers, Inc., containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general
nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction
of the governing body of the Village, shall be accepted in all courts without
question as the Official Code and Law of the Village as enacted by the
President and Board of Trustees.
   Section 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the Official Village Code is identified by the proper catchline and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, three (3) copies
of which shall be maintained in the office of the Village Clerk, certified as
to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said
office is regularly open.
   Section 3. All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official
Village Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision
and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the
President and Board of Trustees shall not serve to cause any interruption in
the continuous effectiveness of ordinances included in said Official Village
Code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond
ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall
continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a
provision of the Village Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included
in the Official Village Code.
   Section 4. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6. This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval and publication in
pamphlet form as provided by law.
   PASSED this 11th day of March, 1993.
   APPROVED this 11th day of March, 1993.
            /s/Warren R. Fuller
            President
ATTEST:
                                                      
Village Clerk
AYES:                                            
NAYS:                                           
ABSENT:                                        
PUBLICATION IN PAMPHLET FORM:
                                                      
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Village Code is hereby
declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Code of the Village.
This Village Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the SOUTH
BARRINGTON VILLAGE CODE and it is hereby published by authority of the Board of
Trustees and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation
of the City as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this Village Code by title in any legal document. (1992 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code. (1992 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the Village Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Village Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Village Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the Village Code. (1992 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Village Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages
may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by
the Village Board. The Village Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk.
Any person having in his custody an official copy of the Village Code shall
make every effort to maintain said Code current as to the most recent
ordinances codified. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or
replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him
through the office of the Village Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual
possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the
property of the Village and shall be returned to the office of the Clerk when
directed to do so by order of the Village Board. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinance
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this
Village Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Village
Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
Village; and all special ordinances. (1992 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Village Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, excepting as the Village Code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this Village Code shall be considered as amending
such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1992 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this Village Code. (1992 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this Village Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of
Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this Code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or person is
referred to in this Code by words importing the singular number only, or the
masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as
males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these
rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this Code which
contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject
matter or context may be repugnant thereto. (1992 Code)
   A.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the
Village has been changed in the content of this Code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the Village's ordinances is not
meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1992
Code; amd. Ord. 2017-1157, 7-12-2017)
   B.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other Village officer to act or perform some duty,
it shall be constructed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   C.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   D.   Joint Authority: All words giving joint authority to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
   E.   Oath: The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in
all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words
"affirm" and "affirmed". (Ord. 2017-1157, 7-12-2017)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meaning herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
BOARD, VILLAGE BOARD, OR BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The Board of Trustees of the
Village.
CODE: The Municipal Code of South Barrington, Illinois, and amendments thereto.
CORPORATE LIMITS OR VILLAGE LIMITS: The legal boundaries of the Village as
established by the official map of the Village, as amended from time to time.
COUNTY: The County of Cook, State of Illinois.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words, "of the
Village of South Barrington".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the Village of South Barrington shall be from
May 1 to April 30.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MAYOR: See definition of Village President.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one (1) year may be imposed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the Village
of South Barrington".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Any form of property other than real property, as defined
herein.
PROPERTY: Real property and personal property as defined herein.
REAL PROPERTY: Land and anything permanently affixed to such land.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
STREET: Alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public
places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such buildings or land, whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The Village of South Barrington, County of Cook, State of Illinois.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The President of the Village may be referred to as "Mayor"
or "President" of the Village.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (1992 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-1157, 7-12-2017)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Any person found to have been in violation of any of the terms and
provisions of this code shall be fined in an amount not to exceed seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). No imprisonment for failure to pay such fine, penalty
or cost shall exceed six (6) months for each offense. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
In addition to the imposition of a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), a penalty imposed for a violation of an ordinance may
include, or consist of, a requirement that the respondent do one or both of the
following:
      1.   Complete an education program, including, but not limited to,
educational classes addressing issues associated with the offenses of or
related to theft, alcohol or controlled substance abuse or offenses against the
person or public order.
      2.   Perform some reasonable public service work such as, but not limited
to, picking up litter in public parks, maintenance of public facilities,
volunteer work at nursing homes or homes for the aged, hospitals, or public
libraries.
A violation may be established by a preponderance of the evidence.
   B.   If, by the terms of an ordinance, an act that would be consistent with
the criminal laws of the state, is declared to be a misdemeanor, the penalty
therefor shall be for a period of incarceration in a penal institution other
than the penitentiary not to exceed six (6) months. The matter shall be
prosecuted under the rules of criminal procedure of the state, and the village
shall be required to establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
   C.   Any fees or costs incurred by the village with respect to attorneys or
private collection agents retained by the village president and board of
trustees to collect those amounts due and owing to the village as and for
unpaid fines or penalties, shall be charged to the offender or person who has
defaulted in the payment of a fine or penalty or any installment of a fine or a
penalty due and owing the village. Private collection agents are expressly
authorized to act on behalf of the village for the purpose of collecting any
default in payment of any fine or penalty or installment of any fine or penalty
due and owing the village. (Ord. 2011-931, 2-17-2011)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
Unless expressly provided otherwise, the penalty provided in this chapter shall
be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part
of each and every separate section.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which section to proceed. No more than one recovery shall be had against
the same person for the same offense, provided that the revocation of a license
or permit or motor vehicle seizure or impoundment shall not be considered a
recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply. (Ord. 2010-900, 2-18-2010)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1992 Code)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Meetings Of The Board
1-5-2: Presiding Officer
1-5-3: Quorum
1-5-4: Robert's Rules Of Order
1-5-5: Standing Committees
1-5-6: Establishment Of The Office Of Deputy Village President
1-5-1: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The president and board of trustees shall hold their
regular meetings at the hour of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. on the second
Thursday of each month at the village hall located at 30 South Barrington Road,
South Barrington, Illinois; provided, however, that in the event the village
board finds and determines that said facility is unsuitable for a particular
meeting or meetings, the corporate authorities may authorize the holding of a
meeting at an alternative convenient facility located within five (5) miles of
the village hall. Regular, special and committee meetings of the village board
shall not extend beyond eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. (Central time), except
closed sessions, unless authorized by a majority vote of the board of trustees
or committee members. (Ord. 0-97-523, 12-11-1997; amd. Ord. 0-99-568, 5-13-
1999)
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the village
president or by any three (3) trustees, upon written notice delivered to each
member and the president at least twenty four (24) hours prior to such meeting,
which notice shall specify the time of and agenda for such meeting. The village
clerk shall cause an affidavit showing service of such notice as herein
provided to be filed in his or her office prior to the time fixed for such
meeting; together with a statement of compliance with the notices to members of
the public and media as provided in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq.
   C.   Open To The Public: All meetings of the president and board of trustees
shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 120/1 et seq.
   D.   Disturbing Meetings: Any person disturbing any meeting of the president
and board of trustees may be evicted from the meeting upon order of the officer
presiding at said meeting; any person so disturbing such meeting shall, upon
conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction, be fined not less than one
dollar ($1.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.
(Ord. 0-92-407, 10-8-1992)
1-5-2: PRESIDING OFFICER:
The village president shall be the presiding officer at all regular and special
meetings of the board of trustees, and at all times when the board meets as a
committee of the whole. (Ord. 0-92-407, 10-8-1992)
1-5-3: QUORUM:
A quorum shall consist of not less than four (4) trustees or three (3) trustees
and the president; provided, that a lesser number may adjourn a meeting to a
later date. (Ord. 0-92-407, 10-8-1992)
1-5-4: ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER:
"Robert's Rules Of Order", where applicable, will govern the proceedings of the
president and board of trustees. (Ord. 0-92-407, 10-8-1992)
1-5-5: STANDING COMMITTEES:
   Finance Committee
   Public Safety Committee
   Building & Zoning Committee
   Public Works Committee
   Legal and Human Resource Committee
   Emergency Management Committee
Members of the Board of Trustees and village residents shall be eligible to
serve on the standing committee of the Village Board. Only members of the Board
of Trustees shall be permitted to vote at committee meetings. The Village
President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall appoint
the chairperson and other members of each standing committee. (Ord. 0-2003-681,
4-17-2003; amd. Ord. 2018-1191, 11-15-2018)
1-5-6: ESTABLISHMENT OF THE OFFICE OF DEPUTY VILLAGE PRESIDENT:
There is hereby created the office of deputy village president. The deputy
village president shall be a trustee of the village and shall be appointed by
the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and
shall exercise the powers and perform the duties as the village board
prescribes. The deputy village president shall assist the village president in
the performance of his duties, as directed by the village president.
If the village president is temporarily absent because of an incapacity to
perform his official duties, but the incapacity does not create a vacancy in
the office, the deputy village president shall serve as president pro tem
during this absence or incapacity. In addition, in the event of a vacancy in
the office of village president, the deputy village president shall serve as
president pro tem until the vacancy is filled either by an acting village
president or by election. When serving as president pro tem, the deputy village
president shall perform the duties and possess all of the rights and powers of
the village president, but shall not be entitled to vote both as president pro
tem and as trustee. For the purpose of this paragraph, "absence" shall not mean
a voluntary lack of attendance at a meeting of the corporate authorities.
In the event the village president is not present at a meeting of the village
board, but not due to a temporary disability or incapacity, the deputy village
president shall serve as temporary chairman, and in such circumstances the
deputy village president shall have only the power of a presiding officer and
the right to vote only in the capacity of a trustee. (Ord. 0-98-541, 6-11-1998)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Salary Of Clerk
1-6-2: Bonds For Village Officers
1-6-3: Deputy Village Clerk
1-6-4: Health Officer
1-6-5: Village Collector
1-6-6: Village Administrator
1-6-7: Administrative Adjudication Of Ordinance Violations
1-6-8: Village Engineer
1-6-9: Village Arborist
1-6-1: SALARY OF CLERK:
The annual salary for the village clerk shall be three thousand six hundred
dollars ($3,600.00). Said salary shall commence at the inception of the next
term of office of the village clerk. (Ord. 0-77-57, 2-9-1977)
1-6-2: BONDS FOR VILLAGE OFFICERS:
The officers of the village shall pay bonds, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of their offices, in such amounts as follows:
Village president                                           $500,000.00
Village treasurer                                           500,000.00
Village clerk                                               100,000.00
Deputy village clerk                                        100,000.00
Village collector                                           500,000.00
Village administrator                                       100,000.00
Village trustee (with check signatory powers)               100,000.00
Executive secretary                                         50,000.00
Police pension board member (with check signatory powers)   100,000.00
All other village trustees (without check signatory powers) 1,000.00
 
The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the village. (Ord. 0-2000-602, 4-
13-2000)
1-6-3: DEPUTY VILLAGE CLERK:
   A.   Creation Of Position; Appointment: There is hereby created the position
of deputy clerk. The deputy clerk shall be appointed by the village clerk.
   B.   Duties: In the absence of the village clerk, it shall be the duty of
the deputy clerk to perform all of the statutory duties of the village clerk
and such other duties as may be assigned by the village clerk or by the village
president and board of trustees. (Ord. 0-79-122, 1-11-1979)
1-6-4: HEALTH OFFICER:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of
health officer, an executive office of the village. He shall be appointed by
the president by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
   B.   Duties: The health officer shall:
      1.   Enforce all ordinances containing provisions for the protection of
the public health;
      2.   Make inspections of foodstuffs and of the premises used for storing
or selling of provisions as may be provided by ordinance;
      3.   Enforce the provisions of the landfill ordinance 1 ;
      4.   Enforce all the rules and orders of the board of health and shall
attend the meetings of said board when requested to do so by the presiding
officer;
      5.   Perform such other duties and functions as may be required by
statute or ordinance.
   C.   Reports And Recommendations: The health officer shall make such reports
to the board of trustees as may be required. He shall also make recommendations
for rulings, orders or ordinances respecting the public health whenever he is
requested to do so, or whenever he deems it advisable or necessary.
   D.   Employees: There shall be such number of employees in the health
department as shall be provided for from time to time by the village board.
Such employees shall be appointed by the village president and shall perform
their duties under the supervision of the health officer. (Ord. 0-64-50, 2-13-
1964)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 2 of this code.
1-6-5: VILLAGE COLLECTOR:
   A.   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of village
collector. Compensation for the office of village collector shall be as
determined by the president and board of trustees.
   B.   Appointment: The village collector shall be appointed by the president
with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The same person may hold
the collective office of the village clerk and the appointment office of
village collector. The village collector shall serve at the pleasure of the
president and board of trustees.
   C.   Bond: Before entering upon his duties of the office, the village
collector shall provide a bond to be approved by the village board, in the sum
of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). This bond shall be conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the duties of the office of the village collector, and
shall be conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by reason or neglect
or duty or any act of the village collector. The village shall pay the cost of
the bond.
   D.   Powers And Duties: The village collector shall have and is hereby
vested with all the rights, powers, privileges, authority and duties authorized
and provided for in the Illinois municipal code with respect to the office of
the village collector in the conduct of his office. In addition, the village
collector shall perform such other duties as the president and board of
trustees may prescribe from time to time.
   E.   Detention Of Public Money; Penalty: The village collector is prohibited
from keeping any monies collected by him in his hands, or in the hands of any
other person for personal use. Any violation of this provision shall subject
him to immediate removal from office. (Ord. 0-98-542, 6-11-1998)
1-6-6: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Position Created: There is hereby created the office of village
administrator, an executive office of the village.
   B.   Appointment, Qualifications, Removal:
      1.   Appointment: The village administrator shall be appointed by the
village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and
for such term and compensation as shall be determined by the village board.
      2.   Qualifications: The village administrator shall be chosen on the
basis of objective executive and administrative qualifications, with special
consideration to specific professional education, actual experience, and
knowledge of the accepted practice with respect to the administration of local
government and to the duties of the position specified herein.
      3.   Removal: The village president, with the advice and consent of the
village board, pursuant to applicable Illinois law, may remove the village
administrator at any time.
   C.   Duties: The village administrator shall be responsible to the president
and board of trustees. Subject to the supervision and direction from the
village president, the village administrator shall have the following duties
including any additional duties and responsibilities assigned to him/her by the
village president and board of trustees:
      1.   Administer and enforce all policy directives, administrative and
ordinances adopted by the village board; oversee the general administration of
municipal affairs except the police department; review procedures and determine
that recommendations are carried out.
      2.   Conduct the nonpolice department business affairs of the village
under the direction of the president and board of trustees.
      3.   Except with respect to the village police department, act as the
village chief administrative officer and make recommendations to the village
president regarding the hiring and removal of employees from the village
service.
      4.   Assist the finance committee of the board of trustees in preparing
the annual operating and capital improvements budgets for all municipal
departments ("budgets") for submission to the board of trustees with
appropriate communication describing the important features and in preparing
the annual appropriation ordinance.
      5.   After adoption, be responsible for the administration and
implementation of the budgets, with the exception of the police department
budget, including the preparation of periodic statements analyzing and
accounting for variations between budgeted and appropriate amounts and actual
expenditures; analyze variations in estimated and actual income.
      6.   Prepare written reports to the village board as requested and
recommend changes in village operations for more efficient operations.
      7.   Conduct inquiries related to citizen complaints concerning the
conduct of employees and the quality of municipal services except for police
services; speak before public and private groups to explain the functions and
operations of the village government.
      8.   Recommend to the village board a standard schedule of pay for each
employee of the village except with respect to the police department, including
minimum and maximum rates of pay, and recommend periodic merit, promotion and
service increases.
      9.   At the direction of the village president, prepare agendas for and
attend all meetings of the village board unless excused therefrom and take part
in the discussion of all matters coming before the board unless excused
therefrom.
      10.   Attend meetings of the village committees and commissions when
requested.
      11.   Except with respect to the village police department, administer
purchasing activities and supervise bidding procedures; and recommend major
purchases to the president and board of trustees.
      12.   Coordinate and facilitate municipal services except with respect to
the police department's services; undertake studies of the manner in which such
services are provided and make recommendations to the village board for changes
in the types and quality of such service provided.
      13.   Maintain and monitor in cooperation with the village clerk all
letters of credit and all letters of credit files.
      14.   Uphold and advance the zoning and land use policies of the village.
      15.   Perform related work to all of the above, and such other duties as
required.
   D.   Bond: The village administrator shall furnish a fidelity bond in the
amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) subject to approval by the village
board. The bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties
of the position. The premium for the bond shall be paid by the village.
   E.   Full Time Position: The village administrator shall devote his full
time and loyalty to the performance of his duties and to the village. The
village administrator alone or in combination with others shall not engage in
any other employment or any consultancy without the prior consent of the
president and board of trustees made by means of a motion passed and recorded
in the minutes of the village board.
   F.   Integrity And Professionalism: The village administrator shall not
condone any illegal activity or other activity not in the best interests of the
village and shall act in a fair and impartial manner at all times. The
administrator shall respect the rights and responsibilities of the village
board and the village's employees. The administrator alone or in combination
with others shall not use village property for personal gain or waste village
property.
   G.   Authority Of Officials: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
diminish or detract from the statutory powers and authority of the village's
elected officials. (Ord. 0-2010-918, 8-12-2010)
1-6-7: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Recitals: The recitals of the ordinance codified herein are adopted as
express findings of the corporate authorities of the village of South
Barrington and are incorporated herein by specific reference.
   B.   Purpose: The stated purpose of this section is to provide for the fair
and efficient enforcement of village of South Barrington (hereinafter referred
to as "village") ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by ordinance,
through an administrative adjudication of violations of such village ordinances
and by establishing a schedule of fines and penalties for violations, and
authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties and
enforcement of orders to correct violations.
   C.   Creation Of Code Hearing Unit; Jurisdiction: There is hereby created
within the village of South Barrington an executive unit of the municipal
government to be known as the code hearing unit, which is authorized to provide
for and operate a "system of administrative adjudication", which shall be
defined as the adjudication of any violation of any municipal ordinance of the
village of South Barrington, including, but not limited to, those actions
brought pursuant to title 5, "Police Regulations", and title 6, "Motor Vehicles
And Traffic", of this code, as well as the zoning ordinance and various
building, health, fire and property maintenance codes and regulations of the
village of South Barrington; provided that proceedings not within the statutory
or home rule authority of the village and any offense under the Illinois
vehicle code 1  or similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the
movement of vehicles, and any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the
Illinois vehicle code, shall not be subject to administrative adjudication
pursuant to the provisions of this section.
   D.   Hearing Procedures Nonexclusive: The provisions of this section shall
not preclude the village from using other methods or proceedings to enforce the
ordinances of the village of South Barrington, including, but not limited to,
the institution of any action in the circuit court of Cook County, Illinois, or
any other administrative proceeding.
   E.   Code Hearing Unit: The code hearing unit shall be composed of an
administrative hearing officer, an ordinance enforcement administrator, the
chief of police or his designee, hearing room personnel, and any other duly
appointed person or persons deemed necessary for the efficient administration
of the code hearing unit, with the following powers, duties and authority:
      1.   All adjudicatory hearings shall be presided over by an
administrative hearing officer who shall be an attorney licensed to practice
law in the state of Illinois for no less than three (3) years. The
administrative hearing officer shall be appointed by the village president with
the advice and consent of the village board. Prior to conducting administrative
adjudication hearings, the administrative hearing officers shall have
successfully completed a formal training program which includes the following:
         a.   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative
hearings which they will conduct;
         b.   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they
will adjudicate;
         c.   Observation of administrative hearings;
         d.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders; and
      2.   Administrative hearing officers are hereby authorized, empowered and
directed to:
         a.   Administer oaths;
         b.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the
existence of an ordinance violation;
         c.   Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant
testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
         d.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing, including
all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
         e.   Issue a determination, based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, of whether a code violation occurred or exists. The administrative
hearing officer's determination shall be in writing and shall include written
findings of fact, decision, and order including the fine, penalty, or other
action with which the respondent must comply; and
         f.   Impose fines, penalties, public service or education requirements
consistent with applicable village of South Barrington code provisions and
assess costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation, provided,
however, that the administrative hearing officer shall not be authorized to: 1)
impose a penalty of incarceration, 2) impose fines in excess of fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) against a single respondent, or 3) levy a total fine and
penalty in excess of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for any one violation
of a standing, parking or compliance regulation except that the total fine and
penalty for any one violation of section 11-1301.3 of the Illinois vehicle code
2  or similar provision of this code shall not exceed three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00).
         g.   The maximum monetary fine under subsection E2f of this section
shall, except as may otherwise be provided, be exclusive of costs of
enforcement or costs incurred by the village to secure compliance with the
village's ordinances and shall not be applicable to cases to enforce the
collection of any tax imposed and collected by the municipality.
         h.   Retain jurisdiction of any adjudicated matter to monitor
respondent compliance with any order issued by the hearing officer for the
respondent to perform community or public service work and/or to complete an
education program as authorized by this code.
   F.   Ordinance Enforcement Administrator: The ordinance enforcement
administrator shall either be an employee of the village or an independent
contractor or agency contracted by the village to perform such duties as
enumerated herein. The ordinance enforcement administrator is hereby
authorized, empowered and directed to:
      1.   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
vehicular standing and/or parking regulation violations, vehicle compliance
violations, vehicle license or sticker requirement violations, building, fire
and health code violations, and all other village of South Barrington ordinance
violations as may be permitted by law and directed by ordinance;
      2.   Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under
this section or as may reasonably be required to carry out the purpose of this
section;
      3.   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a
determination of liability;
      4.   Certify copies of final determinations of vehicular standing and/or
parking regulation violation liability, vehicle compliance violations, vehicle
license or sticker requirement violations, building, fire and health code
violations or any other ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this
section as may be necessary;
      5.   Certify reports to the secretary of state of Illinois concerning
initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the
provisions herein and those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5;
      6.   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the system of administrative adjudication hereby established; and
      7.   Collect unpaid fines and penalties including the use of private
collection agencies that may be retained by the village or by directing the
village attorney to file complaints in the Cook County circuit court, or by
selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on behalf of the village
in filing complaints, seeking judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and
pursuing all postjudgment remedies available under current law.
   G.   Computer Programs: The ordinance enforcement administrator is hereby
further authorized, empowered and directed to operate and maintain computer
programs for the system of administrative adjudication hereby established, on a
day to day basis, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Inputting of violation notice information;
      2.   Establishing hearing dates and notice dates;
      3.   Recording fine and penalty assessment and payments;
      4.   Issuing payment receipts;
      5.   Issuing succeeding notices of hearing dates and/or final
determinations of liability and issuing notices of impending driver's license
suspension as may be required, in accordance with the Illinois vehicle code;
      6.   Keeping accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered and fines and other penalties assessed
and paid.
   H.   Hearing Room Personnel: Hearing room personnel shall be appointed by
the chief of police and may include any police officer or auxiliary police
officer, and such persons are hereby authorized and directed to:
      1.   Maintain hearing room decorum;
      2.   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of
the circuit court;
      3.   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and
as directed by the administrative hearing officer or the ordinance enforcement
administrator.
   I.   Compensation Of Code Hearing Unit Personnel: Authorization for
compensation for each of the above stated positions shall be made by the
president and board of trustees through the annual appropriation process, and
such compensation shall be determined by the village board.
   J.   Complaints; Notices Of Hearings And Instituting Hearings:
      1.   A proceeding before an administrative hearing officer shall be
instituted upon the filing of a written sworn notice of violation or complaint
by any authorized official of the village, including police officers, community
service officers and/or code enforcement officers, and such other employees as
may be authorized to issue notices of violation of village ordinances.
      2.   Respondents shall be served with a copy of the verified sworn notice
of violation or complaint along with a notice of adjudicatory hearing in any
manner reasonably calculated to give them actual notice of the proceeding
instituted against them including:
         a.   Personal service upon a party;
         b.   Service by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the
party's address;
         c.   Service by first class mail, postage prepaid, at the party's
address; or
         d.   Service by posting a copy of the sworn pleading or complaint upon
the property where the violation is found when the respondent party is the
owner or manager of the property; and
         e.   In the case of a motor vehicle parking, standing or compliance
regulation, service of the violation notice shall be by affixing the notice to
the vehicle.
      3.   Notices of the adjudicatory hearing shall include:
         a.   The type and nature of the alleged ordinance violation to be
adjudicated;
         b.   The date, time and location of the adjudicatory hearing;
         c.   The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is
to be held; and
         d.   The penalties for failure to appear at the hearing and in the
case of a motor vehicle parking, standing or compliance violation, the amount
of the fine, any penalty for late payment and that payment of the fine shall
act as a final disposition of the violation.
   K.   Administrative Hearing Procedures: Parties shall be provided with an
opportunity for a hearing during which they may be represented by counsel,
present witnesses, and cross examine opposing witnesses. Parties may request
the administrative hearing officer to issue subpoenas to direct the attendance
and testimony of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant documents.
Hearings shall be scheduled with reasonable promptness, provided that for
hearings scheduled in all nonemergency situations, if requested by the
respondent, the respondent shall have at least fifteen (15) days after service
of process to prepare for a hearing. For purposes of this subsection,
"nonemergency situation" means any situation that does not reasonably
constitute a threat to the public interest, safety, health or welfare. If
service of the notice of violation is provided by mail, the fifteen (15) day
period shall begin to run on the day that the notice is deposited in the mail.
   L.   Rules Of Evidence Shall Not Govern: The formal and technical rules of
evidence shall not apply in an adjudicatory hearing authorized under this
section. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type
commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their
affairs.
   M.   Judicial Review: Any final decision by an administrative hearing
officer that a code violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final
determination for purposes of judicial review and that decision shall be
subject to review under the Illinois administrative review law 3 .
   N.   Enforcement Of Judgment:
      1.   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine,
other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or
the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois
administrative review law is a debt due and owing the village of South
Barrington and may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
      2.   After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of
an ordinance violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
findings, decision, and order of the administrative hearing officer may be
enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
      3.   In any case in which a respondent has failed to comply with a
judgment ordering that respondent to correct an ordinance violation or imposing
any fine or other sanction as a result of an ordinance violation, any expenses
incurred by the village to enforce the judgment entered against that defendant,
including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs, and costs related to
property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of
competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer, shall be a debt due and owing the
village of South Barrington and may be collected in accordance with applicable
law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by the administrative hearing officer
pursuant to this subsection N, the village shall provide a notice to the
respondent that states that the respondent shall appear at a hearing before the
administrative hearing officer to determine whether the defendant has failed to
comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such hearing, which
shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date that notice is served. If
notice is served by first class mail, the seven (7) day period shall begin to
run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
      4.   Upon being recorded in the manner required by article XII of the
Illinois code of civil procedure 4 , or by the uniform commercial code 5 , a
lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the
respondent in the amount of any debt due and owing the village under this
section. The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien
pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
      5.   The administrative hearing officer may set aside any judgment
entered by default and set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed by the
respondent within thirty (30) days after the issuance of the order of default,
if the administrative hearing officer determines that the respondent's failure
to appear at the hearing was for good cause, or at any time if the respondent
establishes, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the village did not
provide proper service of process. If any judgment is set aside pursuant to
this subsection, the administrative hearing officer shall have authority to
enter an order extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for any debt due
and owing the village as a result of the vacated default judgment. When a
judgment is vacated, the administrative hearing officer shall set a new date
for a hearing on the underlying violation(s).
   O.   Additional Notices For Motor Vehicle Parking, Standing And Compliance
Violations:
      1.   If the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" fails to
appear at the administrative hearing on the date indicated in the violation
notice, or upon a final determination of violation liability, the traffic
compliance administrator shall send or cause to be sent additional notices
which:
         a.   Shall be sent to registered owner or lessee of the "cited
vehicle" at the address as is recorded with the secretary of state or to the
lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address last known to the lessor of the
"cited vehicle" at the time of the lease.
      2.   All such additional notices shall be sent by first class mail,
postage prepaid, and service of additional notices shall be complete as of the
date of deposit in the United States mail.
      3.   The additional notices for motor vehicle parking, standing and
compliance violations shall be in the following sequence and shall, at a
minimum, contain the following information:
         a.   Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the "cited
vehicle" to appear at the hearing set forth in the violation notice, additional
notices shall be sent and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:
            (1)   Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation notice,
            (2)   Particular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violated, including code section and description of violation sufficient to
allow the owner or lessee to understand the offense and to prepare a defense,
            (3)   Vehicle make and state registration,
            (4)   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment,
            (5)   Notice to the registered owner or lessee of the current
status of the violation, other than paid in full,
            (6)   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which
the owner or lessee may contest the violation notice on its merits,
            (7)   That failure to either pay fine and any applicable late
payment penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date
and at the time and place specified will result in a final determination of
violation liability in the amount of the fine and late payment penalty
indicated, and
            (8)   Statement that upon the entry of a final determination of
liability for the failure to appear, or the failure to exhaust available
administrative or judicial procedures for review, any remaining unpaid fine
and/or late payment penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the village of
South Barrington.
         b.   A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation liability shall be sent following a final
determination of liability and the conclusion of administrative review and
judicial review procedures as hereinafter set forth. The notice shall state
that:
            (1)   The unpaid fine and any late penalty assessed is a debt due
and owing the village of South Barrington,
            (2)   Failure to pay the fine and any late penalty due and owing
the village within the time specified may result in the village filing a
complaint in the circuit court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a
judgment in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3(f), and
            (3)   The registered owner's driver's license may be suspended for
failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more final determinations of
liability of such violations.
   P.   Final Determination Of Liability: A final determination of vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation liability shall:
      1.   Occur following the failure to pay the total assessed fine and/or
penalty after the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation liability and the exhaustion of or
the failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter set
forth, or
      2.   Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the third
and final administrative hearing (provided proper notice has been given), the
hearing officer's determination of liability shall become final:
         a.   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside the determination
of liability, or
         b.   Upon the expiration of the period for filing petition to set
aside a final determination of liability without such filing having been made.
   Q.   Internal Review: A petition to set aside a final determination of
liability may be filed by a person owing an unpaid fine and/or penalty by
filing in the manner and subject to the restrictions as follows:
      1.   A written petition to set aside a determination of liability in the
office of the traffic compliance administrator no later than fourteen (14) days
from the date the final determination of liability is made by the hearing
officer.
      2.   The traffic compliance administrator shall act upon the petition
timely filed and render a decision thereon within fourteen (14) days of the
date filed.
      3.   The grounds for setting aside a final determination of liability
shall be limited to the following:
         a.   The person against whom the determination of liability is made
was not the owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" on the date the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation notice was issued,
         b.   The person paid the fine or penalty prior to the determination of
liability for the violation in question, or
         c.   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a
hearing.
      4.   In the event a determination of liability is set aside, the traffic
compliance administrator shall notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the
case may be:
         a.   That the determination of liability has been set aside, and
         b.   Of the date, time and place for a hearing on the merits of the
violation for which determination of liability has been set aside.
      5.   Notice of setting aside the determination of liability and the
notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail, postage prepaid, to
the address set forth on the petition to set aside the determination of
liability, and service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notices
are deposited in the United States mail.
   R.   Nonresident Procedures:
      1.   Nonresidents of the village who have been served vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation notices may contest the alleged
violation on its merits in person or may contest the validity without
personally appearing at an administrative hearing by:
         a.   Completing, in full, the "nonresident request for hearing"
section of the violation notice,
         b.   Signing the nonresident request for hearing in the space
specified in the violation notice, and acknowledging that their personal
appearance is waived and that they submit to an adjudication based upon the
notarized statement filed by them and the facts contained in the violation
notice, and
         c.   Filing the violation notice with the "request for hearing"
section fully completed with the traffic compliance administrator postmarked
within ten (10) days of issuance of the violation notice. The request shall be
deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator.
      2.   A notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice must be filed with the traffic compliance
administrator postmarked within ten (10) days of the violation notice issuance.
The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance
administrator. "Nonresident requests for hearing" received after the due date
may, at the discretion of the traffic compliance administrator, be accepted for
hearing consideration and decision.
      3.   The hearing officer shall make determination of liability or
nonliability based upon a review of the facts set forth in the notarized
statement of facts filed by the nonresident as well as the factual allegations
contained in the violation notice.
         a.   Notice of the hearing officer's determination shall be served
upon the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted and
service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is placed in the
United States mail.
         b.   All other provisions of this section shall apply equally to
residents and nonresidents.
   S.   Schedule Of Fines/Penalties:
      1.   Fines And Penalties: The fines and penalties which shall be imposed
for each violation of a vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation shall be no less than thirty dollars ($30.00) nor more than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and the fines and penalties shall be uniformly
applied for each violation, provided, however, fines and penalties for a
violation of parking in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities
(handicapped parking) shall be no less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor
more than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
      2.   Late Payment Penalty: A late payment penalty of twenty dollars
($20.00) shall be added to any violation notice that is not paid within ten
(10) days, provided, however, no such late fee penalty will be assessed against
any person requesting a hearing.
   T.   Adoption Of Certain Illinois Compiled Statutes Provisions: The village
of South Barrington adopts by reference all current and future provisions of
Illinois Compiled Statutes governing the standing, parking, or condition of
motor vehicles, for its enforcement and adjudication within the corporate
boundaries of the village and in those areas subject to off street parking
agreements. (Ord. 2010-901, 2-18-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
2 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3.
3 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
4 2. 735 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq.
5 3. 810 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
1-6-8: VILLAGE ENGINEER:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created and established
the office of village engineer who shall be appointed by the village president,
by and with the consent of the board of trustees.
   B.   Qualifications: Any person employed by the village may act as the
village engineer as long as such person is registered under the provisions of
the Illinois professional engineering practice act 1 .
   C.   Duties: Any person acting in the capacity of village engineer shall
prepare or approve all plans, blueprints and specifications of public
improvements made or caused to be made by the village. (Ord. 0-2015-1051, 3-4-
2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.
1-6-9: VILLAGE ARBORIST:
   A.   Position Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the position of
Village Arborist who shall be appointed by the Village President, by and with
the consent of the Board of Trustees.
   B.   Duties: Any person acting in the capacity of Village Arborist shall be
responsible and subject to the supervision of the Village President and Board
of Trustees, and shall perform the following duties:
      1.   The Village Arborist shall advise on the village street tree
inventory, tree planting, tree removal, beautification projects, and
educational projects.
      2.   The Village Arborist shall provide advice and recommendations on
Village Ordinances pertaining to trees.
      3.   The Village Arborist shall advise on whatever acts are necessary,
including the planting and maintenance of trees, the removal of undesirable
trees, shrubs, and other plants located on Village-owned property, to insure
that all trees, shrubs, and other plants located on Village-owned property
conform with the Village plans.
      4.   The Village Arborist shall advise on public information and
education that will encourage the planting, maintenance, or removal of trees,
shrubs, and other plants on private property. (Ord. 2019-1198, 4-11-2019)
CHAPTER 7
DISCONNECTION OF PROPERTY FROM VILLAGE
SECTION:
1-7-1: Adoption Of Preamble
1-7-2: Disconnection Procedure
1-7-1: ADOPTION OF PREAMBLE:
The President and Board of Trustees find and believe the recitations set forth
in Ordinance 0-91-390 to be a true summary of the facts and a rational basis
for the legislative actions contained within this Chapter and incorporate those
recitations into this Chapter. (Ord. 0-91-390, 8-8-1991)
1-7-2: DISCONNECTION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Purpose: The provisions of this Chapter shall supersede the
disconnection provisions of sections
7-3-4 and 7-3-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code 1  and shall constitute the sole
and exclusive process and standards for disconnection of territory from the
corporate limits of the Village.
   B.   Eligibility: In order to be eligible to apply for disconnection from
the Village, in addition to the standards hereinafter provided, the territory
to be disconnected shall:
      1.   Contain twenty (20) or more acres, except that the Village Board of
Trustees may initiate disconnection of territory that is less than twenty (20)
acres in size;
      2.   Be located on the border of the Village; and
      3.   If disconnected, not result in the functional or geographic
isolation of any part of the Village from the remainder of the Village.
   C.   Petition:
      1.   Generally: One or more owners of real property who wish to
disconnect his or their property from the Village shall file with the Village
Clerk a petition (using a form to be provided by the Village Clerk) and such
accompanying documentation as may be necessary to demonstrate compliance with
the standards and requirements set forth herein.
      2.   Content: A petition for disconnection shall contain such information
as may be required from time to time by the Village's Plan Commission/Zoning
Board of Appeals, but in all instances shall include the following:
         a.   Plat of disconnection, with surveyor's calculation of acreage
involved.
         b.   Information as to Ownership:
            (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the legal owner,
beneficial owner or owners, and any persons enjoying options or rights to
acquire the property and a statement of last instrument conveying title to, or
beneficial ownership of, or options with respect to, each parcel of property
involved in the petition, giving grantor, grantee, date and land records
involved.
            (2)   List of all existing legal rights of way or easements
affecting the property.
            (3)   Listing of all existing covenants on the property, if any.
         c.   Location and description of territory, including township,
section number, subdivision (if any), street boundaries, existing zoning, and
current use(s).
         d.   Complete discussion of the reason for disconnection, including
proposed or anticipated use of the territory.
         e.   Inventory and analysis of the territory and surrounding
properties, for a distance of not less than one thousand feet (1,000') ("the
inventoried area). To the extent that they relate to the territory, such
inventory and analysis shall consider: topography; soils and geology;
waterways, wetlands and drainage; vegetation; wildlife; historic features;
adjacent land uses and zoning; utilities and related easements; riding trails,
roadways and traffic circulation; and other information critical to an
understanding of the capability of the territory to accommodate development.
      3.   Quantity: The petitioner shall submit to the Village Clerk thirty
(30) copies of the petition form and all supporting materials (together,
"petition").
   D.   Fees: A petition shall be accompanied by 1) a filing fee in the amount
of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus an additional one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each five (5) acres or portion thereof beyond ten (10) acres,
except that the maximum filing fee shall not exceed two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) for territory one hundred (100) acres or less in size and
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for territory over one hundred (100) acres
plus 2) an initial retainer in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) to cover all costs incurred by the Village in providing notice as
required herein and in reviewing the petition, including (but not limited to)
the fees and costs of experts in planning, traffic engineering, storm water
drainage, wetlands, limnology, real estate appraisal and surveying and all
legal and engineering fees and costs ("review expenses"). Credit toward said
review expenses shall be given for the filing fee. Upon demand of the Village
Clerk at any time after payments are made for review expenses, the petitioner
shall deposit such additional funds as may be necessary to maintain on account
with the Village an amount equal to the full amount of the initial retain. No
petition shall be placed on an agenda for action by the Board of Trustees
unless the full amount of the retainer is on file.
   E.   Preliminary Determination of Eligibility and Completeness of Petition:
      1.   Within ten (10) days after receipt of a petition, the Village Clerk
shall determine whether 1) the eligibility requirements of subsection B above,
appear to be met, 2) the petition is complete, and 3) the appropriate fees are
paid.
      2.   If the eligibility requirements do not appear to be met or the
petition is incomplete, the Village Clerk shall return the petition to the
petitioner with a letter specifying the deficiency. A determination that the
eligibility requirements do not appear to have been met may be appealed to the
Board of Trustees by letter from the petitioner received by the Village Clerk
at least five (5) days before its next regularly scheduled meeting.
      3.   If the eligibility requirements appear to be met, the petition is
complete and the appropriate fees are paid, the Village Clerk shall refer the
petition to staff for review in accordance with the terms of this Section and
to the Village's Police Chief and the chairman of the Village's E-911 Emergency
Telephone System Board, shall place the item on the agenda for public hearing
at the next regular meeting of the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, and
shall provide notice of the public hearing as required hereinbelow.
   F.   Notice:
      1.   Published Notice: The Village Clerk shall, at the petitioner's
expense, provide that notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall
be published at least once, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing (or the first thereof), in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village.
      2.   Mailed Notice: The petitioner shall give at least fifteen (15) days'
prior written notice of the time and place of the public hearing by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to: (a) all owners of property within two
hundred feet (200') of the boundaries of the territory proposed for
disconnection; and (b) the trustees or other officers of: the fire protection
district in which it is located, the school district in which it is located,
the library district in which it is located, the park district in which it is
located, and the planning director and sheriff of the county in which it is
located.
      3.   Posted Notice: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public
hearing, the petitioner shall post notice of the hearing on each road or street
frontage of the territory proposed for disonnection.
   G.   Hearing on Petition: The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall
hold a public hearing on the petition at such time and place within the Village
as shall have been stated in the published, mailed and posted notices. The
hearing shall begin with presentation of the petitioner's case, followed by
presentation of staff review, questions from the Plan Commission/Zoning Board
of Appeals members, and questions and comments from other governmental entities
and the public.
   H.   Burden of Proof: The petitioner shall have the burden of proving
compliance with the requirements set forth herein.
   I.   Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals; Findings of Fact and
Recommendations: Within a reasonable time after the close of the hearing on the
petition, the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall make written
findings of fact and shall submit same together with its recommendation to the
Board of Trustees. The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeal's findings shall
be based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect
to the following matters:
      1.   The eligibility requirements set forth in subsection B above;
      2.   Conformity of the anticipated future use of the disconnected
territory with the Village's Comprehensive Plan 2  and, in particular, with the
Plan's goals for the planning area in which the territory is located and
adjacent planning areas within one thousand feet (1,000') of the boundary of
the territory;
      3.   The impact of the proposed disconnection and anticipated future use
of the territory on: (a) adjacent land uses and zoning; (b) the character of
that area of the Village and the Village as a whole; and (c) waterways,
wetlands and drainage, wildlife, natural areas, historic features, water
supply, roadways and traffic circulation, utilities and related easements and
riding trails, each (i) on-site, (ii) off-site within the inventoried area, and
(iii) if relevant, outside of the inventoried area;
      4.   The impact of the proposed disconnection and anticipated future use
of the territory on the school district, the park district, the library
district and the fire protection district;
      5.   The suitability of the soils, geology and topography of the
territory for septic and other wastewater management systems;
      6.   The impact of the proposed disconnection and anticipated future use
of the territory on provision of police and emergency response services by the
Village; and
      7.   Such other matters as may be deemed relevant to a particular
application. The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall not recommend
the granting of a petition for disconnection unless it finds that the
disconnection and anticipated future use of the territory is in the public
interest and is not solely for the interest of the petitioner. The Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend the imposition of such
conditions and restrictions upon the territory to be disconnected as it may
deem necessary to protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the
Village residents, including, but not limited to, the requirement of
recordation of restrictive covenants regarding future use, density of
development, required bufferyards, and conservation easements.
   J.   Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals (PC/ZBA); Findings of Fact and
Recommendations: Within a reasonable time after the closing of the hearing on
the petition, the PC/ZBA shall make written findings of fact and shall submit
same together with its recommendation to the Board of Trustees. The PC/ZBA's
findings shall be based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case
with respect to the following matters:
      1.   The existing uses and zoning of the territory proposed for
disconnection and all other property within the inventoried area (as previously
defined);
      2.   The suitability of the territory, if disconnected, for the
anticipated use;
      3.   The length of time the territory has been vacant as zoned,
considered in the context of development in the Village as a whole and in the
vicinity of the territory (both within and outside the Village);
      4.   The trend of development in the Village as a whole and in the
general area of the territory proposed for disconnection;
      5.   The trend of development outside of the Village in the general area
of the territory proposed for disconnection;
      6.   The need for the anticipated use in South Barrington;
      7.   The extent to which property values in the Village may be diminished
by the disconnection and anticipated future use of the territory;
      8.   The extent to which such diminution property values promotes the
public health, safety, morals or general welfare of the residents of the
Village;
      9.   The relative gain to the residents of South Barrington as compared
to any hardship to the property owner(s); and
      10.   Such other matters as may be deemed relevant to a particular
application. The PC/ZBA shall not recommend the granting of a petition for
disconnection unless it finds that such disconnection and anticipated future
use of the territory is in the public interest and is not solely for the
interest of the petitioner. The PC/ZBA may recommend the imposition of such
conditions and restrictions upon the territory to be disconnected as it may
deem necessary to protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the
Village residents, including, but not limited to, the requirement of
recordation of restrictive covenants regarding future use, density of
development, required bufferyards, and conservation easements.
   K.   Action by the Board of Trustees:
      1.   The Board of Trustees shall not act upon a petition for
disconnection until it shall have received a written report and recommendation
from the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals on the proposed disconnection
and a response from the Illinois Department of Conservation pursuant to the
Endangered and Threatened Species Consultation process.
      2.   In cases in which the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
recommends denial of a petition for disconnection, or in case of a written
protest against a proposed disconnection signed and acknowledged by the owners
of twenty percent (20%) or more of the property adjacent to the territory
proposed to be disconnected is filed with the Village Clerk, such petition
shall not be granted except by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all
members of the Board of Trustees.
      3.   In granting a petition for disconnection, the Board of Trustees may
impose such conditions and restrictions upon the territory to be disconnected
as it may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety, morals and
welfare of its residents, including, but not limited to, the requirement of
recordation of restrictive covenants regarding future use, density of
development, required bufferyards and conservation easements.
      4.   Action by the Board of Trustees on a petition for disconnection
shall be by resolution. Such resolution, by its terms, shall not take effect
until and unless all review fees incurred by the Village have been reimbursed
by the petitioner and all conditions to approval (such as recording of
restrictive covenants) have been fulfilled to the satisfaction of the Village's
legal counsel.
   L.   Appeal to Circuit Court: Actions against the Village pertaining to the
validity of this Chapter or any part thereof, or any application thereof, shall
be brought in the county in which the Village's principal office is located.
(Ord. 0-91-390, 8-8-91)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/7-3-4 and 5/7-3-6.
2 1. See Title 9, Chapter 1 of this Code.
CHAPTER 8
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Purpose
1-8-2: Policy
1-8-3: Persons Affected
1-8-4: Definitions
1-8-5: Prohibited Political Activities
1-8-6: Gift Ban
1-8-7: Reserved
1-8-8: Reserved
1-8-9: Reserved
1-8-10: Disclosure Statements
1-8-11: Ethics Officer
1-8-12: Ethics Commission
1-8-13: Penalties
1-8-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Public trust is essential for an effective democratic government.
Public trust is developed when public officials serve their government with
integrity and honesty and perform their duties equitably and in the public
interest, with accountability to the people. Public confidence requires that
governmental decisions and policy be made and carried out in the proper
channels of the governmental structure and that public office not be used for
personal gain.
   B.   For the purpose of protecting the integrity of the government and
public service, both the people and those serving them should be guided by
objective standards, as well as a system for interpreting and requiring
adherence to these standards. (Ord. 2004-713, 5-13-2004)
1-8-2: POLICY:
   A.   It is the policy of the village that its elected and appointed
officials, paid or unpaid, perform their duties for the benefit of the citizens
of the village. All public officials of the village shall observe in their
official acts the highest ethical standards and conduct the affairs of the
village with integrity, honesty and impartiality, without allowing the
opportunity for personal gain to influence their decisions or actions or to
interfere with serving the public interest. They shall act within the authority
of their position and for the purposes intended.
   B.   All public officials and employees of the village shall give all
persons an equal opportunity to express and represent their interests.
   C.   All public officials of the village shall uphold the constitution of
the United States of America and the constitution of the state of Illinois, and
shall carry out, impartially, the laws of the nation, state and village, thus
fostering respect for government. (Ord. 2004-713, 5-13-2004)
1-8-3: PERSONS AFFECTED:
This chapter shall apply to any "official", "officer", and "employee" of the
village as defined in this chapter and to any candidate seeking an office with
the village or in the process of being appointed to any office in the village.
(Ord. 2004-713, 5-13-2004)
1-8-4: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited
to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as
a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does
not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated
time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is
executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of
the election code 3 .
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village of South Barrington, whether on a
full time or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are
subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material
details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent
contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of South Barrington.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment, b) service credit towards pension benefits, and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office
created by statute or ordinance and members or commissioners of any board,
commission or other agency created by the corporate authority of the village or
as a matter of law, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
Political activity includes:
   A.   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
   B.   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value or intended as a campaign contribution.
   D.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
   K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
   N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 1 , but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   A.   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   B.   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   C.   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
   D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. 2004-
713, 5-13-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-8-5: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any political
activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein.
   B.   No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or
resources of the village of South Barrington in connection with any political
activity.
   C.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require another
officer or employee to perform any political activity: 1) as part of that
officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment, or 3) during
any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
   D.   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being
awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary
adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise,
nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any
benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   E.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   F.   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 2004-713, 5-13-
2004)
1-8-6: GIFT BAN:
   A.   Solicitation Or Acceptance Of Gift Prohibited: Except as permitted by
this chapter, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family
member living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as
"recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any
"prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law
or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift
that violates this section.
   B.   Exceptions: Subsection A of this section is not applicable to the
following:
      1.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
      2.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
      3.   Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code
or b) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
      4.   Educational materials and missions.
      5.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
      6.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
      7.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: a) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; b)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and c) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
      8.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or b) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food
or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
      9.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
      10.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of
this section, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
      11.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
      12.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other.
   C.   Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate
this chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift
from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to
its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter
amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 2004-713, 5-13-2004)
1-8-7: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2004-713, 5-13-2004)
1-8-8: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2004-713, 5-13-2004)
1-8-9: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2004-713, 5-13-2004)
1-8-10: DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS:
   A.   Filing Disclosure Statements Mandatory: All officers, officials,
candidates for elective or appointive office and employees shall file with the
village clerk a disclosure statement, which shall be in the following form:
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
I,                              , state as follows:
Initials:
1.              I have been elected or appointed to public office by the
Village of South Barrington.
OR
                I intend to run for election or be appointed to the public
office of the Village of South Barrington, Illinois.
   OR
                I have been retained or employed or desire to be retained or
employed by the Village of South Barrington.
   2.              I have received from the Village Clerk a copy of the Code of
Ethics of the Village as set forth in Chapter 8 of Title 1 of the Village Code
of the Village of South Barrington, as amended from time to time.
   3.              I understand that I have an obligation to read the Code of
Ethics and the Code of Conduct of the Village.
   4.              I understand that I am subject to the provisions of the Code
of Ethics of the Village.
   5.              I have read and l understand the Code of Ethics of the
Village of South Barrington and, to the best of my knowledge, I am in
compliance with and not in violation of the provisions of said Code:
                EXCEPT AS FOLLOWS:
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                   NO EXCEPTIONS.
   6.              I acknowledge and agree that upon any change of condition of
any aspect of my disclosure, I am required to submit an amended Disclosure
Statement within seven (7) days of any such change or event.
   7.              I hereby certify that I have made all disclosures required
by the Code of Ethics of the Village.
                EXCEPT AS FOLLOWS:
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                   NO EXCEPTIONS.
                                                                                                
   Signature of Official Officer, Candidate, or Employee   Date
It is a violation of the Code of Ethics of the Village to file a false,
misleading or inaccurate Disclosure Statement or to fail to file such a
Statement or Amended Statement.
   B.   Filing Disclosure Statements: Disclosure statements shall be filed with
the village clerk according to the following schedule:
Each official, officer and employee shall:
      1.   Annually file a disclosure statement no later than March 15 of each
year.
      2.   Within ten (10) days prior to appointment or hiring of a person to
serve as an official or employee.
      3.   Within twenty one (21) days after the filing of a petition for
election to any office of the village.
      4.   Each official, officer and employee is required to submit an amended
disclosure statement with the village within seven (7) days of any change of
status.
The village clerk shall provide each person filing a disclosure statement with
a written receipt indicating the date on which the disclosure statement was
filed.
   C.   Availability; Copies Of Disclosure Statement: Pursuant to the terms and
conditions of the freedom of information act and upon written application by
any requesting party, all disclosure statements filed pursuant to this chapter
shall be available to the public. (Ord. 2004-713, 5-13-2004)
1-8-11: ETHICS OFFICER:
   A.   The village president, with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees, shall designate an ethics officer for the village of South
Barrington. The duties of the ethics officer may be delegated to an officer or
employee of the village of South Barrington.
   B.   The ethics officer shall provide guidance to the officers and employees
of the village of South Barrington concerning compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and state ethics laws. The ethics officer shall perform such other
duties as may be delegated by the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 2004-
713, 5-13-2004)
1-8-12: ETHICS COMMISSION:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created a commission to be known as the
ethics commission of the village of South Barrington. The commission shall be
comprised of five (5) members appointed by the village president with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees. No person shall be appointed as a
member of the commission who is related, either by blood or by marriage up to
the degree of first cousin, to any elected officer of the village of South
Barrington.
   B.   Term Or Appointment: Commissioners shall be appointed to two (2) year
terms. Commissioners may be reappointed to serve subsequent terms.
   C.   Chairperson, Meetings, Quorum: The commissioners shall choose a
chairperson from their number. Meetings shall be held at the call of the
chairperson or any two (2) commissioners. A quorum shall consist of three (3)
commissioners, and official action by the commission shall require the
affirmative vote of three (3) members.
   D.   Removal Of Commissioners, Vacancy: The village president of South
Barrington, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, may remove a
commissioner in case of incompetency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office
after service on the commissioner by certified mail, return receipt requested,
of a copy of the written charges against the commissioner and after providing
an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel upon not less than ten (10)
days' notice. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointments.
   E.   Powers And Duties: The commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
      1.   To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its
duties and the exercise of its powers.
      2.   Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to
investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for
disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with section
1-8-13 of this chapter and refer violations of section
1-8-5,
1-8-6, or
1-8-10 of this chapter to the appropriate attorney for prosecution. The
commission shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a written complaint
alleging a violation of this chapter and not upon its own prerogative.
      3.   To receive information from the public pertaining to its
investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons
who may have violated the provisions of this chapter.
      4.   To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production
of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all
officers and employees of the village of South Barrington to cooperate with the
commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to
cooperate with requests by the commission shall constitute grounds for
discipline or discharge.
      5.   The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters
clearly within the purview of this chapter.
   F.   Complaint Procedures:
      1.   Complaints alleging a violation of this chapter shall be filed with
the ethics commission.
      2.   Within three (3) business days after the receipt of a complaint, the
commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of
the complaint. The commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant
within three (3) business days after receipt by the commission. The notices to
the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time,
and place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to
establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
      3.   Upon not less than forty eight (48) hours' public notice, the
commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the
complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this chapter, to
determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by
the complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the
extent authorized by the open meetings act. The commission shall issue notice
to the complainant and the respondent of the commission's ruling on the
sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed
within seven (7) business days after receiving the complaint.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section
1-8-5 of this chapter and there is a determination of probable cause, then the
commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled
within four (4) weeks after the complaint's receipt. Alternatively, the
commission may elect to notify in writing the attorney designated by the
corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and request that the complaint
be adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege
a violation or if there is a determination of no probable cause, then the
commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be
made public.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section
1-8-6 or
1-8-10 of this chapter, then the commission shall notify in writing the
attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and
shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in
the custody of the commission concerning the alleged violation.
      4.   On the scheduled date and upon at least forty eight (48) hours'
public notice of the meeting, the commission shall conduct a hearing on the
complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and
evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the
open meetings act.
      5.   Within thirty (30) days after the date the hearing or any recessed
hearing is concluded, the commission shall either: a) dismiss the complaint or
b) issue a recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the
village administrator, or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. The
particular findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any
fine imposed shall be a matter of public information.
      6.   If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file a
written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven (7) business
days after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a
fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the
recommendation or fine. Within eight (8) days after receiving the demand, the
commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at least forty
eight (48) hours' public notice of the hearing and allow both parties the
opportunity to present testimony and evidence. Within seven (7) days
thereafter, the commission shall publicly issue a final recommendation to the
alleged violator and to the village administrator or impose a fine upon the
violator, or both.
      7.   If a complaint is filed during the sixty (60) days preceding the
date of any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the commission
shall render its decision as required under subsection F5 of this section
within seven (7) days after the complaint is filed, and, if a complaint is
filed, during the seven (7) days preceding that election, the commission shall
render such decision before the date of that election, if possible.
      8.   The commission may fine any person who intentionally violates any
provision of section
1-8-5 of this chapter in an amount of not less than one thousand one dollars
($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The commission
may fine any person who knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a
violation of this chapter in an amount of not less than one thousand one
dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The
commission may recommend any appropriate discipline up to and including
discharge.
      9.   A complaint alleging the violation of this section must be filed
within one year after the alleged violation. (Ord. 2004-713, 5-13-2004)
1-8-13: PENALTIES:
   A.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-8-5 of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three
hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   B.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-8-6 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
   C.   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement authorities, the
state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a
term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a
period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined
in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   D.   A violation of section
1-8-5 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney
for the village of South Barrington by filing in the circuit court an
information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall
be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall
require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable
doubt.
   E.   A violation of section
1-8-6 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an
attorney for the village of South Barrington, or, by the ethics commission
through the designated administrative procedure.
   F.   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of section
1-8-5,
1-8-6 or
1-8-10 of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge. (Ord. 2004-713,
5-13-2004)
CHAPTER 9
PURCHASING AUTHORITY
SECTION:
1-9-1: Village President
1-9-2: Village Administrator
1-9-3: Chief Of Police
1-9-1: VILLAGE PRESIDENT:
The village president shall have the authority to make purchases of material,
equipment, supplies or other personal property, to engage the services of
contractors, or to make any other expenditures authorized by the annual
appropriation ordinance then in effect, in an amount up to fifteen thousand
dollars ($15,000.00), without prior approval of the board of trustees. (Ord. 0-
2015-1089, 9-10-2015)
1-9-2: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
The village administrator shall have the authority to make purchases of
material, equipment, supplies or other personal property, to engage the
services of contractors, or to make any other expenditures authorized by the
annual appropriation ordinance then in effect, in an amount up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), without prior approval of the board of trustees. (Ord. 0-
2015-1089, 9-10-2015)
1-9-3: CHIEF OF POLICE:
The chief of police shall have the authority to make purchases of material,
equipment, supplies or other personal property, to engage the services of
contractors, or to make any other expenditures authorized by the annual
appropriation ordinance then in effect, in an amount up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), without prior approval of the board of trustees. (Ord. 0-2015-
1089, 9-10-2015)
CHAPTER 10
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE TO DETERMINE ELIGIBILITY UNDER THE PUBLIC SAFETY
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT
SECTION:
1-10-1: Purpose
1-10-2: Policy And Procedure For Administering Applications For PSEBA Benefits
1-10-3: Policy And Procedure For Hearings For PSEBA Benefits
1-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method of
determining the eligibility of an employee for the benefits enumerated under
the public safety employee benefits act, 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/
1 et seq. ("PSEBA"), through an administrative process including, if necessary,
an administrative hearing. All benefits provided under this chapter will be
consistent with PSEBA. (Ord. 2015-1095, 11-12-2015)
1-10-2: POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTERING APPLICATIONS FOR PSEBA BENEFITS:
   A.   Application For PSEBA Benefits: The village shall maintain a PSEBA
benefit application form which shall be the standard form required for a PSEBA
benefit applicant (hereinafter the "applicant") to request benefits under
PSEBA. The form shall be completed pursuant to the instructions on the
application and delivered to the village president for review and
consideration. The applicant shall provide, along with the application and the
required information therein, any medical records regarding the injury, any
decisions by a governing public safety pension board and supporting
documentation related to such pension board decisions, and any additional
pertinent documentation that the applicant wants to have considered or that is
requested by the village.
The PSEBA benefit application form must be signed, sworn and notarized to
certify the truthfulness of the content of the information contained in the
completed application. The application shall also include a PSEBA medical
authorization release and a PSEBA general information release, executed and
notarized by the applicant. Both the PSEBA medical release and the PSEBA
general information release authorize the collection of information related to
the incident that qualifies the applicant for benefits under PSEBA, including,
but not limited to, the disability pension proceedings, worker's compensation
records and medical records.
The village president's review of the PSEBA benefit application will not occur
until the application is complete including the completion of the PSEBA medical
authorization release and a PSEBA general information release.
   B.   Application Review Process:
      1.   When the village president receives a complete and executed PSEBA
benefit application, the village president shall review the application and
engage in such additional fact finding and/or investigation as may be deemed
necessary or appropriate to evaluate the application, including, but not
limited to, the review of public safety pension board hearing transcripts and
decisions, workers' compensation documentation and independent medical
examinations.
      2.   If additional fact finding and/or investigation is determined to be
necessary, the applicant shall fully cooperate. If the applicant refuses or
otherwise fails to fully cooperate, then a written notice shall be sent to the
applicant reiterating the duty of full cooperation in the fact finding and/or
investigation process. If the applicant fails to cooperate as requested within
twenty one (21) calendar days after service of such notice, then the
application for PSEBA benefits shall be deemed withdrawn.
      3.   The village president shall make a written recommendation to the
board of trustees of the village, with a copy to the applicant, within forty
five (45) calendar days after the later of the following:
         a.   The submission of all documentation relevant to the PSEBA benefit
application; or
         b.   The completion of such additional fact finding or investigation
as deemed necessary or appropriate by the village president (as stated in
subsection B2 of this section).
The village president's written recommendation shall include the reasons for
the recommendation and shall state that:
         a.   The applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA; or
         b.   A hearing should be convened in order to determine whether or not
the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA.
      4.   The village president's recommendation shall be presented to the
board of trustees at the next regularly scheduled village board meeting
(subject to the notice provisions of the open meetings act). At that meeting,
the village president and board of trustees shall:
         a.   Make the determination, by resolution, that the applicant is
eligible for benefits under PSEBA; or
         b.   Make the determination, by motion, that a hearing as set forth in
subsection 1-10-3C of this chapter should be convened in order to determine
whether or not the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. (Ord. 2015-
1095, 11-12-2015)
1-10-3: POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR HEARINGS FOR PSEBA BENEFITS:
If the village president and board of trustees make the determination that a
hearing should be convened, the village board shall convene a hearing which
shall be overseen by a hearing officer, appointed by the village president as
set forth in subsection B of this section, whose power and authority and
limitations are as follows:
   A.   Power Of The Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall have all of the
powers granted to him or her under common law relative to the conduct of an
administrative hearing including the power to:
      1.   Preside over the administrative hearing;
      2.   Administer oaths;
      3.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under PSEBA;
      4.   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production
of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
      5.   Rule upon objections presented at the administrative hearing;
      6.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
in evidence introduced at the hearing;
      7.   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a
written finding of facts, decision and order.
   B.   Hearing Officer: The village president is authorized to appoint a
hearing officer for each administrative hearing held under this chapter. A
hearing officer must be an attorney who has been licensed to practice law in
Illinois for at least three (3) years. In making the appointment, the village
president must consider the candidate's ability to perform the requirements of
a hearing officer and his or her knowledge and experience in administrative
practice, the rules of evidence, civil procedure, and laws concerning PSEBA and
other benefits for public safety employees.
   C.   Administrative Hearing: An administrative hearing shall be held, under
the guidelines set forth below, to adjudicate and determine whether the
applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. If the applicant is found
eligible, the benefits shall be consistent with PSEBA.
      1.   Time And Date: The village shall notify the applicant of the
administrative hearing pursuant to a written notice served upon the applicant
via U.S. mail, at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing.
Such notice will indicate the date, time and place that the hearing will be
held, as established by the village, along with the name and contact
information of the hearing officer who will preside at the hearing. If the
applicant cannot attend said hearing on the date or time as indicated in the
notice, the applicant must contact the hearing officer within seven (7)
business days of service of the notice to coordinate an alternative hearing
date. Failure to coordinate an alternative date or appear at the scheduled
hearing may result in the denial of PSEBA benefits.
      2.   Record: All hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter
who shall make a transcript of all proceedings.
      3.   Procedures: The village, by the village president or his or her
designee, and the applicant shall be parties to the administrative proceedings
and each shall be entitled to representation by counsel at the administrative
hearing. Each party may present witnesses, may present testimony and documents,
may cross examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance of subpoenas
to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant
documents.
      4.   Evidence: The rules of evidence as set forth in the Illinois code of
evidence shall apply.
      5.   Determination: Within ninety (90) days from the conclusion of the
administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a determination of
whether the petitioning applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. This
determination shall be in writing and shall include a written finding of facts,
decision and order. The determination by the hearing officer shall constitute a
final administrative determination for the purpose of judicial review under the
common law writ of certiorari.
      6.   Acknowledgment Of Determination: The hearing officer's determination
shall be presented to the board of trustees at the next regularly scheduled
village board meeting (subject to the notice provisions of the open meetings
act). At that meeting, the village president and board of trustees shall:
         a.   Accept the hearing officer's determination, by resolution; or
         b.   Decide, by motion, to timely appeal the hearing officer's
determination to the appropriate circuit court for judicial review regarding
whether or not the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. Once the
court (either the circuit court or any subsequent appellate court if the matter
is appealed further by either party) makes a final decision regarding whether
or not the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA, the village board
shall, by resolution, acknowledge and accept the court's final decision.
      7.   Burden Of Proof: The applicant shall have the obligation and burden
of proof to establish that the applicant is qualified to receive PSEBA
benefits.
      8.   Administrative Records: All records pertaining to the administrative
process will be held within the office of the village treasurer, in a file in
the public safety employee's name, separate from the employee's personnel file.
(Ord. 2015-1095, 11-12-2015)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLAN COMMISSION/ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Created; Composition
2-1-2: Appointments And Term Of Office; Vacancies
2-1-3: Organization
2-1-4: Powers And Duties
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED; COMPOSITION:
A Plan Commission is hereby created and established for the Village. Such
Commission shall consist of seven (7) members. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
The Plan Commission shall act and is hereby constituted as the Board of Appeals
of the Village, and said Commission shall hereafter be designated as the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals.
In addition to its duties as the Plan Commission, the Plan Commission, in its
capacity as the Board of Appeals, shall have such duties and powers as are
granted to it by the Zoning Ordinance of the Village and by such other
ordinances as may be adopted by the President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 0-
92-408, 10-8-1992; 1992 Code)
2-1-2: APPOINTMENTS AND TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
The President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees,
shall appoint seven (7) members of the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals.
When first appointed, the members of the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals shall serve respectively for the following terms: two (2) for one year,
two (2) for two (2) years, and three (3) for three (3) years, or until their
respective successors have been duly appointed and qualified. The successor to
each member so appointed shall serve for a term of three (3) years, or until
his successor has been duly appointed and qualified. Vacancies upon the Board
shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become
vacant, in the manner herein provided for the appointment of such members. All
terms of office shall be effective as of February 1. (Ord. 0-98-527, 1-8-1998)
2-1-3: ORGANIZATION:
Upon the appointment of the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals and within
a reasonable time thereafter, the President shall designate one of the number
to serve as chairman. At the first meeting, the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals shall adopt such reasonable rules and regulations of the governing
thereof. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977; 1992 Code)
2-1-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The plan commission/zoning board of appeals shall have duties and powers as
follows:
   A.   To prepare and recommend to the board of trustees a comprehensive plan
of public improvements looking to the present and future development of the
village 1 . Such plan, after its adoption by the board of trustees, shall be
known as the official plan of the village. The commission/board may thereafter
from time to time recommend any changes in such official plan. Such plan may
include reasonable requirements in reference to streets, alleys and public
grounds in unsubdivided lands within the corporate limits and in contiguous
territory outside of the distant not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles
from such limits and not included in any city, village or incorporated town;
such requirements to be effective whenever such lands shall be subdivided after
the adoption of such plan.
   B.   To prepare and recommend to the board of trustees from time to time
plans for specific improvements in pursuance of such official plan.
   C.   To give aid to the officials of the village charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further the
making of such improvements and generally to promote the realization of the
official plan.
   D.   To review the off street parking space plans and site layouts and other
duties as required in the zoning ordinance.
   E.   To give due notice and hold public meetings and hearings for the review
and recommendation of village ordinances as may be directed by the village
president and board of trustees.
   F.   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by this
chapter and by such other ordinances as may be conferred by the board of
trustees on the plan commission/zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-
1977; amd. 1992 Code)
   G.   To make recommendations for variation, to the village board, from
section
8-4-5 of this code regarding swimming pools provided such variation will not
adversely affect any adjoining property. All such hearings for variation shall
comply with the provisions and procedures of section
11-3 of the village zoning code. (Ord. 2006-765, 4-13-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 9 of this Code.
CHAPTER 2
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Commission Created; Composition; Appointment And Term
2-2-2: Recommendations By Commission
2-2-1: COMMISSION CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
There is hereby created an Electrical Commission consisting of six (6) members
appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. The Chief Electrical Inspector shall be a member and ex officio
chairman of such Commission. Of the other five (5) members, one shall be a
registered professional engineer, one an electrical contractor, one a
journeyman electrician, one a representative of an inspection bureau maintained
by the Fire Underwriters (or, if no such representative resides in the Village,
then the Chief of the Fire Department), and one a representative of an
electrical supply house. Such members shall be appointed for one year and shall
serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. (Ord. 0-64-51,
2-13-1964)
2-2-2: RECOMMENDATIONS BY COMMISSION:
The Electrical Commission shall recommend safe and practical standards and
specifications for the installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment
in the Village designed to meet the necessities and conditions in the Village;
shall recommend reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of
permits, and fees to be paid; however, such standards and specifications, rules
and regulations, and fees shall not be effective until adopted by ordinance.
(Ord. 0-64-51, 2-13-1964)
CHAPTER 3
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
2-3-1: Purpose
2-3-2: Board Created
2-3-3: Membership; Terms of Office
2-3-4: Duties
2-3-1: PURPOSE:
A referendum was conducted in the Village pursuant to Illinois Revised
Statutes, chapter 1081/2, paragraph 3-145 and a majority of the votes cast in
said referendum favored the adoption by the Village of article 3 of the
Illinois Pension Code pertaining to the creation of a Police Pension Fund (the
"Pension Fund"), and pursuant to State law, it is now necessary for the Village
to create a Police Pension Board for the purpose of administering the Pension
Fund in the Village. (Ord. 0-88-291, 4-14-88)
2-3-2: BOARD CREATED:
There is hereby created a Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund (the
"Board") of the Village, which Board shall administer the Pension Fund of the
Village and designate the beneficiaries thereof. (Ord. 0-88-291, 4-14-88)
2-3-3: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE:
The Board shall consist of five (5) members: two (2) of whom shall be appointed
by the Village President; two (2) of whom shall be elected from the active
participants of the Pension Fund by such active participants; and one of whom
shall be elected by and from the beneficiaries.
Of the two (2) members of the Board appointed by the President, one shall serve
for a period of one year beginning May 10, 1988, and the other shall serve for
a period of two (2) years beginning May 10, 1988. The successors to the
foregoing Trustees shall serve for a period of two (2) years each or until such
time as their successors are appointed and qualified.
The third and fourth members of the Board shall be elected from the regular
police force by the active members thereof as provided by statute. The fifth
member shall be elected by and from the beneficiaries of the Pension Fund and
if no such beneficiary then exists, the fifth member shall be elected from the
regular police force by the active members thereof until such time as
beneficiaries of the Pension Fund are identified. The three (3) elected members
shall serve for a period of two (2) years beginning on May 10, 1988. (Ord. 0-
88-291, 4-14-88)
2-3-4: DUTIES:
The Board shall exercise and have all of the powers and duties delegated to it
by statute. 1  (Ord. 0-88-291, 4-14-88)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 108/2 ¶ 3-131.
CHAPTER 4
ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-4-1: Definitions
2-4-2: Creation Of Architectural Control Commission
2-4-3: Members, Qualifications And Terms
2-4-4: Rules And Records
2-4-5: Powers Of The Commission
2-4-6: Additional Functions
2-4-7: Procedure
2-4-8: Criteria
2-4-9: Pamphlets
2-4-10: Appeals
2-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
 
                       The exterior architectural treatment and general
                       arrangement of the portions of an improvement and site
                       as shall be open to external view, including, but by way
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: of limitation, the kind, color and texture of building
                       materials, types of windows and doors, attached or
                       detached signs, landscaping, screens, parking lots,
                       exterior lighting, walkways and other fixtures
                       appurtenant to such portions.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT:   Any improvement by the village upon property owned by or
                       under the control of the village.
                       Any building, structure, parking lot, landscaping,
                       screens, exterior lighting, walkways, signs, or other
                       fixtures placed, constructed, installed or located on
                       real property zoned for commercial, business or
IMPROVEMENT:           industrial use. Improvement excludes wires, cables,
                       ducts, conduits, pipes, sewers and other utility
                       facilities installed, located or maintained underground.
                       Also, improvement excludes improvements on real property
                       owned by or under the control of the village.(Ord. 0-88-
                       301, 8-18-1988; amd. Ord. 2022-1312, 4-14-2022)
 
2-4-2: CREATION OF ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL COMMISSION:
There is hereby created an architectural control commission (the "Commission")
for the village which shall have the powers, duties and functions as
hereinafter provided. (Ord. 0-88-301, 8-18-1988)
2-4-3: MEMBERS, QUALIFICATIONS AND TERMS:
The commission shall consist of seven (7) members. All members shall be
appointed by the president, subject to the confirmation of the board of
trustees. In making appointments to the commission, the president shall seek to
appoint persons who are knowledgeable in matters of design and aesthetic
judgment by virtue of training, education, and/or experience. The initial
appointment of members of the commission shall be for the following respective
terms: three (3) members' terms shall expire in 2002, and the remaining
members' terms shall expire in 2004; thereafter, each appointment shall be for
a term of four (4) years. A person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for
the remainder of the unexpired term. The president shall designate one member
to serve as chairman, subject to the confirmation of the board of trustees. All
terms shall commence on October 1. No member of the commission shall
participate in discussions or vote on any matter involving any client he is
serving or from any business of which he is owner, corporation officer or
employee. The president, with concurrence of a majority of the board of
trustees, shall have the authority to remove any members without cause. (Ord.
0-2001-636, 6-14-2001)
2-4-4: RULES AND RECORDS:
The commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its
business, subject to the approval of the board of trustees. A majority of the
membership shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business.
Action by the commission shall be by majority vote. A tie vote on a motion to
approve shall constitute a failure of the motion and a denial of the
application.
The village clerk or his or her duly authorized representative shall serve as
executive secretary of the commission and shall be responsible for records. All
meetings of the commission shall be open to the public and held pursuant to the
requirements of the Illinois open meetings act 1 . The commission shall keep
minutes of its proceedings and such minutes and a copy of its rules shall be
kept on file in the office of the village clerk and open to inspection by the
public. (Ord. 0-88-301, 8-18-1988)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
2-4-5: POWERS OF THE COMMISSION:
   A.   An applicant shall not be issued a building permit for the construction
of any improvement unless the village board has approved the plan for the
improvement after receiving a recommendation from the commission. The applicant
shall not make any significant changes in or to an architectural feature of any
improvement without the prior approval of the village board.
   B.   If not otherwise secured pursuant to any ordinances regulating the
subdivision and development of lands, the village board may require a bond from
the applicant in a reasonable amount to secure the installation and maintenance
of landscaping, screens, parking lots, exterior lighting, walkways and other
similar site improvements. The amount shall not exceed one hundred twenty
percent (120%) of the estimated costs of the construction and installation of
such improvements.
   C.   Consultants or village officials charged with the design responsibility
for a capital improvement may hold preliminary discussions on the proposed
project with the commission to obtain preliminary recommendations from the
commission as to aesthetic, environmental and design principles and objectives
for the improvement. In addition, consultants or village officials may request
that the commission review substantial capital improvements at the completion
of the design development phase and construction document phase, or at any time
it deems necessary. A capital improvement approved by the president and board
of trustees after review and recommendations by the commission may be
implemented on a phasing basis without further review if the improvement is
developed in substantial conformity with the reviewed plan.
   D.   The commission shall complete its review and make its decision and
recommendations within forty-two (42) days after a matter is submitted to it,
unless an extension is authorized by the president and board of trustees or
requested by the applicant. Decisions of the commission shall be based upon the
criteria set forth in section
2-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-88-301, 8-18-1988;amd. Ord. 2022-1312, 4-14-
2022)
2-4-6: ADDITIONAL FUNCTIONS:
   A.   The commission may assist any person, group or agency who requests
design advice on matters not requiring commission action.
   B.   The commission shall consult and cooperate with the planning
commission/zoning board of appeals and other governmental bodies on matters
affecting the appearance of the village. The commission may offer
recommendations to the appropriate village agencies and officials on
legislation to promote aesthetic and environmental values. (Ord. 0-88-301, 8-
18-1988)
2-4-7: PROCEDURE:
An applicant seeking commission approval shall submit to the village clerk a
site plan and exterior elevations and such other data as will assist the
commission in evaluating the proposed improvement. Preliminary drawings may be
submitted for review and for a preliminary advisory opinion by the commission.
No formal commission action shall be taken except upon plans and elevations
drawn to scale and indicating the nature and extent of the work proposed and
showing in detail how they conform with the provisions of this chapter. The
village clerk shall refer all applications to the commission at its next
regular meeting. The commission may approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove an application. In no instance shall the commission's action
conflict with the zoning, subdivision, building or other applicable Village
ordinances, resolutions or approvals, or with State or Federal requirements.
All formal decisions of the Commission shall be reduced to writing and shall
include findings of fact and a statement of the reasons deemed controlling to
the decision. (Ord. 0-88-301, 8-18-88)
2-4-8: CRITERIA:
   A.   Relationship of Building to Site:
      1.   The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with
the streetscape, and to provide for adequate planting and pedestrian movement.
      2.   The height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its
site and adjoining buildings.
   B.   Relationship of Building and Site to Adjoining Area:
      1.   Buildings and structures shall be made compatible with adjacent
buildings of conflicting architectural styles by such means as screens, site
breaks and materials.
      2.   Harmony in texture, lines and masses shall be provided in the design
of buildings.
      3.   Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be
provided.
      4.   Public and quasi-public buildings and structures shall be consistent
with the established neighborhood character.
   C.   Landscape and Site Treatment:
      1.   Where existing topographic patterns contribute to beauty and utility
of a development, they shall be preserved and developed.
      2.   Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces and other paved areas
shall provide an inviting and stable appearance.
      3.   Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural
features, strengthen vistas and provide shade.
      4.   In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by
pedestrian or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree
guards or other devices, wherever possible.
      5.   Where building sites limit planting, the placement of trees or
shrubs in parkways or paved areas is encouraged, and shall be approved by the
Commission.
      6.   Screening of service yards, parking areas and other places which
tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting
or combinations of these. Screening shall be effective in winter and summer.
      7.   In areas where general planting will not prosper, other materials
such as fences, walls and pavings of wood, brick, stone, rocks and gravel shall
be used.
      8.   Exterior lighting, when used, should enhance the building design and
the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and fixtures shall be of a design
and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting should be
shielded and restrained in design. Excessive brightness, flashing lights and
brilliant colors should be avoided.
   D.   Building Design:
      1.   Architectural style is not restricted -- evaluation of a project
shall be based on quality of its design and relationship to surroundings.
      2.   Buildings shall be of proportionate size to be in harmony with
permanent neighboring development.
      3.   Building components -- such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets
shall have good proportions and relationship to one another.
      4.   Colors shall be harmonious, with bright or brilliant colors used
only for accent.
      5.   Design attention shall be given to mechanical equipment or other
utility hardware on roof, ground or buildings so as to screen them from view.
      6.   Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept.
Fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories should be harmonious with
building design.
      7.   Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be
avoided. Variety of detail, form and siting shall be used to provide visual
interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting or individual
buildings may be used to prevent monotonous appearance. These provisions shall
not be interpreted to prohibit uniform building designs within a multiple
building project. (Ord. 0-88-301, 8-18-1988)
   E.   Signs:
      1.   Signs shall be a part of the architectural concept. Size, materials,
color, lettering, location, number and arrangement shall be harmonious with the
building design. Signage, including, but not limited to, canopy signs, window
graphics and single faced signs, may be deemed minor and may be approved by the
village president and the chairman of the commission.
      2.   The number of signs shall be minimized in order to avoid clutter.
      3.   Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint. Excessive
brightness and brilliant colors should be avoided. Lighting shall be harmonious
with the design. If external spot or flood lighting is used, it shall be
arranged so that light source is shielded from view. (Ord. 2014-1037, 11-13-
2014)
   F.   Miscellaneous Structures And Street Furniture:
      1.   Miscellaneous structures located on private property, public ways
and other public property shall be designed to be part of the architectural
concept of design and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings,
scale should be appropriate, colors shall be in harmony with buildings and
surroundings, and sizes shall be in proportion to nearby buildings and
improvements.
      2.   Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structures should meet the
criteria applicable to site, landscape, buildings and signs. (Ord. 0-88-301, 8-
18-1988)
2-4-9: PAMPHLETS:
The commission may prepare pamphlets for distribution at cost, describing the
policies and procedures to be used by architects and builders under this
chapter. Authority to spend village funds must be sought in accordance with
Illinois law. (Ord. 0-88-301, 8-18-1988)
2-4-10: APPEALS:
Any applicant aggrieved by any action of the committee may file a notice of
appeal with the president and board of trustees setting forth the reasons for
such appeal. Appeals must be filed with the village clerk within ten (10) days
from the date of formal action by the commission. The president and board of
trustees shall take final action within forty five (45) days of the filing of a
notice of appeal. Review by the president and board of trustees shall be
confined to the decision and record of proceedings before the commission,
except that the president and board of trustees may elect to take additional
testimony bearing on the issue of alleged procedural irregularities in the
proceedings before the commission, not shown in the record. The president and
board of trustees shall, upon request, consider oral and written arguments. The
president and board of trustees may affirm the decision of the commission,
remand to the commission for further proceedings, or reverse the decision of
the commission if it finds that the substantial rights of the appellant have
been prejudiced because the findings, conclusions or decision of the commission
were in violation or in excess of its authority or jurisdiction, made upon
unlawful procedure, clearly erroneous in view of the entire record as submitted
and the public policy contained in this chapter, or arbitrary or capricious.
(Ord. 0-88-301, 8-18-1988)
CHAPTER 5
[RESERVED]
CHAPTER 6
CONSERVANCY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-6-1: Purpose
2-6-2: Commission Created; Composition
2-6-3: Appointment And Term Of Office; Vacancies
2-6-4: Organization
2-6-5: Goals
2-6-6: Powers And Duties
2-6-7: Conservancy Park Use Regulations
2-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the conservancy commission is to educate, foster, and assist
those committed to maintaining and improving conservancy areas, advance the
maintenance and renovation of conservancy properties and scenic corridor
easements, and to act as a resource for the education and understanding of
regulations and restrictions for conservancy areas and scenic corridor
easements. (Ord. 2005-737, 4-14-2005)
2-6-2: COMMISSION CREATED; COMPOSITION:
A conservancy commission shall consist of five (5) members. The conservancy
commission shall act and is hereby constituted to make recommendations to the
village board on conservancy issues. In addition to its duties as hereinafter
set forth, the conservancy commission shall have those duties and powers as
granted to it by village ordinances, resolutions, and motions as properly
adopted by the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 2011-933, 3-10-2011)
2-6-3: APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
The president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, shall
appoint five (5) members to the conservancy commission.
When first appointed, the members of the conservancy commission shall serve
respectively for the following terms: three (3) for a four (4) year term; and
two (2) for a two (2) year term, or until their respective successors have been
appointed and qualified. The successor to each member so appointed shall serve
for a term of four (4) years or until his successor has been duly appointed and
qualified.
Vacancies upon the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the
member whose place has become vacant in the manner herein provided for the
appointment of such members. All terms of office shall be effective as of May
1. (Ord. 2011-933, 3-10-2011)
2-6-4: ORGANIZATION:
Upon the appointment of the conservancy commission and within a reasonable time
thereafter, the president shall designate two (2) of the number of commission
members to serve as the chairman and vice chairman. The conservancy commission
shall adopt any reasonable rules and regulations for governance as they deem
appropriate. (Ord. 2006-759, 3-9-2006)
2-6-5: GOALS:
The conservancy commission shall make every effort to accomplish the following
goals:
   A.   To encourage the enhancement of areas or districts which seek to
maintain a natural environment by introducing a wide variety of species, which
are appropriate to each specific district, such as wetland or prairie district
areas, and to generally promote those uses which are passive in nature and to
prohibit active sports and playground uses.
   B.   To protect residential development from noise and pollution generated
by vehicular traffic along major thoroughfares within and adjacent to the
village and to provide a refuge for native flora and fauna.
   C.   To protect woodlands and promote sound forestry management in the
protected areas.
   D.   To plan and promote walking paths, water features, wildlife viewing
areas, landscaping, parking, and a general gathering, community and/or
educational center.
   E.   To research and study the opportunity of creating a memorial in
recognition of our national parks.
   F.   To explore and study opportunities for citizen and corporate funding to
advance the goals of the commission. (Ord. 2005-737, 4-14-2005)
2-6-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The conservancy commission shall have duties and powers as follows:
   A.   To prepare and recommend to the village president and board of trustees
a master plan for conservancy in an effort to preserve the goals and objectives
of the village. Such plan, after its adoption by the board of trustees, shall
be known as the master plan for conservancy of the village. The commission may
thereafter, from time to time, recommend any changes to such master plan.
   B.   To prepare and recommend to the village president and board of
trustees, from time to time, plans for specific improvements in furtherance of
the master plan.
   C.   To assist village officials with projects of conservancy within the
village.
   D.   To implement and promote the master plan.
   E.   To exercise such other powers as granted by this chapter and as may be
conferred on the conservancy commission by the village president and board of
trustees.
   F.   To recommend from time to time such rules, regulations, activities,
hours the conservancy area and facilities are open to the public, and such
other details as required by this chapter or requested by the village president
and board of trustees. (Ord. 2005-737, 4-14-2005)
2-6-7: CONSERVANCY PARK USE REGULATIONS:
The following rules and regulations governing the use of conservancy areas have
been adopted to further the purpose and goals of the conservancy commission,
and to ensure the appropriate use of the areas for the enjoyment and general
welfare of the public while protecting the areas in their natural states:
   A.   Conservancy areas are open to all, free of charge, from sunrise to
sunset.
   B.   Individuals are welcome for nature study or quiet exploration.
Activities which could interfere with quiet observation by other visitors are
not allowed, this includes, but is not limited to: loud music or noise,
fireworks, active sports such as soccer, baseball, football, etc.
   C.   Groups in excess of fifteen (15) people or events expected to attract
more than fifteen (15) people must apply for a permit for use of a conservancy
area from the village of South Barrington. The village of South Barrington may
require a cleanup security deposit of twenty dollars ($20.00) per person prior
to the issuance of a permit. Uses not in keeping of the purpose of conservancy
area shall be denied.
   D.   Plants, flowers, equipment, boulders or rocks, picnic tables, waste
containers, trail markers, signs, or any other parts of a conservancy area may
not be collected, removed, rearranged, or damaged.
   E.   Open fires and wood or charcoal barbecues are not permitted without the
prior written approval of the village of South Barrington. Gas barbecues will
be permitted at any time.
   F.   Use of a conservancy area parking lot shall be restricted to use by
patrons of the conservancy area only. Overnight parking is prohibited.
Violators may be towed pursuant to current village ordinances and state
statutes. Motorized vehicles, except for maintenance equipment or emergency
vehicles, are restricted to the designated parking area and are otherwise not
permitted within the conservancy area. Bicycles are restricted to the paved
areas and the designated mowed trails.
   G.   Alcoholic beverages are not permitted in a conservancy area without the
prior written approval of the village of South Barrington.
   H.   Swimming or wading in ponds is not permitted.
   I.   Domesticated animals are not permitted in the conservancy area.
Any person found to have been in violation of any of the terms and provisions
of this section shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2010-917, 7-8-2010)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax (Rep. by Ord. 0-93-424, 9-23-93)
3-1-2: Municipal Service Occupation Tax (Rep. by Ord. 0-93-424, 9-23-93)
3-1-3: Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax and Home Rule Service
Occupation Tax
3-1-4: Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Municipal Grocery
Service Occupation Tax
3-1-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-93-424, 9-23-93)
3-1-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-93-424, 9-23-93)
3-1-3: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND HOME RULE MUNICIPAL
SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property titled or registered with an agency of this State's government, at
retail in the Village of South Barrington (the "Village") at the rate of one
percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such
business while this Section is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all
persons engaged in the Village in the business of making sales of service, at
the rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of all tangible personal
property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service.
Such "Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax" and the "Home Rule
Municipal Service Occupation Tax" shall not be applicable on the sales of food
for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold
(other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared
for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines,
drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and
needles used by diabetics.
The imposition of these home rule taxes are in accordance with the provisions
of section 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively, of the Illinois Municipal Code 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1 and 5/8-11-5 (1992 State Rev. Edition).
   B.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue of the State. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 0-93-425, 9-23-93,
eff. 1-1-94)
3-1-4: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL GROCERY
SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   A Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax is hereby imposed. A tax
is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries
at retail in the Village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts
from such sales made in the course of that business while this section is in
effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24).
   B.   A Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax is hereby imposed. A tax is
hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in: the Village in the business of
making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales of service,
transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of this tax
shall be the same rate identified in subsection A above. The imposition of this
tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   C.   The taxes hereby imposed by this section, and all civil penalties that
may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Illinois Department of Revenue. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have
full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
   D.   As required under the Municipal Grocery Occupation Tax Law, the Village
Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this section with the
Illinois Department of Revenue within a timely manner and in no event later
than October 1, 2025. (Ord. 2024-1418, 12-9-2024, eff. 1-1-2026)
CHAPTER 1A
ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
3-1A-1: Definitions
3-1A-2: Tax Imposed
3-1A-3: Collection Of Tax
3-1A-4: Tax Remittance And Return
3-1A-5: Resales
3-1A-6: Books And Records
3-1A-7: Credits And Refunds
3-1A-8: Effective Date
3-1A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the content otherwise requires:
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any
state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes
of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of
electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois
municipal code 1 , as amended, directly in the generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the
village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
VILLAGE: The village of South Barrington. (Ord. 2003-685, 6-12-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2 (2002 state bar edition).
3-1A-2: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code, as amended,
and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege
of using or consuming electricity acquired in the purchase at retail and used
or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the following rates,
calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
      1.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.545 cents per kilowatt hour;
      2.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.358 cents per kilowatt hour;
      3.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.322 cents per kilowatt hour;
      4.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.313 cents per kilowatt hour;
      5.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.304 cents per kilowatt hour;
      6.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.286 cents per kilowatt hour;
      7.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.282 cents per kilowatt hour;
      8.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.277 cents per kilowatt hour;
      9.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.273 cents per kilowatt hour;
      10.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt hours in a month; 0.268 cents per kilowatt hour.
   B.   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the village, the state of Illinois or any other political
subdivision of the state.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the tax shall not
be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would
violate the constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution
of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2003-685, 6-12-2003)
3-1A-3: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   Subject to the provisions of section
3-1A-5 of this chapter regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the
tax imposed under this chapter shall be collected from purchasers by the person
maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers electricity to such
purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who
delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of
the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and
is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge
for delivering the electricity.
   B.   Any tax required to be collected by this chapter, and any tax in fact
collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the person delivering
the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be
allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges
for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such
charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to
remit such tax.
   C.   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser
by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an
amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse them
for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing
and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the village upon
request. For purposes of this chapter, any partial payment of a billing amount
not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the
delivery of electricity. (Ord. 2003-685, 6-12-2003)
3-1A-4: TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN:
   A.   Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form
prescribed by the village. The return and accompanying remittance shall be due
on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax
is collected or is required to be collected under section
3-1A-3 of this chapter.
   B.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under subsection 3-1A-5E2 of
this chapter, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by
the village and pay the tax directly to the village on or before the last day
of the month following the month during which the electricity is used or
consumed. (Ord. 2003-685, 6-12-2003)
3-1A-5: RESALES:
   A.   Electricity that is delivered to a person in this village shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the village and
furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies
to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a
sale for resale.
   B.   If a person who receives electricity in the village claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the village for
a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable
for the tax imposed by this chapter on any purchases of electricity and shall
furnish such additional information as the village may reasonably require.
   C.   Upon approval of the application, the village shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   D.   The village may cancel the resale number of any person if the person
fails to pay any tax payable under this chapter for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number: 1) was obtained through
misrepresentation, or 2) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
   E.   1. If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption
and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this chapter
directly to the village pursuant to subsection 3-1A-4B of this chapter on the
amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the
tax pursuant to section
3-1A-3 of this chapter and remit the tax pursuant to subsection 3-1A-4A of this
chapter on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
      2.   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of this chapter shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the village the
total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the village may reasonably require. (Ord. 2003-685, 6-12-2003)
3-1A-6: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this
chapter shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity,
including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave
rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this chapter. The
books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times
during business hours of the day. (Ord. 2003-685, 6-12-2003)
3-1A-7: CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, in order to permit sound
fiscal planning and budgeting by the village, no person shall be entitled to a
refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this chapter unless the person
files a claim for refund or credit within one year after the date on which the
tax was paid or remitted to the village. (Ord. 2003-685, 6-12-2003)
3-1A-8: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter is effective September 1, 2003. (Ord. 2005-754, 12-8-2005)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-2-3: License And Compliance Required; Delivery And Consumption On Village
Property
3-2-4: Application For License
3-2-5: Restrictions On Issuance Of License
3-2-6: Examination Of Applicant
3-2-7: Classification Of Licenses
3-2-8: Number Of Licenses; License Fees
3-2-9: Term Of License
3-2-10: Disposition Of Fees
3-2-11: Renewal Of License
3-2-12: Transfer Of License
3-2-13: Building And Location Restrictions
3-2-14: Conditions Of License
3-2-15: Sanitary Conditions
3-2-16: Social Hosting
3-2-17: Reserved
3-2-18: Reserved
3-2-19: Reserved
3-2-20: Restrictions On Sales, Purchases And Possession
3-2-21: Regulations Regarding Containers
3-2-22: Record Of Licenses
3-2-23: Entry Powers
3-2-24: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-2-25: Penalties
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this
chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified
or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, including synthetic ethyl
alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
BANQUET FACILITY: Any place kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out as a
place where a prearranged private party, function, or event for a specific
social or business occasion may be held, either by invitation or reservation
and not open to the general public, where the guests in attendance are served
in a room designated and used exclusively for a private party, function or
event, and where prepared meals and alcoholic liquors are sold as agreed
pursuant to a contract.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
BOWLING ALLEY: Every establishment or building, or part of an establishment or
building, as the case may be, wherein the game of bowling played with
composition and ten (10) wooden pins, is played.
BREWERY: Any class of brewer or craft brewer licensed to manufacture beer under
the Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.).
BREWPUB: A person licensed under the Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-
1 et seq.) who manufactures no more than one hundred fifty-five thousand
(155,000) gallons of beer per year only at a designated licensed premises to
make sales to importing distributors, distributors, and to non-licensees for
use and consumption only who stores beer at the designated premises, and who is
allowed to sell at retail from the licensed premises, provided that a brewpub
licensee shall not sell for off-premises consumption more than one hundred
fifty-five thousand (155,000) gallons per year.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary
profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members
through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or
space in a building, of such extent and character and comfortable use and
accommodation of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and
adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a
sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving
food and meals for its members and their guests; provided, that such club files
with the local liquor control commissioner at the time of its application for a
license under this chapter two (2) copies of a list of names and residences of
its members, and similarly files, within ten (10) days of the election of any
additional member, his name and address; and, provided further, that its
affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive
committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting and
that no member or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or
directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation,
any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or
the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount
of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members
or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue
of the club.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed
and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and
guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty five (25)
or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and
having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests,
such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same
building or buildings in connection therewith and such building or buildings,
structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity.
LICENSEE: Any person, firm, corporation or partnership or club holding a
license under the provisions of this chapter.
ON SITE MANAGER: The person responsible for the day to day operation of the
licensed premises.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or
other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor.
PRIVATE FUNCTION: A prearranged private party, function, event or grand opening
for a specific social or business occasion that is either by invitation or
reservation and not open to the general public, where the guests in attendance
are served in a room or rooms designated and used exclusively for the private
party, function, event or grand opening.
RACING SIMULATOR STUDIO: Any business establishment that is devoted to
providing simulated racing or other virtual reality experiences to guests or
patrons.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are served, and the meals are actually and
regularly served, as the main or principal activity or business purpose
conducted or carried out at the premises, such space being provided with an
adequate and sanitary kitchen or food preparation area and dining room
equipment or eating area and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient
number of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
RETAIL SALES: Sale for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
RETAILER: A person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including all sales made by any person, whether principal,
proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SALON/ BARBERSHOP: Any business establishment devoted to the cutting, washing.
dyeing and/or styling of hair, shaving or trimming beards and/or providing
manicures, pedicures or facials.
SHOPPING CENTER: A collection of retail stores, restaurants and/or businesses
offering services or activities and exceeding four hundred thousand (400,000)
square feet.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
THEATER: A building or area for exhibitions, shows, movies, performances and/or
other cinematic events.
TO SELL: Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of “alcohol” or “spirits” as defined herein.
(Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008; amd. Ord. 2015-1099, 12-10-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; Ord.
2023-1363, 5-10-2023; Ord. 2023-1371, 7-13-2023; Ord. 2024-1403, 5-9-2024; Ord.
2024-1414, 11-14-2024)
3-2-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The village president is hereby authorized to be the local liquor control
commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of the dramshop act,
235 Illinois Compiled Statutes, and of such ordinance and resolutions relating
to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted. The village president may appoint a
person or persons to assist him in the exercise of the powers and the
performance of the duties provided for such local liquor control commissioner.
(Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
3-2-3: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; DELIVERY AND CONSUMPTION ON VILLAGE
PROPERTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale in the village any
alcoholic liquor without having a valid village retail liquor license and a
valid state of Illinois retail liquor license.
   B.   The provisions of subsection A of this section notwithstanding
alcoholic liquor may be delivered and consumed, but not sold, on the premises
of that property commonly known as the South Barrington Village Hall, 30 S.
Barrington Road, South Barrington, Illinois, for special events as may be
authorized, in writing, by the local liquor control commissioner of the village
of South Barrington. (Ord. 2016-1121, 6-9-2016)
3-2-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the local liquor control
commissioner. The application fee for a new license, except temporary licenses,
shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Such applications shall be in
writing and shall be signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly
authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by oath or
affidavit, and shall include the following information and statements:
   A.   The name, date of birth, age, mailing address and home and work
telephone numbers of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of
a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in
the case of a corporation for profit or a club, the date of incorporation, the
objects for which it was organized, the names and addresses of the officers,
trust beneficiaries and directors, the on site manager of the licensed premises
and the names, dates of birth and addresses of any person owning more than five
percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation.
   B.   The type of business of the applicant; and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
   C.   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character; or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
   D.   The location of the premises or place of business which is to be
operated under such license.
   E.   A statement as to whether applicant has made similar application for a
similar license on premises other than described in this application, and the
disposition of such application.
   F.   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and
is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, laws of the state or ordinances of the village.
   G.   Whether a previous license issued by any state or political subdivision
thereof, or by the federal government, has been suspended or revoked for cause,
and the reasons therefor.
   H.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
state of Illinois or of the United States or any ordinances of the village in
the conduct of his place of business.
   I.   All debts, invoices and/or fees due the village of South Barrington
have been paid.
In addition, each person listed in subsection A of this section shall provide
requested information necessary to complete a background check to assure their
qualification to hold a liquor license in the village of South Barrington. If
more than five (5) individuals are listed, there shall be an additional
application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each individual in
excess of five (5) individuals. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008; amd. Ord. 2016-1142,
11-10-2016; Ord. 2024-1403, 5-9-2024)
3-2-5: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
No such license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   B.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law unless the liquor control commissioner determines that such person has been
sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering all
relevant matters and matters set forth in such person's application and the
liquor control commissioner's investigation. The burden of sufficient
rehabilitation shall be on the applicant.
   C.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause or whose license issued by the Illinois state commission has been
revoked.
   D.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license under a first
application.
   E.   A copartnership, unless all the members of such copartnership shall be
qualified to receive a license.
   F.   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois business corporation
act to transact business in Illinois.
   G.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   H.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license
is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
   I.   Any law enforcing public official, any president of the village board
of trustees, and no such official shall be interested in any way, either
directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic
liquor.
   J.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of the liquor control act of the state of Illinois or
has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation.
   K.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   L.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of section 28-1 of, or as proscribed
by section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the "criminal code of 2012", of the state of
Illinois, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a statute
replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
   M.   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period.
   N.   A copartnership, to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device
stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax
period.
   O.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent
(20%) of the stock of such corporation has been issued a federal gaming device
stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period.
   P.   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period.
   Q.   Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor dealer's license.
   R.   A person or entity who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or
consumption on the licensed premises who does not have liquor liability
insurance coverage for the licensed premises, naming the village as additional
insured, in an amount that is at least equal to the maximum liability amounts
as may, from time to time, be required by subsection (a) of section 6-21 of the
Illinois liquor control act. (Ord. 2016-1142, 11-10-2016; amd. Ord. 2021-1269,
4-8-2021)
3-2-6: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT:
   A.   The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to examine,
or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for an original local liquor
license or for a renewal thereof, and to examine or cause to be examined the
books and records of any such applicant; and take proof for his information in
the performance of his duties relative to the original issuance or renewal of a
liquor license, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be
effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the
information desired by the local liquor control commissioner under this
section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf, as provided by
statute.
   B.   If the local liquor control commissioner determines that there is a
license available and that the applicant has met all of the requirements for
the issuance or renewal of a local liquor license, the license shall be issued.
   C.   If the local liquor control commissioner determines that there is no
license available or that the applicant has not met the qualifications for
issuance or renewal of a license, he/she shall notify the applicant in writing
of his/her decision. If the applicant desires to appeal the decision of the
local liquor control commissioner, he shall request in writing that the local
liquor control commissioner reconsider his decision and hold a hearing to hear
testimony and evidence supporting the applicant's request for a reversal of the
decision. Such request shall be made in writing within fourteen (14) days of
the decision to deny the application/renewal. Such hearing shall be held in
accordance with the provisions set out in section
3-2-24 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
3-2-7: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
Every person engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the village
shall pay an annual license fee. Such licenses shall be divided into the
following classes:
   A.   Class A; Restaurant: The Class A liquor license shall authorize the
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises only of a restaurant
or an entertainment facility with a restaurant where the food service component
of the business is operational during the hours of sale and delivery of
alcoholic liquor. The Class A liquor license shall also authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a shopping center, in
accordance with the regulations of a Class S liquor license, if the Class A
liquor licensee is located within a shopping center and also has a valid Class
S liquor license.
   B.   Class B; Package Sales: The Class B liquor license shall authorize the
sale of alcoholic liquor in its original package for consumption off the
premises where the primary business purpose is other than the sale of alcoholic
liquor, including, but not limited to, the sale of medications, food, and other
items for use and consumption off the premises. The display of such alcoholic
liquor for sale shall be in a separate area of the premises that may be easily
observed by a store clerk.
   C.   Class C; Club: The Class C liquor license shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor by clubs, as defined in section
3-2-1 of this chapter for consumption on the premises only.
   D.   Class D; Restaurant - Limited Beer And Wine: The Class D liquor license
shall authorize the sale of beer and wine for consumption on the premises only
of a food service establishment or restaurant where the food service component
of the business is operational during the hours of sale and delivery of beer
and wine. The Class D liquor license shall also authorize the sale of beer and
wine for consumption on the premises of a shopping center, in accordance with
the regulations of a Class S liquor license, if the Class D liquor licensee is
located within a shopping center and also has a valid Class S liquor license.
   E.   Class E; Restaurant - Beer And Wine Package Sales: The Class E liquor
license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises of a food service establishment or restaurant where the food service
component of the business is operational during the hours of sale and delivery
of alcoholic liquor and further authorizes the sale of beer and wine in its
original sealed package or container for consumption off the premises. The
Class E liquor license shall also authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises of a shopping center. in accordance with the
regulations of a Class S liquor license. if the Class E liquor licensee is
located within a shopping center and also has a valid Class S liquor license.
   F.   Class F; Restaurant - Brewpub: The Class F liquor license shall
authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a
food service establishment or restaurant where the food service component of
the business is operational during the hours of sale and delivery of alcoholic
liquor and further authorizes the sale of beer that is produced on the premises
in a sealed container for consumption off the premises. The Class F liquor
license shall also authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises of a shopping center, in accordance with the regulations of a
Class S liquor license. if the Class F liquor licensee is located within a
shopping center and also has a valid Class S liquor license.
   G.   Class G; Restaurant - Wine Package Sales: The Class G liquor license
shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of
a food service establishment or restaurant where the food service component of
the business is operational during the hours of sale and delivery of alcoholic
liquor and further authorizes the sale of wine in its original sealed package
or container for consumption off the premises. The Class G liquor license shall
also authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of
a shopping center. in accordance with the regulations of a Class S liquor
license, if the Class G liquor licensee is located within a shopping center and
also has a valid Class S liquor license.
   H.   Class H; Specialty Shop: The Class H liquor license shall authorize the
sale of wine, chocolate martinis and chocolate flavored beer for consumption on
the premises of a chocolatier in conjunction with the sale of chocolate and
beer flavored chocolates and further authorizes the sale of wine and chocolate
flavored beer in their original sealed package or container for consumption off
the premises in conjunction with the sale of gift baskets or packages that
include chocolate or beer flavored chocolates. For purposes of this subsection,
a “chocolate martini” shall be defined as an alcoholic beverage containing
vodka and a chocolate flavored liqueur and may contain additional flavored
liqueurs and other nonalcoholic ingredients. The licensee shall submit a list
of specific chocolate martinis, including specific ingredients, to the local
liquor commissioner for prior approval. Not more than five (5) chocolate
martini varieties and not more than six (6) chocolate flavored beer varieties
shall be approved for service and listed on the menu during any period of time.
The Class H liquor license shall also authorize the sale of wine, chocolate
martinis and chocolate flavored beer for consumption on the premises of a
shopping center, in accordance with the regulations of a Class S liquor
license, if the Class H liquor licensee is located within a shopping center and
also has a valid Class S liquor license.
   I.   Special Event License: The special event license shall be a license
which shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the
premises where sold, for an event of an educational, fraternal, civic,
religious, or not for profit corporation, club, or organization, for a period
not exceeding four (4) days. In addition, a special event license shall
authorize the sale or giving away of beer, wine, hard cider and hard seltzer at
a private function. No such permit, however, shall be issued or granted except
upon proof of adequate dramshop (host liquor liability) insurance in effect
during the period for which each such special event license shall be issued.
      1.   Each application shall contain the information required by the
village, which may vary based on the type of event and the entity hosting the
event. All applications shall specify the person or persons responsible for the
custody and sale of the alcoholic liquor, the dates and hours of service, and
shall indicate the nature of the organization (e.g., charitable, civic,
commercial) and the character of the event or events to which the permit
applies.
      2.   All applications shall state the time period for which the license
shall be applicable and shall state whether the license is for solely an
outdoor or an indoor location.
      3.   The special event license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor by the specified organization at a picnic, outing, festival,
fundraising event, or such other similar special occasion for consumption on
the premises or within the area specifically designated in such license. The
special event license for a private function shall authorize the sale or giving
away of beer, wine, hard cider and hard seltzer on the premises within a
private room designated in such license. The local liquor control commissioner
shall also establish the hours of operation of the special event license which
may be more restrictive than the hours of operation established in section
3-2-14 of this chapter.
      4.   The fee for such special event license shall be as specified in
section
3-2-8 of this chapter, but no separate application fee shall be charged. No
more than one such special event license shall be issued in any calendar year
to any one applicant.
   J.   Extended Hours Supplemental License: The supplemental license for
extended hours shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor until two o’clock
(2:00) A.M. each day, provided the licensee has a valid liquor license in good
standing pursuant to class A, D, E, F, or G that has been operating for at
least one year without incident or problem.
   K.   Special Use Permit License: A special use permit liquor license shall
allow a holder of a village of South Barrington retail liquor license to
transfer a portion of its alcoholic liquor inventory from its license retail
premises to a designated site in the Village for sale and consumption at a
special event. A special use permit liquor license must be obtained for each
special event, and each special event shall not exceed a period of fifteen (15)
days in duration.
      1.   Each application or request by a retail liquor licensee for a
special use permit liquor license shall specify the person or persons
responsible for the custody and sale of alcoholic liquor, the dates and hours
of service, and the character of the special event to which the permit applies.
Each application or request for a special use permit liquor license shall
include a certificate of dramshop insurance, required by State law or local
ordinance whichever is greater, naming the Village of South Barrington as an
additional insured and setting forth the exact location of the special event.
      2.   A special use permit liquor license shall authorize the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor by the specified retail liquor licensee for consumption on
the premises of the special event or within an area specifically designated in
the special use permit liquor license request or application.
      3.   A special use permit liquor license shall be issued by the Village
of South Barrington Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
      4.   No more than twelve (12) special use permit liquor licenses shall be
issued in any calendar year to any one applicant/licensee.
      5.   An applicant for a special use permit liquor license shall also
apply for and be issued a State of Illinois special use permit liquor license
issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission for the location and dates of
the special event.
      6.   No special use permit liquor license shall be issued to any person,
partnership, corporation or club that does not first satisfy all requirements
for issuance of a Village of South Barrington retail local liquor license as
provided in section
3-2-5 of this chapter.
      7.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may, in his/her discretion,
limit the hours of the sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor at the special
event.
   L.   Class L: The Class L liquor license shall authorize the sale of beer,
wine, and limited canned cocktail spirits for consumption on the premises only
of an art/painting studio. Limited cocktail spirits shall be no more than two
(2) varieties, at or under nine percent (9%) alcohol content, and available for
sale and consumption by registered patrons. Such sales and consumption shall be
limited to registered patrons assembled on the premises for the purpose of
attending art or painting classes offered by an art studio, arts and crafts
school or similar business.
      1.   The service of beer, wine, and limited cocktail spirits shall only
be allowed during the time at which the facility is conducting art and/or
painting classes.
   LL.   Class LL: The Class LL Liquor License shall authorize the sale of beer
and wine for consumption on the licensed premises only of an axe throwing
establishment.
      1.   Food will be advertised and available by third party that delivers
to the license premises.
      2.   Such sales and consumption shall be limited to registered patrons
assembled on the premises for the purpose of attending axe throwing offered by
the business.
      3.   Sale of beer and wine shall be an accessory to the axe throwing
establishment and shall only be sold during the hours of 3 p.m. and 10 p.m.
Monday through Thursday, 2 p.m. through 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday, and 2 p.m.
through 8 p.m. on Sunday.
   M.   Class M; Restaurant - Wine And Liqueur Package Sales: The Class M
liquor license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises of a food service establishment or restaurant where the food
service component of the business is operational during the hours of sale and
delivery of alcoholic liquor and further authorizes the sale of wine and
Limoncello liqueur in its original sealed packages or containers for
consumption off the premises. The Class M liquor license shall also authorize
the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a shopping
center, in accordance with the regulations of a Class S liquor license, if the
Class M liquor licensee is located within a shopping center and also has a
valid Class S liquor license.
   MM.   Class MM; Restaurant And Liqueur Package Sales: The Class MM liquor
license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises of a food service establishment or restaurant where the food service
component of the business is operational during the hours of sale and delivery
of alcoholic liquor and further authorizes the sale of Limoncello liqueur in
its original sealed packages or containers for consumption off the premises.
The Class MM liquor license shall also authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the premises of a shopping center. in accordance with the
regulations of a Class S liquor license, if the Class MM liquor licensee is
located within a shopping center and also has a valid Class S liquor license.
   N.   Class N; Banquet Facility: The Class N liquor license shall authorize
the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a banquet
facility.
   O.   Class O; Theater: The Class O liquor license shall authorize the sale
of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a theater, as defined in
section
3-2-1 of this chapter. The Class O liquor license shall also authorize the sale
of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a shopping center. in
accordance with the regulations of a Class S liquor license, if the Class O
liquor licensee is located within a shopping center and has a valid Class S
liquor license.
   P.   Class P; Salon/Barbershop: The Class P liquor license shall authorize
the sale of beer, wine, hard cider and hard seltzer for consumption on the
premises of a salon/barbershop, as defined in section
3-2-1 of this chapter. The sale of beer, wine, hard cider and hard seltzer
shall be incidental to the primary business at the premises and shall be
limited to patrons of the salon/barbershop as part of salon or barbershop
services being rendered to those patrons. In addition, patrons shall not be
served more than three (3) alcoholic beverages during salon or barbershop
services. No beer, wine, hard cider or hard seltzer may be sold, given or
delivered to persons who are not receiving salon or barbershop services.
   Q.   Class Q: Farm Brewer/Brewpub: The Class liquor license shall authorize
the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a farm that
covers no less than thirty (30) acres and further authorizes the sale of beer
that is produced on the premises in a sealed container for consumption off the
premises if the licensee is also a brewery or brewpub.
   R.   Class R: Racing Simulator Studio: The Class R liquor license shall
authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a
racing simulator studio, as defined in section 3-2-1 of this chapter. The Class
R liquor license shall also authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises of a shopping center, in accordance with the
regulations of a Class S liquor license, if the Class R liquor licensee is
located within a shopping center and also has a valid Class S liquor license.
   S.   Class S: Shopping Center Special Use License: The Class S liquor
license shall authorize the consumption of alcoholic liquor on the premises of
a shopping center during business hours; provided the alcoholic liquor is
purchased from a liquor licensee with a valid liquor license and also a valid
Class S liquor license. The liquor licensee must have a physical location in a
shopping center and the alcoholic liquor must be sold or delivered from
premises located within the shopping center. Alcoholic liquor may be consumed
in the interior portions of the shopping center and on the premises of the
licensee who sold or delivered the alcoholic liquor. Alcoholic liquor may not
be consumed on the premises of a business that did not sell or deliver the
alcoholic liquor or in the parking lot of the shopping center unless otherwise
authorized by the local liquor control commissioner. Rules governing the
consumption of alcoholic liquor on the premises of a shopping center shall be
on file with the village. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008; amd. Ord. 2013-989, 6-4-
2013; Ord. 2014-1012, 4-10-2014; Ord. 2015-1064, 4-9-2015; Ord. 2015-1087, 9-
10-2015; Ord. 2015-1099, 12-10-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; Ord. 2017-1169, 12-14-2017;
Ord. 2019-1202, 5-9-2019; Ord. 2021-1269, 4-8-2021; Ord. 2022-1327, 6-9-2022;
Ord. 2023-1363, 5-10-2023; Ord. 2023-1371, 7-13-2023; Ord. 2024-1403, 5-9-2024;
Ord. 2024-1414, 11-14-2024)
3-2-8: NUMBER OF LICENSES; LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Number Issued: The total number and classification of licenses to be
issued by the village shall be:
Class A; Restaurant                                                           9
Class B; Package Sales                                                        0
Class C; Club                                                                 1
Class D; Restaurant - Limited Beer and Wine                                   0
Class E; Restaurant - Beer and Wine Package Sales                             0
Class F; Restaurant - Brewpub                                                 1
Class G; Restaurant - Wine Package Sales                                      0
Class H; Specialty Shop                                                       0
Class L; Art Studio                                                           1
Class LL; Axe Throwing Establishment                                          0
Class M; Restaurant - Wine and Liqueur Package Sales                          2
Class MM; Restaurant and Liqueur Package Sales                                1
Class N; Banquet Facility                                                     0
Class O; Theater                                                              1
Class P; Salon/Barber Shop                                                    1
Class Q; Farm Brewery/Brewpub                                                 1
Class R; Sports Simulator                                                     2
Class S; Shopping Center Special Use License                                  4
Special event license, as determined by the local liquor control commissioner
Special use permit license, as determined by the local liquor control
commissioner
Extended hours supplemental license                                           0
 
   B.   Reduction In The Number Of Licenses: Whenever a license previously
issued under this chapter, except a special event license or a special use
permit license, is revoked, surrendered, not renewed or otherwise terminated by
dormancy, the maximum number of licenses in the class of the license which is
revoked, surrendered, not renewed or otherwise terminated by dormancy as set
forth in subsection A of this section shall be automatically and immediately
reduced by one. No additional license for any class shall be issued unless by
action of the Corporate Authority of the Village. The Village Clerk shall
codify the appropriate maximum number of licenses for each class whenever a
number is reduced or increased as herein provided.
   C.   License Fees:
Class A; Restaurant                                  $1,500.00
Class B; Package Sales                               1,500.00
Class C; Club                                        500.00
Class D; Restaurant - Limited Beer and Wine          750.00
Class E; Restaurant - Beer and Wine Package Sales    1,500.00
Class F; Restaurant - Brewpub                        1,500.00
Class G; Restaurant - Wine Package Sales             1,500.00
Class H; Specialty Shop                              750.00
Class L; Art Studio                                  750.00
Class LL; Axe Throwing Establishment                 750.00
Class M; Restaurant - Wine and Liqueur Package Sales 1,500.00
Class MM; Restaurant and Liqueur Package Sales       1,500.00
Class N; Banquet Facility                            1,500.00
Class O; Theaters                                    1,500.00
Class P; Salon/Barber Shop                           750.00
Class Q; Farm Brewery/Brewpub                        1,000.00
Class R; Sports Simulator                            1,000.00
Class S: Shopping Center Special Use License         250.00
Special event license                                $50.00 per day
Special use permit license                           $75.00 (1 day only)
                                                     $150.00 (2-14 days)
Extended hours supplemental license                  $1,000.00
 
(Ord. 2013-995, 8-8-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-1169, 12-14-2017; Ord. 2019-1197, 4-
11-2019; Ord. 2019-1202, 5-9-2019; 2019-1205, 6-13-2019; Ord. 2019-1215, 10-10-
2019; Ord. 2020-1251, 11-12-2020; Ord. 2021-1270, 4-8-2021; Ord. 2021-1289, 6-
10-2021; Ord. 2022-1313, 4-14-2022; Ord. 2023-1363, 5-10-2023; Ord. 2023-1367,
6-8-2023; Ord. 2023-1371, 7-13-2023; Ord. 2023-1376, 8-10-2023; Ord. 2024-1392,
2-8-2024; Ord. 2024-1403, 5-9-2024; Ord. 2024- 1409, 9-12-2024; Ord. 2024-1414,
11-14-2024; Ord. 2024-1419, 12-9-2024; Ord. 2025-1432, 6-11-2025; Ord. 2025-
1449, 10-9-2025)
3-2-9: TERM OF LICENSE:
Any license issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall expire on
December 31 of the year of issuance unless earlier revoked or terminated as in
this chapter provided 1 . The fee for any license issued for a partial year
shall be prorated on a monthly basis. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-2-24 of this chapter.
3-2-10: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
All such fees shall be paid to the Village of South Barrington in care of the
Village President at the time application is made, and be forthwith turned over
to the Treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee,
minus any processing expense (i.e., background check), shall be returned to the
applicant; if the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the
General Corporate Fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by
the Board of Trustees by proper action. (Ord. 2016-1142, 11-10-2016)
3-2-11: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee desiring to renew the license shall file an application for
renewal of his license with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner at least
forty five (45) days prior to the expiration thereof; provided, that he is then
qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license
is sought are suitable for the purpose; provided further, that the renewal
privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which
shall in any case prevent the decreasing of the number of licenses to be issued
within the Village. Applications for renewal shall be in a form provided by the
Village and shall list the owners, partners, officers, directors, trust
beneficiaries, and persons who own more than five percent (5%) of the stock in
the licensee, and the general manager, assistant manager and onsite manager of
the licensed premises. There shall be a fee of seventy-fifty dollars ($75.00)
for each newly listed individual on the renewal application who was not listed
on the prior application. Any application for a license renewal made less than
forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration of the license shall result in a
surcharge of fifty dollars ($50.00) which surcharge shall accompany the license
renewal fee. The local liquor control commissioner shall review all
applications for renewal in accordance with procedures set out in section
3-2-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008; amd. Ord. 2020-1251, 11-12-2020)
3-2-12: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year
after issuance unless sooner revoked as is in this chapter provided, and shall
not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such licenses shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee, and
the trustee of any deceased, insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate
consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of
alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the
privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of
such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such
license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of such licensee. No refund shall be made of that portion of the
license fee paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from
operating under such license in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
3-2-13: BUILDING AND LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Location Restrictions: No license shall be issued for the sale at
retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church,
school, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their
wives or children, or any military or naval station; provided, that this
prohibition shall not apply to clubs, restaurants, food shops or other places
where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on, if
such place of business not exempted shall have been established for such
purpose prior to the taking effect of this chapter; nor to the renewal of a
license for the sale of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred feet
(100') of any church where such church has been established within such one
hundred feet (100') since the issuance of the original license.
   B.   Stores Selling School Supplies, Lunches, Etc.: No license shall be
issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any
store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of
school age or where the principal business transacted consists of schoolbooks,
school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors.
   C.   Access From Licensed Premises To Dwelling Quarters: Except in the case
of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any
premises which has any access which leads from such premises to any other
portion of the same building or structure used for dwelling or lodging purpose
and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for any use by the public.
This provision shall not prevent any connection between such premises and such
other portion of the building or structure which is used only by the licensee,
his family and personal guests.
   D.   View From Street: In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption upon the premises is licensed, other than as a restaurant,
hotel, club or any bowling establishment, no screen, blind, curtain, partition,
article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such
licensed premises nor inside such premises, which shall prevent a clear view
into the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk
at all times, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction nor any
arrangements of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior
of the licensed premises which shall prevent a full view of the entire interior
of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where liquor is
sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously lighted during
business hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of
the interior of the premises are clearly visible. In case the view into any
licensed premises required by the foregoing provision is wilfully obscured by
the licensee or by him wilfully suffered to be obscured or in any manner
obstructed, then such license is subject to revocation in the manner herein
provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this subsection, the local
commissioner has the right to require the filing with him of plans, drawings
and photographs showing the clearance of the view as above required.
   E.   Change Of Location: A liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of
alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and license.
Such location may be changed only upon the written permit to make such change
issued by the village president. No change of location shall be permitted
unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor under the statutes of this state and the ordinances of the
village. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
3-2-14: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Closing Hours: It shall be unlawful to keep open or permit to be open
any place where alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption on premises between
the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of any day;
provided that a licensee may remain open until two o'clock (2:00) A.M. if an
extended hours supplemental license has been issued for the premises.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the holder(s) of a class B liquor license shall
not sell alcoholic liquor between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. In the event the principal business being
conducted on the premises is not the sale of alcoholic liquor, the premises may
remain open during such hours, provided that alcoholic liquor is not sold or
otherwise dispensed.
   B.   Display Of License: Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses
to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises.
   C.   Restaurants: It shall be unlawful for any restaurant licensed to sell
alcoholic liquor to sell such liquor except in conjunction with the service of
meals.
   D.   Peddling: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the
village.
   E.   Soliciting Drinks: It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager,
officer, director or employee of any licensed premises to solicit any patron or
customer of such licensed premises to purchase alcoholic liquor or nonalcoholic
beverages for said licensee, officer, director or employee or any other person
therein. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
3-2-15: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Premises: All premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor or for the
storage of such liquor for sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances regulating
the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human
consumption. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
   B.   Employees: It shall be unlawful for any person to employ in any
premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted
with, or who is a carrier of, any contagious or infectious disease, and it
shall be unlawful for any person afflicted with or who is a carrier of any such
disease to work in or about any such premises or to engage in any way in the
handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. (Ord. 2016-1142, 11-10-
2016)
3-2-16: SOCIAL HOSTING:
   A.   Definitions:
    ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid
or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and which contains one-half
of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
   CONVEYANCE: Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft or container operated for the
transportation of persons or property.
   EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
   HOST: To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or
permit an event or gathering.
   ILLICIT DRUGS: Any drug, substance, or compound prohibited by law, including
drugs prescribed by a physician that are in the possession of or used by
someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.
   PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
      1.   As a natural, adoptive parent, or stepparent;
      2.   As a legal guardian; or
      3.   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust
or any other legal entity.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, parks, businesses or parking lots.
   REASONABLE STEPS: Controlling access to alcoholic beverages and/or illicit
drugs at the event or gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic
beverages and/or illicit drugs present at the event or gathering; verifying the
age of persons attending the event or gathering by inspecting drivers' licenses
or other government issued identification cards to ensure that underage persons
do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the event or gathering; and
supervising the activities of an underage person at the event or gathering or
calling for police assistance in the event people under twenty one (21) are in
possession of alcohol and/or illicit drugs at the event or gathering.
   RELIGIOUS CEREMONY: The possession, consumption and dispensation of alcohol
or an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or
religious ceremony.
   RESIDENCE OR PREMISES: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied
on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or
specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased,
rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
   RESPONSE COST: Cost associated with responses by law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire, and other emergency response providers to an event or
gathering, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or
other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to,
remaining at, or otherwise dealing with an event or gathering, and the
administrative costs attributable to such responses;
      2.   The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the event or gathering;
      3.   The cost of repairing any damaged village equipment or property, and
the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at, or
leaving an event or gathering.
   UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual less than twenty one (21) years of age.
   B.   Certain Events And Gatherings Prohibited:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to host, permit, allow, or fail to
take reasonable steps to prevent an event or gathering at any residence or
premises, or on any other property whether private or public, or in any
conveyance, over which that person has control or a reasonable opportunity for
control where illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages are present when that person
knows or reasonably should know that an underage person will or does consume or
possess any illicit drugs or alcoholic beverage.
      2.   It also is unlawful for any person to fail to take reasonable steps
to prevent possession or consumption of illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages by
an underage person at any such event or gathering. A person who permits,
allows, or hosts an event or gathering shall be presumed to have known or
should have known that underage persons have used or consumed illicit drugs or
alcoholic beverages if such person is present at the premises of the event or
gathering at the time any underage person uses or consumes illicit drugs or
alcoholic beverages; however a person who hosts an event or gathering does not
have to be present at the event or gathering to be in violation of this
subsection B.
   C.   Other Responsible Persons:
      1.   A person is responsible for violating subsection B of this section
if that person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, conspires with, or
solicits another person to commit a violation of subsection B of this section.
      2.   A person is responsible for violating subsection B of this section
if that person knows or should have known about the committing of a prohibited
act and failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the prohibited act.
   D.   Exceptions:
      1.   A person who hosts an event or gathering shall not be in violation
of this chapter if he or she undertakes one of the following steps before any
other person makes a complaint about the event or gathering:
         a.   Seeks assistance from the South Barrington police department or
other law enforcement agency to remove any person who refuses to abide by the
host's performance of the duties imposed by this chapter, or
         b.   Terminates the event or gathering because the host has been
unable to prevent underage persons from consuming illicit drugs or alcoholic
beverages despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so; provided that the
host shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that intoxicated guests of the
event or gathering do not operate a vehicle subsequent to the termination of
the event or gathering.
      2.   This section does not apply to conduct involving the use of
alcoholic beverages that occurs at a religious ceremony or that is exclusively
between an underage person and his or her parent, as permitted by Illinois
state law.
   E.   Fines; Penalties: Any person who violates or assists in the violation
of any provision of this section shall be deemed to have committed a petty
offense and shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each such violation. Each day on which, or during which, a violation occurs
shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any fine imposed, a person
found to be in violation of this section shall be responsible for any and all
response costs incurred to investigate and/or respond to the event or
gathering.
The fines imposed pursuant to violation of this section shall be as follows:
      1.   The first violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of
no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).
      2.   A second violation of this section by the same person within a
twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      3.   A third or subsequent violation of this section by the same person
within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). (Ord. 2015-1091, 9-10-2015)
3-2-17: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
3-2-18: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
3-2-19: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
3-2-20: RESTRICTIONS ON SALES, PURCHASES AND POSSESSION:
   A.   Sales To Certain Persons; Minors:
      1.   No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor
to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to any intoxicated
person or to any person known by him to be impaired. For the purpose of
preventing the violation of this subsection, any licensee, or his agent or
employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is
unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he
or she is over the age of twenty one (21) years. Adequate written evidence of
age and identity of the person is a document issued by a federal, state, county
or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not
limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate
issued under the federal selective service act, or an identification card
issued to a member of the armed forces. Proof that the defendant licensee, or
his employee or agent, demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon such
written evidence in any transaction forbidden by this subsection is competent
evidence and may be considered in any prosecution for violation of this
subsection or in any proceeding for the suspension or revocation of any license
based upon a violation of this subsection. (Ord. 2016-1142, 11-10-2016)
      2.   No person shall sell, give or furnish to any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic
evidence of the age and identity of such person, nor sell, give or furnish to
any person under the age of twenty one (21) years evidence of age and
identification of any other person.
      3.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall present or
offer to any licensee, his agent or employee, any written, printed or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent or not
actually his own, or otherwise misrepresents his age, for the purpose of
ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring or
attempting to procure the serving of any alcoholic beverage, nor have in his
possession any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of
age and identity. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
      4.   It shall be unlawful for a licensee, agent or employee of such
licensee to permit or allow any person under twenty one (21) years of age to
tend any bar to draw, pour, mix, sell or serve alcoholic liquors in any
licensed premises, provided the provisions of this subsection A4 shall not be
construed to prevent the employment of persons who are at least eighteen (18)
years of age as waiters or waitresses for the purpose of serving food and
alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises. (Ord. 2016-1130, 9-8-2016)
      5.   In every place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold, there
shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card which shall
read substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE
   FOR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
You are subject to a fine up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) under the
Ordinances of the Village of South Barrington if you purchase alcoholic liquor
or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor.
      6.   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer's
license, or his agent or employee, to suffer or permit any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years to remain in any room or compartment adjoining or
adjacent to or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises are
located; provided, that this subsection A6 shall not apply to any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years who is accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian, or to any licensed premises which derives its principal business from
the sales or services of commodities other than alcoholic liquor. In addition
to all other fines and penalties, the president of the village may revoke or
suspend the retail liquor dealer's license for any violation of this subsection
A6.
      7.   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any minor
child of which he or she may be the parent or guardian to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
   B.   Purchase Or Acceptance Of Gift Of Liquor By Minors:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided by subsections A4 and B5 of this
section it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to purchase, consume, possess or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor
within the village. If a licensee, his agent or employee, believes or has
reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of the age of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such
sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive state issued
identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the
performance of his official duties. (Ord. 2016-1130, 9-8-2016)
      2.   No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification
card, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged
identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false
information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this subsection. The consumption of alcoholic
liquor by any person less than twenty one (21) years of age is forbidden.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquors to
any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises
located within the village to knowingly allow any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to remain on such premises while in the possession of
alcoholic liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquor in violation of this
subsection.
      5.   The possession and dispensing or consumption by a person under
twenty one (21) years of age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a
religious service or ceremony, or while under the direct supervision and
approval of the parent or parents of such person in the privacy of a home, is
not prohibited by this chapter.
   C.   Sales On Credit: No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at
retail to any person on credit, or on a passbook, or order on a store, or in
exchange for any goods, wares or merchandise, or in payment for any services
rendered; and if any person shall extend credit for such purpose, the debt
thereby attempted to be created shall not be recoverable at law; provided, that
nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent any club from permitting
checks or statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide
guests of members and charged to the account of such members or guests in
accordance with the bylaws of said club; and provided further, that nothing
herein contained shall be construed to prevent any hotel from permitting checks
or statements for liquor to be signed by regular guests residing at said hotel
and charged to the accounts of said guests; and provided further, that nothing
herein shall be construed to prevent payment by credit card or other credit
device for the purchase of liquor in the original package or container for
consumption off the premises. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
3-2-21: REGULATIONS REGARDING CONTAINERS:
   A.   Refilling Containers: No person except a manufacturer or distributor,
or importing distributor, shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any
original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other kind or quality
of alcoholic liquor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to have in his
possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks or other containers containing
alcoholic liquor except in original packages.
   B.   Size Of Container: No unmixed whiskey, unmixed gin or unmixed rum shall
be sold or offered for sale at retail for consumption on the premises, except
in a container having a minimum capacity of at least one fluid ounce of the
beverage being sold. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
3-2-22: RECORD OF LICENSES:
The local liquor control commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a complete
record of all such licenses issued by him. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
3-2-23: ENTRY POWERS:
The local liquor control commissioner is hereby given the power to enter or to
authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises
licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of the dramshop
act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes, or this chapter, or any of the rules or
regulations adopted by him or by the state commission have been or are being
violated, and at such time to examine the premises of said licensee in
connection therewith. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
3-2-24: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Examination: The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right
to examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any licensee upon whom notice
of revocation or suspension or fine has been served as provided by statute or
this chapter, and to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of
any such licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his information in the
performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall
be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the
information desired by the local liquor control commissioner under this
section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf, as provided by
statute.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The local liquor control commissioner shall have the
following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses issued
hereunder:
      1.   To suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke any local
liquor license issued by him if he determines that the local liquor licensee
has violated any ordinance, resolution or regulation enacted by the village or
the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the liquor control act of
1934 or regulation adopted by the state of Illinois liquor control commission.
      2.   To levy a fine upon the licensee if he determines that the local
liquor licensee has violated any ordinance, resolution or regulation enacted by
the village or the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the liquor
control act of 1934 or regulation adopted by the state of Illinois liquor
control commission. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for a first violation within a twelve (12) month period, one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a second violation within a
twelve (12) month period and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for
a third or subsequent violation within a twelve (12) month period. Each day
upon which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in fines may be imposed upon any licensee during the annual period
of his or her license. All proceeds from such fines shall be paid into the
general corporate fund of the village of South Barrington.
   C.   Hearing Procedure:
      1.   No local liquor license shall be revoked, suspended, and no licensee
shall be fined except after a public hearing before the local liquor control
commissioner or his or her designee with no less than a three (3) day written
notice to the licensee setting forth the nature of the violation(s) alleged and
affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
      2.   a. Open To Public; Record Of Proceedings: All such hearings shall be
open to the public and an official record shall be made by a certified court
reporter in attendance;
         b.   Motions To Be In Writing: All motions shall be in writing and
shall be served upon the local liquor control commissioner at least one day
prior to presentation;
         c.   Motion For Continuance: No motion for a continuance first made on
the date of the hearing shall be granted unless by agreement of the parties and
approved by the local liquor control commissioner or for good cause shown;
         d.   Disposition By Stipulation, Agreed Settlement, Consent Order, Or
Default: Disposition of any matter brought before the local liquor control
commissioner for hearing may be made by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent
order, or default;
         e.   Reasons For Action; Service: If the local liquor control
commissioner determines that the licensee is not liable for the offense charged
or that the local liquor license shall be revoked or suspended and/or a fine
imposed, the local liquor control commissioner shall state the reasons for such
determination in a written order setting forth that the offense charged be
dismissed or setting forth the period of suspension or that the license has
been revoked and/or the amount of the fine imposed, as the case may be; and he
shall serve a copy of such written order within five (5) days upon the
licensee;
         f.   Emergency Closure: If the local liquor control commissioner has
reason to believe that continued operation of any licensed premises presents an
imminent threat to the welfare of the village, he may, upon the issuance of a
written order stating the reason(s) for such conclusion and without notice or
prior hearing, order the licensed premises closed for a period not to exceed
seven (7) days. The local liquor control commissioner shall afford the licensee
an opportunity to be heard during the seven (7) day period in accordance with
the hearing procedures set forth herein.
         g.   Appeal Of Local Liquor Control Commissioner Decision: Any
licensee aggrieved by a decision of the local liquor control commissioner may
appeal that decision pursuant to the provisions of section 5/7-9 of the liquor
control act 1 , provided, however, that any appeal of the proceedings for the
imposition of a revocation or suspension and/or fine shall be limited to review
of the official record of the proceedings before the local liquor control
commissioner.
   D.   Use Of Premises After Revocation: When any local liquor license shall
have been revoked for cause, no local liquor license shall be granted to any
person or entity for the period of one year thereafter for the conduct of the
sale of alcoholic liquor in the premises described in the order of revocation
unless the local liquor control commissioner vacates the revocation order or
unless the revocation order was entered as to the offending licensee only.
(Ord. 2008-861, 7-10-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/7-9.
3-2-25: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2008-861, 7-
10-2008)
CHAPTER 3
SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Findings And Purpose
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: Administration
3-3-4: Solicitation Permits
3-3-5: Solicitation Restrictions
3-3-6: Commercial Solicitation Permit Application
3-3-7: Commercial Solicitation Permit Requirements
3-3-8: Noncommercial Solicitation Permit Application
3-3-9: Noncommercial Solicitation Permit Requirements
3-3-10: Revocation Of Permits
3-3-11: Appeal Of Decisions Of The Chief Of Police
3-3-12: Penalties
3-3-13: Severability
3-3-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
   A.   It is hereby determined that:
      1.   Uninvited visits to private residential properties and privately
owned businesses for the purposes of soliciting funds, goods, wares,
merchandise or services by persons and organizations have been occurring and
continue to occur within the village.
      2.   Residents and business owners have complained that these activities
are intrusive upon their privacy and disruptive to their daily activities.
      3.   A variety of misrepresentations and other frauds are at times
employed in such activities.
      4.   Burglaries and attacks on persons in their homes have occurred by
persons claiming to be solicitors.
      5.   The village has a legitimate and substantial interest in promoting
the public health, safety, and welfare of its residents by preventing
fraudulent or criminal activities which may result from unregulated
solicitation.
      6.   Noncommercial speech is entitled to broader protection under the
first amendment to the United States constitution than commercial speech,
affording the village a greater ability to regulate commercial speech than
noncommercial speech.
      7.   An effective way to promote and protect persons' safety and privacy
is by reasonably limiting the hours of solicitation and requiring solicitors to
obtain permits in a content neutral manner. Allowing individuals to determine
their level of comfort with privacy and whether or not they want to receive
solicitation will promote the village's interest in promoting public safety and
protecting individuals' privacy, while respecting solicitors' interests in
effective distribution of information. A reasonable accommodation of these
competing interests can be achieved by adoption of this chapter, which
regulates the time, place and manner of solicitations.
   B.   Based on the findings described above, it is further found that there
is a need for narrowly tailored reasonable, time, place and manner restrictions
regarding soliciting within the village so as to accomplish the following, to
the extent reasonably possible:
      1.   Prevent crime, including burglaries and fraud, and deter such fraud
and crime by determining the identity of solicitors by requiring solicitors to
obtain a permit prior to soliciting within the village;
      2.   Protect the health, safety, welfare and privacy of the citizens of
the village;
      3.   Ensure that the police department is aware of the number and
identity of persons who will be soliciting for commercial and noncommercial
purposes, and the geographical areas and time periods during which such
activities will occur within the village;
      4.   Prevent the imitation of noncommercial purposes by persons and
organizations who would defraud the public, and thereby cause noncommercial
purposes and organizations to be endangered by the suspicions engendered by
such practices;
      5.   Protect the welfare, safety, peace, privacy, comfort and convenience
of the public in its homes, from unwanted disturbances and intrusions; by
reasonably restricting the hours of solicitation activities;
      6.   Prohibit the solicitation of occupants of property when the occupant
has posted a sign prohibiting such activities; and
      7.   Respect the solicitors' interests in effective distribution of
information. This chapter is expressly not intended to interfere with the
exercise of free speech and free exercise rights protected by the first
amendment (e.g., religious proselytizing, anonymous political speech, and the
distribution of handbills). (Ord. 2012-967, 7-12-2012)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
APPLICANT: Any person or entity that has filed an application for a commercial
or noncommercial solicitation permit as hereinafter provided.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: A. Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or
eleemosynary person or one purporting to be such which solicits and collects
funds for charitable purposes and includes each local, county, or area division
of such charitable organization, provided such local, county or area division
has authority and discretion to disburse funds or property otherwise than by
transfer to any parent organization;
   B.   A not for profit organization incorporated pursuant to 805 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 110/0.01 and 110/35; or
   C.   Any other organization that has been granted tax exempt status from the
state of Illinois or the internal revenue service pursuant to section 501(c)(3)
of the internal revenue code.
CHARITABLE PURPOSE: Any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or
eleemosynary purpose.
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: Solicitation which is not conducted for any
"charitable purpose" or "political purpose", or on behalf of any "charitable
organization", as those terms are defined herein.
NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: Solicitation for a "charitable purpose" or
"political purpose", or on behalf of a "charitable organization", as those
terms are defined herein.
Noncommercial solicitation shall include the following so long as the person is
not requesting, either directly or indirectly, money, credit, funds,
contributions, personal property or anything of value: a) a person
communicating or otherwise conveying ideas, views or beliefs or otherwise
disseminating oral or written information to a person willing to directly
receive such information, provided that such information is of a political,
religious or charitable nature; b) a person seeking to influence the personal
belief of the occupant of any residence or business in regard to any political
or religious matter; c) a person seeking to obtain, from an occupant of any
residence or business, an indication of the occupant's belief in regard to any
political or religious matter; d) a person conducting a poll, survey or
petition drive in regard to any political matter; and e) a person carrying,
conveying, delivering or transporting dairy products, newspapers or other goods
to regular customers on established routes or to the premises of any person who
had previously ordered such products or goods and is entitled to receive the
same.
NONRESIDENTIAL PREMISES: Means and includes all buildings, structures, and
units in the village occupied for nonresidential purposes.
PEDDLER: Any person who engages in peddling. Peddler shall include, but not be
limited to, any person required to be licensed pursuant to the "transient
merchant act of 1987 1 ".
PEDDLING: The act of door to door selling, or offering for sale, any goods,
wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services or other property of any kind,
character or description whatsoever, for any kind of consideration whatsoever,
for immediate delivery.
PERSON: Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership,
corporation, trust or any combination thereof.
POLITICAL PURPOSE: Any activity in support of bona fide candidates for public
office, or any matter related to the election, nomination, or performance of
public officials, or issues presented to the electorate at any election.
RESIDENCE: Means and includes every separate living unit in the village
occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any
type of building or structure.
SOLICIT: To engage in any acts of "solicitation" as defined herein.
SOLICITATION: The act of any person traveling by foot, vehicle or any other
type of conveyance who goes from residence to residence, business to business,
from place to place or in or along any highway, street or sidewalk within the
village either: a) requesting, either directly or indirectly, money, credit,
funds, contributions, personal property or anything of value; b) taking or
attempting to take orders for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or
services of any kind, or description for future delivery or for services to be
performed in the future, in person or by the in person distribution of fliers
and leaflets; and c) selling and making immediate delivery any goods, wares,
merchandise or services of any kind or description, commonly referred to as
"peddling". (Ord. 2012-967, 7-12-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 465 et seq.
3-3-3: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   The chief of police shall have the following powers and duties, which
shall at all times be performed without consideration of the content or
viewpoint of the information being distributed by a solicitor:
      1.   To administer and rule upon the applications for, and the issuance,
renewal, suspension, denial and revocation of permits as set forth in this
chapter.
      2.   To take such further actions as the chief of police shall deem
necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter and to exercise
such additional powers in furtherance thereof as are implied or incident to
those powers and duties expressly set forth in this chapter.
   B.   The powers and duties of the chief of police under this section may be
exercised by any designee of the chief of police. (Ord. 2012-967, 7-12-2012)
3-3-4: SOLICITATION PERMITS:
   A.   Solicitation Permit Required: A commercial or noncommercial
solicitation permit shall be required to solicit within the village.
   B.   Solicitation Without Permit Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person not in possession of a current and valid commercial or noncommercial
solicitation permit to solicit within the village at any time after the
effective date of this chapter.
   C.   Solicitation Without Permit Badge Displayed: It shall be unlawful for
any person to solicit within the village at any time that a current and valid
commercial or noncommercial solicitation permit badge is not displayed in plain
view on the person who is soliciting after the effective date of this chapter.
Such permit badge shall contain the name of the peddler or solicitor, and the
name of the group or organization, if any, on whose behalf the peddler or
solicitor is conducting activities that are regulated under this chapter.
   D.   Solicitation In Violation Of Permit Prohibited: It shall be unlawful
for any holder of a commercial or noncommercial solicitation permit to solicit
except in the manner authorized by, and in compliance with, the provisions of
this chapter.
   E.   Assignment Or Transfer Of Permit Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any holder of a commercial or noncommercial solicitation permit to assign or
transfer a commercial or noncommercial solicitation permit. (Ord. 2012-967, 7-
12-2012)
3-3-5: SOLICITATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No Solicitors Sticker: It shall be unlawful for any person to go in or
upon, ring the bell, knock on the door of or attempt to gain admission to any
residence, dwelling, apartment or nonresidential premises which is posted with
a sticker or sign bearing the words "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers", "No
Solicitors", or any other similar notice indicating in any manner that the
occupants of such residence or nonresidential premises desire not to be
disturbed or to have their rights of privacy disturbed for the purpose of
soliciting unless such occupant has specifically requested or invited such
solicitation. For convenience, the village's police department may make
available to village residents stickers or weatherproof cards bearing notice of
the type herein described for posting on or near the main entrance door to any
residence or nonresidential premises.
   B.   Hours: It shall be unlawful for any person to go in or upon, ring the
bell, knock on the door of or attempt to gain admission to any residence,
dwelling, apartment or nonresidential premises for the purpose of conducting
solicitation at any time before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and after nine o'clock
(9:00) P.M. on any day, unless such person has been requested or invited by the
owner or adult occupant of the premises to be thereupon for such purposes.
   C.   Failure To Leave: It shall be unlawful for any person conducting
solicitation at any residence or nonresidential premises to fail to leave, and
to fail to cease conducting solicitation at, such residence or nonresidential
premises immediately upon receiving, from any person present at such residence
or nonresidential premises, a request to leave or cease conducting
solicitation.
   D.   Right To Cancel Sale: It shall be unlawful for any person who engages
in "peddling" or "solicitation" as defined in section
3-3-2 of this chapter, to misrepresent the right of a buyer to rescind or
cancel a sale under the provisions of applicable law.
   E.   Misrepresentation: It shall be unlawful for any person who engages in
peddling or solicitation to use any false plan, scheme or ruse; to cheat,
deceive, or make any fraudulent misrepresentation while acting as a peddler or
solicitor in the village, whether through the company or organization or
through an employee or solicitor thereof.
   F.   Sales Other Than As In The Application: It shall be unlawful for any
person who engages in "peddling" or "solicitation", as defined in section
3-3-2 of this chapter, to barter, sell or peddle any goods, wares, merchandise,
foodstuffs, services or other property other than as specified in the
application.
   G.   Solicitation On Public Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct solicitation in or on any sidewalk or other public property, way or
place in a manner that completely or substantially impedes the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic in, on or around such sidewalk or public
property, way or place. No person conducting solicitation shall have the
exclusive right to any sidewalk or other public property, way or place, nor to
establish a permanent stationary location for such solicitation.
   H.   Solicitation To Occupant Of Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for any
person to conduct solicitation of employment, business, contributions or sales
of any kind or collect money for such from the occupant of any vehicle
traveling upon any street or highway when:
      1.   The solicitation or collection causes the person performing the
activity to enter onto the traveled portion of a street or highway; or
      2.   The solicitation or collection involves the person performing the
activity to be located upon any median area which separates traffic lanes for
vehicular travel in opposite directions; or
      3.   The person performing the activity is located such that vehicles
cannot move into a legal parking area to safely conduct the transaction.
For purposes of this section, the traveled portion of the street or highway
shall mean that portion of the road normally used by moving motor vehicle
traffic.
   I.   Do Not Solicit Registry: The village shall establish and maintain a do
not solicit registry, upon which any person in lawful possession or occupation
of any residence may request to be placed after completing the necessary
application. It shall be unlawful for commercial solicitors to solicit at any
residence registered in the do not solicit registry.
   J.   Violation: A violation of this section is hereby defined to be a public
nuisance. (Ord. 2012-967, 7-12-2012)
3-3-6: COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMIT APPLICATION:
   A.   Applications for a commercial solicitation permit shall be made on
forms provided by the police department. The applications shall be provided by
the police department immediately upon request. The applicant shall verify
under oath by signature or other similar affirmation that the statements made
by the applicant in the application are true, complete and accurate. The
application shall contain the following:
      1.   The applicant's full legal name, age, telephone number, current
residence address, and the applicant's business address, if other than
residence address;
      2.   The full legal name, telephone number, current residence address,
and the business address, if other than residence address of the person, or
organization, if any, sponsoring, promoting or conducting the proposed
activities;
      3.   The applicant's social security number, the applicant's driver's
license number or other official form of identification and the applicant's
vehicle identification number, if any;
      4.   A current photograph of the applicant;
      5.   A brief physical description of the applicant, including height,
weight, and hair and eye color;
      6.   In the case of a commercial solicitation permit, the name and
address of the applicant's current employer or person or entity on whose behalf
the applicant is conducting commercial solicitation;
      7.   A brief description of the subject matter of the applicant's
solicitation and method of operation;
      8.   The dates for which the applicant seeks a commercial solicitation
permit, and the specific dates upon which the applicant will solicit;
      9.   Names of the three (3) most recent communities where the applicant
has solicited house to house;
      10.   Information regarding the use or revocation of prior commercial
solicitation permits issued to the applicant by the village, if any, including
the date, or approximate date, of the last previous application for a
commercial solicitation permit from the village, if any;
      11.   Information regarding prior or current violations, if any, by the
applicant of any of the provisions of this chapter, or the solicitation
regulations of any other local, state, or federal government; and
      12.   Information regarding any prior conviction of the applicant of a
felony under the laws of the state of Illinois, any other state, or the United
States.
   B.   If, during the pendency of any application for, or during the term of
any commercial solicitation permit there is any change in any material
information given in the application for such permit, the applicant shall
promptly notify the chief of police in writing of such change.
   C.   Within ten (10) business days of receipt of an application for a
commercial solicitation permit, the chief of police shall grant the application
and issue the permit provided that the applicable requirements contained in
section
3-3-7 of this chapter are satisfied. If the requirements contained in section
3-3-7 of this chapter are not satisfied, the chief of police shall, within ten
(10) business days of receipt of the application for a permit, deny the
application and state the reasons in writing for such denial. If the chief of
police fails, within ten (10) business days of receipt of the application for a
permit, to act on the application, then, provided that the permit fee has been
paid, the application shall be considered granted. The chief of police shall
cause to be kept in the village records an accurate record of every commercial
solicitation permit application received and acted upon together with all other
information and data pertaining thereto, including commercial solicitation
permits issued or denied under the provisions of this section.
   D.   The fee for each commercial solicitation permit application shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   E.   A commercial solicitation permit shall expire one year from the date of
its issuance.
   F.   A commercial solicitation permit may be renewed by the applicant by
reaffirming that the information in the prior application remains true,
complete and accurate, or by submitting in a new application, with any
information that has changed from the prior application, and provided that the
applicable requirements contained in section
3-3-7 of this chapter are satisfied. (Ord. 2012-967, 7-12-2012)
3-3-7: COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A commercial solicitation permit shall be subject to, and granted upon,
the following conditions, restrictions and requirements:
      1.   The material statements made in the application are true;
      2.   The applicant has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of
the state of Illinois, any other state or the United States within five (5)
years of the date of the application;
      3.   The applicant has not been convicted of a sex offense as set forth
in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes, act 5, article 11 et seq., or any equivalent
law of any other state;
      4.   The applicant has not had a previously issued commercial
solicitation permit revoked by the village within five (5) years of the date of
the application;
      5.   The applicant has not been convicted of violating any provisions of
this chapter within five (5) years of the date of the application;
      6.   The applicant has not been convicted of a misdemeanor resulting from
criminal trespass, theft, fraud, deception or misrepresentation within five (5)
years of the date of the application;
      7.   The chief of police may conduct a background investigation of the
applicant through the use of the police department resources including, but not
limited to, an Accurint background investigation;
      8.   The application is accompanied by a current photograph of the
applicant; and
      9.   The applicant has paid the commercial solicitation permit
application fee. (Ord. 2012-967, 7-12-2012)
3-3-8: NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMIT APPLICATION:
   A.   Applications for a noncommercial solicitation permit shall be made on
forms provided by the chief of police. The applications shall be provided by
the police department immediately upon request. The applicant shall verify
under oath by signature or other similar affirmation that the statements made
by the applicant in the application are true, complete and accurate. The
application shall contain the following:
      1.   The applicant's name, age and current residence address;
      2.   The applicant's social security number, the applicant's driver's
license number or other official form of identification and the applicant's
vehicle identification number if any;
      3.   A current photograph of the applicant;
      4.   A brief physical description of the applicant, including height,
weight, and hair and eye color;
      5.   The dates for which the applicant seeks a noncommercial solicitation
permit;
      6.   Names of the three (3) most recent communities where the applicant
has solicited house to house;
      7.   Information regarding the revocation of prior noncommercial
solicitation permits issued to the applicant by the village, if any;
      8.   Information regarding prior or current violations, if any, by the
applicant of any of the provisions of this chapter, or the solicitation
regulations of any other local, state, or federal government;
      9.   Information regarding any prior conviction of the applicant of a
felony under the laws of the state of Illinois, any other state, or the United
States;
      10.   The name of the organization the applicant represents, if any, and
the name or names of the organization on behalf of which the applicant intends
to solicit contributions;
      11.   The name and address of the organization's registered agent for
service in Illinois and in the state in which the organization was legally
established;
      12.   The principal address of the organization the applicant represents,
if any, and the address of its principal office in Illinois, if different. If
the organization does not maintain a principal office, the name and address of
the location where the records of the organization are maintained;
      13.   The charitable purpose of the organization and evidence of its tax
exempt status;
      14.   The dates for which the applicant seeks a noncommercial
solicitation permit, and the specific dates upon which the applicant will
solicit.
   B.   If, during the pendency of any application for, or during the term of,
any noncommercial solicitation permit there is any change in any material
information given in the application for such permit, the applicant shall
promptly notify the village administrator in writing of such change.
   C.   Within ten (10) business days of receipt of an application for a
noncommercial solicitation permit, the chief of police shall grant the
application and issue the permit provided that the applicable requirements
contained in section
3-3-9 of this chapter are satisfied. If the requirements contained in section
3-3-9 of this chapter are not satisfied, the chief of police shall, within ten
(10) business days of receipt of the application for a permit, deny the
application and state the reasons in writing for such denial. If the chief of
police fails, within ten (10) business days of receipt of the application for a
permit, to act on the application, then the application shall be considered
granted. The chief of police shall cause to be kept in the village records an
accurate record of every noncommercial solicitation permit application received
and acted upon, together with all other information and data pertaining
thereto, including noncommercial solicitation permits issued or denied under
the provisions of this section.
   D.   There shall be no permit fee for a noncommercial solicitation permit.
   E.   A noncommercial solicitation permit shall expire one year from the date
of its issuance.
   F.   A noncommercial solicitation permit may be renewed by the applicant by
reaffirming in writing that the information in the prior application remains
true, complete and accurate, or by submitting, in a new application, with any
information that has changed from the prior application, and provided that the
applicable requirements contained in section
3-3-9 of this chapter are satisfied. (Ord. 2012-967, 7-12-2012)
3-3-9: NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A noncommercial solicitation permit shall be subject to, and granted
upon, the following conditions, restrictions and requirements:
      1.   The material statements made in the application are true;
      2.   The applicant has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of
the state of Illinois, any other state, or the United States within five (5)
years of the date of the application;
      3.   The applicant has not been convicted of a sex offense as set forth
in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes, act 5, article 11 et seq., or any equivalent
law of any other state;
      4.   The applicant has not had a previously issued noncommercial
solicitation permit revoked by the village within five (5) years of the date of
the application;
      5.   The applicant has not been convicted of violating any provisions of
this chapter within five (5) years of the date of the application;
      6.   The applicant has not been convicted of a misdemeanor resulting from
criminal trespass, theft, fraud, deception or misrepresentation within five (5)
years of the date of the application;
      7.   The chief of police may conduct a background investigation of the
applicant through the use of the police department resources including, but not
limited to, an Accurint background investigation;
      8.   The application is accompanied by a current photograph of the
applicant; and
      9.   The solicitation will be conducted for a charitable purpose. (Ord.
2012-967, 7-12-2012)
3-3-10: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
The chief of police shall revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter after a finding that any of the following causes exists:
   A.   Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in the
application for a permit;
   B.   Failure, following thirty (30) days after the expiration of any appeal
rights, to pay any penalty assessed under this chapter;
   C.   Violation of any term of the permit granted to the holder of a permit;
   D.   Violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-967, 7-12-2012)
3-3-11: APPEAL OF DECISIONS OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE:
Any decision of the chief of police under this chapter shall be appealable. Any
person aggrieved by a decision of the chief of police shall have the right to
appeal the decision to the village president, provided that the applicant files
a written notice of appeal, including a statement of the grounds of appeal,
with the village president within fifteen (15) calendar days after notice of
the decision of the chief of police. The village president shall set a hearing
on the appeal within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the written notice
of appeal and notice of the time and place shall be given to the aggrieved
party. The village president shall have the power to reverse, affirm or modify
the decision of the chief of police. In making his/her determination, the
village president shall only consider the standards set forth in this chapter.
The village president's decision shall be rendered the same day as the hearing.
The failure of the village president to set or conduct a hearing in accordance
with the requirements of this section shall be considered a denial of the
appeal. (Ord. 2012-967, 7-12-2012)
3-3-12: PENALTIES:
Any person or entity who shall be guilty of a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than seventy
five dollars ($75.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
A separate offense shall be deemed committed for every day a violation
continues. The provisions of this section shall not limit any other remedies
authorized by law. (Ord. 2012-967, 7-12-2012)
3-3-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-967, 7-12-2012)
CHAPTER 4
FILLING STATIONS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definition
3-4-2: License Required
3-4-3: Application For License; Investigation
3-4-4: License Fee
3-4-5: Nontransferability Of License
3-4-6: Location Restrictions
3-4-7: Conduct Of Business
3-4-8: Storage Tanks
3-4-9: Fire Hazards
3-4-10: Inspections
3-4-11: Penalties
3-4-1: DEFINITION:
The words "filling station", as used in this chapter, mean any building,
structure, premises, enclosure or other place within the village where a
container or tank, either portable or stationary, containing either carbon
bisulfite, gasoline, naphtha, benzol, hydrocarbon (gas drips), liquefied
petroleum gas, acetone, kerosene, turpentine or other inflammable liquids,
having a flash point below one hundred sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (165°F) is
kept or located for the purpose of selling, offering for sale or distribution
to the public any such liquids from such container or tank; but the provisions
of this chapter do not apply to any place where such inflammable liquids are
kept or sold for medicinal purposes only. (Ord. 0-72-17, 1-13-1972)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a filling station without obtaining a
license therefor. (Ord. 0-72-17, 1-13-1972)
3-4-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
The application for the license required by this chapter shall be made to the
village clerk. In the absence of a provision to the contrary, an application
for this license shall state the name of the applicant, the license desired,
the location to be used, the time covered and the fee to be paid. Moreover,
each application shall contain such additional information as is needed for the
proper guidance of the village officials in issuing the license applied for. No
license shall be issued until the applicant has furnished all information
requested by any village official and all other provisions of this chapter in
respect thereto have been complied with.
Upon receipt of the application described in the preceding paragraph, the
village clerk shall refer it to the building inspector. The building inspector,
or some member of his department designated by him, shall examine the premises
on which the filling station is to be operated and the facilities thereof and
shall satisfy himself that the applicant will be able to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the village affecting the
operation of filling stations 1 . No license shall be issued to the applicant
if the results of the foregoing inspection are unsatisfactory in any respect.
After the foregoing inspection has been completed by the building inspector, he
shall endorse on the application for his recommendation as to whether the
license shall issue and thereupon forward the application to the village clerk.
No license shall be issued by the village clerk until the issuance thereof has
been recommended by the building inspector. (Ord. 0-72-17, 1-13-1972)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 5, article C of this code.
3-4-4: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for each filling station is fifty dollars ($50.00) for
six (6) pumps and ten dollars ($10.00) for each additional pump. (Ord. 0-72-17,
1-13-1972)
3-4-5: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
No license granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be assigned or
transferred, nor shall any such license authorize any person other than the
licensee named therein to do business or act under such license. (Ord. 0-72-17,
1-13-1972)
3-4-6: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Licensed Location Only: No license issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall authorize the maintenance of the business of a filling station at
any but the location specified therein.
   B.   Change Of Location: A duly licensed business may be conducted in a
changed location without a new license being required if notice of the change
of location is given to the village clerk at least two (2) weeks before the
actual change is made and the new location and the facilities therein comply
with this chapter and other ordinances of the village bearing upon the
operation of filling stations 1 .
   C.   Theaters And Schools: No filling station shall be operated within two
hundred feet (200') of any public theater or building used exclusively for
school or church purposes. (Ord. 0-72-17, 1-13-1972)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 4, chapter 5, article C of this code.
3-4-7: CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
Each filling station shall be conducted and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the village 1 . (Ord. 0-72-
17, 1-13-1972)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 5, article C of this code.
3-4-8: STORAGE TANKS:
Tanks or containers used in any filling station for the storage of any of the
inflammable liquids named in this chapter shall be free from leaks and shall be
constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, other ordinances
of the village 1  and the laws of the state. Except as otherwise permitted by
ordinance, no tank for the storage of inflammable liquids in a filling station
shall be located within any building. (Ord. 0-72-17, 1-13-1972)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 4, chapter 5, article C of this code.
3-4-9: FIRE HAZARDS:
It is unlawful for any person to permit or maintain any accumulation of waste
or other material which is combustible so as to create a fire hazard on any
premises used as a filling station. (Ord. 0-72-17, 1-13-1972)
3-4-10: INSPECTIONS:
Each filling station shall be inspected at least twice in every year by the
building inspector, or some person duly authorized by him to make the
inspection. It is the duty of the person making the inspection to see that the
premises are maintained in compliance with this chapter and other ordinances of
the village 1 , to see that there is no dangerous accumulation of waste or
other combustible material on the premises and to report to the board any
violation of this chapter or any other ordinances which may be discovered
during the inspections. (Ord. 0-72-17, 1-13-1972)
 
Notes
1 3. See title 4, chapter 5, article C of this code.
3-4-11: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct
offense shall be regarded as committed each day on which such person shall
continue or permit any violation. (Ord. 0-72-17, 1-13-1972)
CHAPTER 5
TOBACCO AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: License
3-5-3: Underage Persons; Possession, Purchase, Sales, Penalty
3-5-4: Signs Required
3-5-5: Minimum Age To Sell Tobacco Products
3-5-6: Unlawful To Sell Near School Buildings
3-5-6A: Sale Of Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) Products Prohibited
3-5-7: Certain Free Distributions Prohibited
3-5-8: Restrictions On Manner Of Sale And Delivery
3-5-9: Responsibility For Agents And Employees
3-5-10: Violations; Suspension, Revocation Of License; Fines; Costs
3-5-11: Use Of Premises After Revocation
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: Any product, substance, or device consisting of
or containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of
nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling,
snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. "Alternative nicotine product"
excludes cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products as
these terms are defined in 720 ILCS 675/1 et. seq., and any product approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration as a non-tobacco product for
sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for
other medical purposed, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
RETAIL TOBACCO AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE DEALER: Any establishment that is
engaged in the sale of tobacco products and/or alternative nicotine products,
and/or tobacco and/or nicotine related accessories.
RETAIL TOBACCO AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE DEALER'S LICENSE: A license authorizing
the retail sale of tobacco products and/or alternative nicotine products, and
tobacco and/or nicotine related accessories.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling or exhaling of any
kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, and/or any other
lighted tobacco product or accessory, and/or the inhaling, exhaling,
vaporizing, vaping, and/or otherwise using any alternative nicotine products,
and/or the carrying of any activated alternative nicotine accessory.
SMOKELESS TOBACCO: Any tobacco products that are suitable for dipping or
chewing.
SMOKING HERBS: All substances of plant origin and their derivatives, including,
but not limited to, brook calea, California poppy, damiana, hops, ginseng,
lobelia, jimsonweed and other members of the Datura genus, passionflower and
wild lettuce, which are processed or sold primarily for use as smoking
materials.
TETRAHYDRO-CANNABINOL (THC) PRODUCTS: A product which contains THC derived from
the cannabis sativa plants such as delta 8 vapes, gummy bears and similar
products containing THC.
TOBACCO AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE RELATED ACCESSORIES: Any items primarily for
the smoking, the ingestion of, the inhaling of, the vaporizing of, or for
otherwise using tobacco products, and/or alternative nicotine products, and/or
of substances made illegal under any statue or of substances whose sale, gift,
barter or exchange is made unlawful under this chapter.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing either smoking herbs or tobacco
leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff,
chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, or smokeless tobacco.
UNDERAGE PERSONS: A person who has not yet attained the age of twenty-one (21)
years of age.
VAPE OR VAPING: The inhaling, exhaling, vaporizing, or otherwise using
alternative nicotine products.
(Ord. 2008-864, 8-14-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-1206, 6-13-2019; Ord. 2020-1228, 3-
11-2020; Ord. 2025-1434, 7-10-2025)
3-5-2: LICENSE:
   A.   Requirement: It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale or distribute
samples of tobacco related products and/or alternative nicotine products or
tobacco and/or alternative nicotine related accessories within the Village
without first obtaining a retail tobacco dealer's license.
   B.   Application: Application for a retail tobacco and/or alternative
nicotine dealer's license hereunder shall be made in writing to the Village
President. The application form shall be approved by the Village President.
   C.   License Location: A retail tobacco and/or alternative nicotine dealer's
license shall be valid only for the premises listed on the license. A retail
tobacco and/or alternative nicotine dealer's license shall not be transferable
to a different location. A retail tobacco and/or alternative nicotine dealer's
license shall also not be transferable to any person, partnership, corporation,
or entity other than the named licensee.
   D.   License Fee: The license fee for a retail tobacco and/or alternative
nicotine dealer's license shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord.
2008-864, 8-14-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-1206, 6-13-2019; Ord. 2020-1228, 3-11-2020)
3-5-3: UNDERAGE PERSONS; POSSESSION, PURCHASE, SALES, PENALTY:
   A.   Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
twenty-one (21) years to possess alternative nicotine products, tobacco
products, smoking herbs or tobacco and/or alternative nicotine related
accessories.
   B.   Purchase: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-
one (21) years to purchase tobacco products and/or alternative nicotine
products, smoking herbs or tobacco and/or alternative nicotine related
accessories. It shall be further unlawful for any person to misrepresent their
identity or age, or to use false or altered identification for the purpose of
purchasing or receiving tobacco and/or alternative nicotine products or tobacco
and/or alternative nicotine related accessories.
   C.   Sales: It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to
sell, offer for sale, exchange, distribute, give away, or deliver tobacco and/
or alternative nicotine products, smoking herbs or tobacco and/or alternative
nicotine related accessories to any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years. It shall be the responsibility of the person making the sale,
distribution, or delivery of tobacco and/or alternative nicotine products,
smoking herbs or tobacco and/or alternative nicotine related accessories to
require proof of age of the purchaser or recipient of alternative nicotine and/
or tobacco products, smoking herbs, or tobacco and/or alternative nicotine
related accessories in the form of a government issued, photographic
identification containing the purchaser's or recipient's date of birth whenever
the licensee or its employee(s) or agent(s) reasonably believes that person to
be under the age of twenty-one ( 21) years.
   D.   Penalty: Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years found to
have violated this section shall be fined in an amount not to exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2008-864, 8-14-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-
1206, 6-13-2019; Ord. 2020-1228, 3-11-2020)
3-5-4: SIGNS REQUIRED:
   A.   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein
shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products.
Each sign shall state:
      THE SALE OF TOBACCO, SMOKING HERBS, AND/OR ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS
TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
   B.   The posted signs required herein shall be plainly visible and shall
measure at least eight and one half inches (8 1/2") in height by eleven inches
(11") in length. Lettering on posted signs shall be red and shall be at least
one inch (1") in height. (Ord. 2008-864, 8-14-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-1206, 6-13-
2019; Ord. 2020-1228, 3-11-2020)
3-5-5: MINIMUM AGE TO SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to permit any person under
the age of twenty-one (21) years to handle or sell tobacco, smoking herbs, and/
or alternative nicotine products or tobacco and/or alternative nicotine related
accessories in any licensed premises. (Ord. 2008-864, 8-14-2008; amd. Ord.
2019-1206, 6-13-2019; Ord. 2020-1228, 3-11-2020)
3-5-6: UNLAWFUL TO SELL NEAR SCHOOL BUILDINGS:
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, distribute
samples, or deliver tobacco products or smoking herbs within one hundred feet
(100') of any school or other building used for educational or recreational
programs for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(Ord. 2008-864, 8-14-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-1206, 6-13-2019; Ord. 2020-1228, 3-
11-2020)
3-5-6A: SALE OF TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL (THC) PRODUCTS PROHIBITED:
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or employee or agent of such licensee
to sell, deliver or distribute any product which contains Tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC). The provisions of this section have no bearing or effect on
establishments licensed by the State of Illinois pursuant to the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act or the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
(Ord. 2025-1434, 7-10-2025)
3-5-7: CERTAIN FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED:
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of
selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco, smoking
herbs, and/or alternative nicotine products, or any employee or agent of any
such licensee or person, in the course of such licensee's or person's business,
to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco, smoking herbs, and/or alternative
nicotine related products free of charge to any person on any public right-of-
way, park, or playground or on other property owned by the Village, school
district, park district, or public library.
(Ord. 2008-864, 8-14-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-1206, 6-13-2019; Ord. 2020-1228, 3-
11-2020)
3-5-8: RESTRICTIONS ON MANNER OF SALE AND DELIVERY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale,
distribute samples, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling,
distributing samples, or delivering tobacco, smoking herbs, and/or alternative
nicotine related products unless the sale occurs in a direct, face to face
exchange. Sale of tobacco and alternative nicotine related products with the
assistance of any electronic or mechanical device (such as a vending machine)
is prohibited.
   B.   1.   All tobacco, smoking herbs, and alternative nicotine related
products must be sold from behind a counter, in an age restricted area, or in a
sealed display case.
      2.   The restrictions described in subsection B1 shall not apply to a
retail tobacco store that:
         a.   Derives at least ninety percent (90%) of its revenue from the
sale of tobacco and/or alternative nicotine related products or tobacco and/or
alternative nicotine related accessories; and
         b.   Does not allow persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years to
enter upon the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
         c.   Posts a sign on the main entrance to the establishment stating
that persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years are prohibited from
entering the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. (Ord.
2008-864, 8-14-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-1206, 6-13-2019; Ord. 2020-1228, 3-11-2020)
3-5-9: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager, or other
agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of
such licensee; and such licensee shall be punished in the same manner as if
such act or omission has been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord.
2008-864, 8-14-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-1206, 6-13-2019; Ord. 2020-1228, 3-11-2020)
3-5-10: VIOLATIONS; SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES; COSTS:
   A.   Enforcement: The South Barrington Chief of Police, or his designee,
shall be charged with the enforcement of this Chapter. Any license issued under
provisions of this Chapter may be suspended or revoked if it is determined that
the licensee has violated any provisions of this Chapter. In addition to a
suspension or revocation of a retail tobacco and alternative nicotine dealer's
license, a fine may be levied against the licensee for a proven violation. The
fine imposed shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
   B.   Public Hearing: No such retail tobacco and alternative nicotine
dealer's license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined
except after a public hearing before the Village's Administrative Hearing
Officer conducted in accord with the provisions of the Village of South
Barrington's administrative adjudication ordinance. The licensee shall be given
a minimum seven (7) days' written notice of the hearing, affording the licensee
an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in the
notice. The notice shall contain a written statement of the violation alleged.
For purposes of this section, the notice period shall begin the day following
delivery of the notice of hearing by certified mail or personal delivery.
   C.   Findings and Determination: If the Hearing Officer determines, after
such hearing, that the retail tobacco and/or alternative nicotine dealer's
license should be revoked, suspended and/or that the licensee should be fined,
a written notice stating findings of fact and the reasons for such
determination and the amount of fine and/or suspension or revocation shall be
entered. A copy of such order shall be served upon the licensee within seven
(7) days after the hearing. Service of the Hearing Officer's findings and
decision shall be served by certified mail or personal delivery.
   D.   Costs: In addition to any fine, suspension and/or revocation, any
licensee determined to have violated any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall reimburse the Village for its costs of the hearing on such violation. The
Village Hearing Officer shall determine the costs incurred by the Village for
the hearing, including, but not limited to, court reporter fees, the cost of
transcripts or records, the costs of preparing and mailing or serving notices
and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the Village or such
lesser sum as the Hearing Officer may determine.
   E.   Any and all fines and costs assessed shall be paid by the licensee to
the general corporate fund of the Village of South Barrington within thirty
(30) days of entry of the Hearing Officer's written order. Except when a
petition for administrative review is timely filed to review the Hearing
Officer's decision, failure to pay the fines and costs within thirty (30) days
of entry of the Hearing Officer's written order shall constitute an additional
violation for which additional fines, suspension and/or revocation may be
imposed. (Ord. 2008-864, 8-14-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-1206, 6-13-2019; Ord. 2020-
1228, 3-11-2020)
3-5-11: USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION:
If any license shall have been revoked for cause, no license shall be granted
for the premises for a period of six (6) months thereafter for the conduct of
the selling of tobacco products or tobacco related accessories unless otherwise
ordered by the Village Administrative Hearing Officer. If the licensed premises
are used for purposes other than the sale of tobacco and/or alternative
nicotine products, such uses may continue during any period of suspension or
revocation. (Ord. 2008-864, 8-14-2008; amd. Ord. 2019-1206, 6-13-2019; Ord.
2020-1228, 3-11-2020)
CHAPTER 6
FOOD VENDING MACHINES
SECTION:
3-6-1: License Required
3-6-2: Application For License
3-6-3: License Fees
3-6-4: License Certificate
3-6-5: Inspection And Analysis
3-6-6: Vending Machine Enclosure
3-6-7: Penalties
3-6-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or maintain in the village for business or the use of
the public, any automatic vending machine for the sale of food, including, but
not limited to, soft drinks, water, or packaged snacks without first having
obtained a license for each such automatic vending machine as provided herein.
(Ord. 2016-1107, 4-13-2016)
3-6-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the village clerk, and shall
state the full name of the applicant and the number of said machines for which
said applicant desires licenses and include a site plan showing the location of
the machines. Such application shall be accompanied by evidence that the
applicant, if an individual, or the authorized person(s) in charge of the
business, if a firm or corporation, is or are authorized person(s), and the
village clerk shall cause a license or licenses to be issued upon the payment
of the license fee hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 2016-1107, 4-13-2016)
3-6-3: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fee for such licenses shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 2016-1107, 4-13-2016)
3-6-4: LICENSE CERTIFICATE:
The village clerk shall issue to said applicant a certificate for the operation
of the approved number of machines, which certificate shall be kept in the
management office of the property with the site plan showing the approved
locations of the machines and subject to inspection at any time by the village.
For a vending machine inside of a business building, a copy of the certificate
is to be available on site and subject to inspection at any time by the
village. (Ord. 2016-1107, 4-13-2016)
3-6-5: INSPECTION AND ANALYSIS:
It shall be the duty of the building and zoning officer, or his designee, who
are hereby authorized and empowered to inspect and examine all food or drink
being offered for sale by means of said automatic vending machine for the
purpose of ascertaining whether the laws of the state of Illinois and of the
village in relation to sales from said vending machines are complied with, and
that said food and drink so offered for sale has been kept fresh, clean and
wholesome, and it shall be the duty of all persons operating said vending
machines, upon the demand of the building and zoning officer, or his designee,
to furnish to him for his inspection samples of all said food and drink, which
samples may be analyzed by or under the direction of the building and zoning
officer and a record of such analysis shall be made and kept in his office for
the inspection of the public. (Ord. 2016-1107, 4-13-2016)
3-6-6: VENDING MACHINE ENCLOSURE:
Vending machines shall be placed inside the principal building, placed inside
an accessory structure designed to complement the principal building, or
screened with walls and landscaping. (Ord. 2016-1107, 4-13-2016)
3-6-7: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day an
unlicensed vending machine is exposed for operation or maintained in violation
of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-1107, 4-13-2016)
CHAPTER 7
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT SANITATION
SECTION:
3-7-1: Intent And Purpose
3-7-2: Adoption Of The Food Service Sanitation Rules And Regulations And The
Retail Food Store Sanitation Rules And Regulations
3-7-3: Regulation Of Provisions
3-7-4: Compliance Procedures; Certificate Required
3-7-5: Issuance Of Food Establishment Certificate
3-7-6: Suspension Of Certificate
3-7-7: Revocation Of Certificate
3-7-8: Service Of Notice
3-7-9: Hearings
3-7-10: Application After Revocation
3-7-11: Inspection Frequency
3-7-12: Access
3-7-13: Report Of Inspections
3-7-14: Correction Of Violations
3-7-15: Inspection Report Form
3-7-16: Examination And Condemnation Of Food
3-7-17: Submission Of Construction Documents
3-7-18: Preoperational Inspection
3-7-19: Procedure When Infection Is Suspected
3-7-20: Inspection, Reinspection Costs
3-7-21: Conditional Certificate
3-7-22: Penalties
3-7-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The purpose of this regulation is to assure that appropriate standards of food
handling and service are maintained. To that end, the "Food Service Sanitation
Rules And Regulations" of the state of Illinois department of public health
(IDPH) and the "Retail Food Store Sanitation Rules And Regulations" of the
state of Illinois department of public health are adopted by reference, and
additional food service regulations are presented. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-2: ADOPTION OF THE FOOD SERVICE SANITATION RULES AND REGULATIONS AND THE
RETAIL FOOD STORE SANITATION RULES AND REGULATIONS:
There is hereby adopted by reference to this code, the "Food Service Sanitation
Rules And Regulations" of the state of Illinois department of public health
(IDPH) (Illinois administrative code title 77, part 570) and the retail food
store sanitation code of the state of Illinois department of public health
(Illinois administrative code title 77, part 760), the same being a public
record of the state of Illinois, and consisting of miscellaneous state
statutory provisions, as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-3: REGULATION OF PROVISIONS:
The issuance, suspension and revocation of certificates to operate food
establishments; the prohibition of sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink,
the enforcement of this chapter shall be regulated in accordance with this
chapter. The compliance procedures and the inspection of food service
establishment shall be regulated in accordance with the "Food Service
Sanitation Rules And Regulations" and the "Retail Food Store Sanitation Rules
And Regulations" on file with the Illinois secretary of state and three (3)
copies of which are on file at the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 2008-865,
8-14-2008)
3-7-4: COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES; CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
No person, corporation or other entity shall operate a food establishment
without having first been issued by the village a valid food establishment
certificate. No food establishment certificate shall be issued without the
applicant fully complying with the requirements of this chapter. Certificates
are not transferable. A valid certificate shall be posted in every food
establishment. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-5: ISSUANCE OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENT CERTIFICATE:
   A.   Application For Certificate: Any person desiring to operate a food
establishment shall make written application for a certificate on forms
provided by the village. Such application shall include the name and address of
each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment, and
the signature of each applicant.
   B.   Inspection Of Food Establishments: Prior to approval of an application
for a certificate, the village and/or the Cook County department of public
health shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Issuance: The village shall issue a food establishment certificate to
the applicant if the inspection required in subsection B of this section
reveals that the proposed food establishment complies with the requirements of
this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and regulations of the
village. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-6: SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATE:
   A.   The village president or his designee may, without warning, notice or
hearing, suspend any certificate to operate a food establishment if the
continued operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent danger to
the health, safety or welfare of the residents or visitors of the village or
otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. Suspension shall
be effective upon service of the notice required by subsection 3-7-7B of this
chapter. When a certificate is suspended, food operations shall immediately
cease. Whenever a certificate is suspended, the holder of the certificate shall
be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt of
a request for hearing.
   B.   Whenever a certificate is suspended, the holder of the certificate or
the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the certificate is, upon
service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for
hearing will be provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the
village within ten (10) days. The notice of suspension shall set forth the
reason(s) for the suspension and the violation charged. If no written request
for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. The
suspension shall remain in effect until all violations forming the basis of the
suspension, if proven by a preponderance of the evidence, are cured. In
addition to the suspension, the holder of the certificate may be fined as
provided by this code for a violation proven. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-7: REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
   A.   The village may, after providing opportunity for hearing, revoke the
certificate for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of
this chapter or for repeated interference by the holder of the certificate with
the village or the Cook County department of public health in the performance
of duty.
   B.   Prior to revocation, the village shall notify the holder of the
certificate, in writing, of the hearing date and the specific reason(s) for
which the certificate may be revoked. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-8: SERVICE OF NOTICE:
A notice provided for by this chapter is properly served when it is delivered
to the holder of the certificate, or the person in charge, or when it is sent
by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the holder of the certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed
in the records of the village. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-9: HEARINGS:
The hearings provided for in this chapter shall be conducted by the village's
administrative hearing officer at a time and place designated in the notice of
hearing. Any oral testimony given at a hearing shall be reported verbatim. The
hearing officer shall make a final finding based upon the complete hearing
record and shall sustain, modify or rescind any prior notice or order. A
written finding of the hearing decision shall be served upon the holder of the
certificate within ten (10) days of the hearing. The hearing officer may impose
a fine or fines upon the holder of the certificate in accord with the
provisions of this code, in addition to an order of suspension or revocation.
The hearing shall be conducted in accord with the procedures of the village's
administrative adjudication hearing ordinance. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-10: APPLICATION AFTER REVOCATION:
Whenever a revocation of a certificate has become final, the holder of the
revoked certificate may make written application for a new certificate. (Ord.
2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-11: INSPECTION FREQUENCY:
An inspection of a food establishment shall be performed at least once every
six (6) months. Additional inspections of the food establishment shall be
performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-12: ACCESS:
Duly authorized representatives of the village or the Cook County department of
public health, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any
food establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections
to determine compliance with this chapter. The representatives shall be
permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information
pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or used. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-
14-2008)
3-7-13: REPORT OF INSPECTIONS:
Whenever an inspection of a food establishment is made, the findings shall be
recorded on the inspection report as provided in section
3-7-15 of this chapter. The inspection report form shall summarize the
requirements of this chapter and shall set forth a weighted point value for
each requirement. Inspectional remarks should be written to reference, by item
number, the item violated and should state the correction to be made. The
rating score of the establishment shall be the total of the weighted point
values for all violations, subtracted from one hundred (100). A copy of the
completed inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of
the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection
report form is a public document that shall be made available for public
disclosure to any person who requests a copy according to law. (Ord. 2008-865,
8-14-2008)
3-7-14: CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS:
   A.   The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period
of time for the correction of the violations found; and correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance
with the following provisions:
      1.   If an imminent health hazard exists, including, but not limited to,
a lack of refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the
establishment shall, whether or not an emergency order of closure is issued by
the village or the Cook County department of public health, immediately cease
food operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the Cook
County department of public health or by order of the village.
      2.   All violations of 4- or 5-point weighted items shall be corrected as
soon as possible, but in no event later than ten (10) days following
inspection. A follow up inspection shall be conducted to confirm correction at
the discretion of the Cook County department of public health.
      3.   All 1- or 2-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as
possible, but in no event later than the next routine inspection.
      4.   When the rating score of the establishment is less than sixty (60),
the establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations
within forty eight (48) hours. One or more reinspections will be conducted at
reasonable time intervals to ensure correction and compliance.
      5.   In the case of temporary food establishments, all violations shall
be corrected within twenty four (24) hours. If violations are not corrected
within twenty four (24) hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food
operations until authorized to resume by the Cook County department of public
health or by order of the village.
   B.   The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time
limits for corrections may result in cessation of food operations. An
opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time limits or both
will be provided if a written request is filed with the village within ten (10)
days following cessation of operations. If a request for hearing is received, a
hearing, as provided herein, shall be held within twenty (20) days of receipt
of the request.
   C.   Whenever a food establishment is required under the provisions of this
chapter to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until it is shown
on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease operations
no longer exist or by hearing before the village hearing officer. Opportunity
for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable time. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-
14-2008)
3-7-15: INSPECTION REPORT FORM:
The inspection report form referred to in this chapter shall be on a form
prescribed by the Cook County public health department and on file in the
office of the village clerk. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-16: EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD:
Food may be examined or sampled by the Cook County department of public health
as often as necessary for enforcement of this chapter. The Cook County
department of public health may, upon written notice to the owner or person in
charge, specifying with particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold order
on any food which it believes is in violation of the Illinois department of
public health's "Food Service And Sanitation Rules And Regulations", or "Retail
Food Store Sanitation Rules And Regulations", respectively, or any other
section of this chapter. The Cook County department of public health shall tag,
label or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject
to a hold order shall be used, served or moved from the establishment. The Cook
County department of public health shall permit storage of the food under
conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without
risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered
and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be
filed within ten (10) days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall
be destroyed. If a request for hearing is received, the hearing shall be held
within twenty (20) days after receipt of the request. On the basis of evidence
produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the owner or person
in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy
such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-17: SUBMISSION OF CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS:
Whenever a food establishment is constructed or remodeled and whenever an
existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly
prepared construction documents for such construction, remodeling or conversion
shall be submitted to the village and the Cook County department of public
health for review and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is
begun. The construction documents shall indicate the proposed layout,
arrangement (including placement of tables and chairs), mechanical plans,
electrical plans and construction materials of work areas and the type and
model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The village and the Cook
County department of public health shall approve the plans and specifications
if they meet the requirements of this chapter. No food establishment shall be
constructed, extensively remodeled or converted except in accordance with plans
and construction documents approved by the village and Cook County department
of public health. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-18: PREOPERATIONAL INSPECTION:
Whenever construction documents are required by section
3-7-17 of this chapter to be submitted to the village and the Cook County
department of public health, the village and/or the Cook County department of
public health shall inspect the food establishment prior to the start of
operations, to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications
and with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-19: PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED:
When the Cook County department of public health has reasonable cause to
suspect possible disease transmission by an employee of a food establishment,
it may secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee or make any other
investigations as indicated and shall take appropriate action. The Cook County
department of public health may require any or all of the following measures:
   A.   The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in the food
establishment;
   B.   The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until, in the
opinion of the Cook County department of public health, no further danger of
disease outbreak exists;
   C.   Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the
establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease;
   D.   Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and of
other employees and of his and their body discharges. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-
2008)
3-7-20: INSPECTION, REINSPECTION COSTS:
The holder of a food establishment certificate shall, during the month of
December in each year, pay the annual cost of the inspections required in
section
3-7-11 of this chapter. In addition, if a reinspection is deemed necessary by
the inspector, the cost of any and all subsequent reinspections shall be paid
by the holder of the certificate. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-21: CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE:
When structural, plumbing, electrical, ventilation or similar such defects
exist in an established food facility that may require significant expenditures
to correct, but are not considered to be imminent health hazards, a conditional
certificate may be granted at the discretion of the health authority. Under no
circumstances will a conditional certificate be issued for more than two (2)
consecutive twelve (12) month periods. The purpose of the conditional
certificate is to allow a reasonable period of time for correction of existing
defects. Such conditional certificate may also be issued during a period when a
food establishment is being remodeled. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
3-7-22: PENALTIES:
In addition to any other penalties that may be imposed for a violation, any
person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation continues. (Ord. 2008-865, 8-14-2008)
CHAPTER 8
RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-8-1: Limitations on Conduct
3-8-2: License Fee; Waiver
3-8-3: Eligible Organizations Designated; Definitions
3-8-4: License Required
3-8-5: License Application, Required Information
3-8-6: License; Persons, Firms, Organizations not Eligible
3-8-7: Conduct of Raffles
3-8-8: Bonding of Raffle Manager; Waiver
3-8-9: Records, Reports; Availability for Inspection
3-8-10: Construction of Chapter Provisions
3-8-11: Violations; Penalty; Refunds
3-8-1: LIMITATIONS ON CONDUCT:
A system is hereby established for the licensing of organizations to operate
raffles in the Village. All raffles shall be subject to the following
limitations:
   A.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle is one million dollars ($1,000,000.00);
   B.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle is one million dollars ($1,000,000.00);
   C.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or
sold is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
   D.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
is one hundred twenty (120) days. (Ord. 0-94-443, 9-8-94)
3-8-2: LICENSE FEE; WAIVER:
A fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged for licenses
hereunder, or such fee may be waived. Each license shall be valid for only one
raffle. (Ord. 0-94-443, 9-8-94)
3-8-3: ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATIONS DESIGNATED; DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable,
labor, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that operate without
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a
period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license
and which have had, during that entire five (5) year period, a bona fide
membership engaged in carrying out their objects.
   B.   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions apply:
    CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to
benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
   EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common
to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope
and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
   FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
   LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
   NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-
for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to any one as a result of the
operation.
   RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 0-94-443, 9-8-94)
3-8-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles or chances without having
first obtained a license therefor pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 0-94-443, 9-8-94)
3-8-5: LICENSE APPLICATION, REQUIRED INFORMATION:
   A.   All applications for raffle licenses shall be on forms provided by the
Village which application shall contain the following information:
      1.   The area or areas within the Village in which raffle chances will be
sold or issued;
      2.   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
      3.   The time when the winning chance will be determined;
      4.   The location or locations at which winning chances will be
determined;
      5.   The name of the raffle manager designated by the organization;
      6.   A sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the
prospective licensee organization signed by the presiding officer and
secretary.
   B.   The Village must act on a raffle application within thirty (30) days
from the date of application. (Ord. 0-94-443, 9-8-94)
3-8-6: LICENSE; PERSONS, FIRMS, ORGANIZATIONS NOT ELIGIBLE:
The following are not eligible for a raffle license from the Village:
   A.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   B.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   C.   Any person who is not of good moral character;
   D.   Any firm or corporation in which a "person" defined in subsections A, B
or C hereof has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a
person is active or employed;
   E.   Any organization in which a "person" defined in subsections A, B or C
hereof is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not;
   F.   Any organization in which a "person" defined in subsections A, B or C
hereof is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined
in this Chapter. (Ord. 0-94-443, 9-8-94)
3-8-7: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
Any raffle conducted in the Village shall be conducted subject to the following
restrictions:
   A.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   B.   No person, except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   C.   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   D.   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified in the license.
   E.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 0-94-443, 9-8-94)
3-8-8: BONDING OF RAFFLE MANAGER; WAIVER:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a
single raffle manager designated by the organization. The raffle manager so
designated shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount determined by the
Village in favor of the organization conditioned upon his honesty in the
performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be
given in writing to the Village not less than thirty (30) days prior to its
cancellation. The Village may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver
provision in the license issued to an organization under this Chapter provided
that a license containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by
unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization. (Ord. 0-94-443, 9-
8-94)
3-8-9: RECORDS, REPORTS; AVAILABILITY FOR INSPECTION:
   A.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction and the receipt.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   B.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles shall be segregated from
other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts if bingo
games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license
therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the State, and placed in a
separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles.
The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the
operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other
revenues of the organization.
   C.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to
its membership, and to the Village, its gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as
required in this Section.
   D.   Records required by this Section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 0-94-443, 9-8-94)
3-8-10: CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting or
operation of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than
raffles as provided for herein. (Ord. 0-94-443, 9-8-94)
3-8-11: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY; REFUNDS:
Violation of any provision of this Chapter shall cause a fine of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) to be imposed. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. If a raffle is
being conducted in the Village without a license, all chances bought for that
raffle shall be cancelled and the purchase price of each chance returned to the
prospective purchaser. (Ord. 0-94-443, 9-8-94)
CHAPTER 9
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: Tax Imposed
3-9-3: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
3-9-4: Returns To Department
3-9-5: Resellers
3-9-6: Severability
3-9-7: Effective Date
3-9-8: Repealer
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in such
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in such municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross
charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
termination point within a municipality that has imposed a tax under the act
and charges for the portion of the interoffice channels provided within that
municipality. Charges for that portion of the interoffice channel connecting
two (2) or more channel termination points, one or more of which is located
within the jurisdictional boundary of such municipality, shall be determined by
the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the
interoffice channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of
channel termination points that are located within the jurisdictional boundary
of the municipality and the denominator of which is the total number of channel
termination points connected by the interoffice channel. However, "gross
charge" shall not include any of the following:
   A.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the
internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to customers'
bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public
utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce
commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act.
   B.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such
municipality.
   C.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time sharing agreement.
   D.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges.
   E.   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-
222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the department of commerce and economic
opportunity.
   F.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
this act has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that the
charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between
wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations
and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service.
   G.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made).
   H.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication
devices.
   I.   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
   J.   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if: 1) those
charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are
taxable, 2) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or
invoice, and 3) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges on
the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the
nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from the
sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a
combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or
telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the
retailer of the telecommunications.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or
a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of
any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities
created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision
of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby
imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state,
who, to the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to
ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued,
without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be
the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state.
The permit may be revoked by the department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this state,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the
retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or
agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or
whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and
state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air to ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or
permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line" means
a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into end to end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications"
subject to the tax imposed under this act. For purposes of this section,
"prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section
2-27 of the retailers' occupation tax act. (Ord. 2002-664, 9-12-2002; amd. Ord.
2006-784, 8-10-2006)
3-9-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all of the following acts or privileges:
   A.   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in
the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person effective January 1,
2003 through December 31, 2003, at a rate of 1.0 percent, and effective January
1, 2004, at a rate of 3.0 percent, of the gross charge for such
telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual
multimunicipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation
under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a
tax in another municipality on that event, shall be allowed a credit against
any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the
amount of the tax properly due and paid in the municipality that was not
previously allowed as a credit against any other municipal tax.
   B.   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in
the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person effective January 1,
2003 through December 31, 2003, at a rate of 1.0 percent, and effective January
1, 2004, at a rate of 3.0 percent, of the gross charge for such
telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual
multistate or multimunicipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject
to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer
has paid a tax in another state or municipality in this state on such event,
shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by
this section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in
such other state or such tax properly due and paid in a municipality in this
state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or
local tax in this state.
   C.   The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such act or privilege
to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
municipality. (Ord. 2006-784, 8-10-2006)
3-9-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer
by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected
pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid,
is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale
at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the
manner provided by the department.
   B.   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 2002-664, 9-12-2002)
3-9-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
Commencing on February 1, 2003, the tax imposed under this chapter on
telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified
municipal telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement this
act. (Ord. 2002-664, 9-12-2002)
3-9-5: RESELLERS:
   A.   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the department may reasonably require.
   B.   Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person having discontinued the making of resales.
   C.   Except as provided in this section, the act or privilege of originating
or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax free on the
grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale
number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in
connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is
nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 2002-664, 9-12-2002)
3-9-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this
chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall
not affect other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that can be
given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2002-
664, 9-12-2002)
3-9-7: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall take effect on January 1, 2003. Copies of ordinance 2003-684
shall be certified and sent to the Illinois department of revenue. (Ord. 2003-
684, 6-12-2003)
3-9-8: REPEALER:
If public act 92-0526, entitled the simplified municipal telecommunications tax
act, is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, or if this amended
chapter is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, then ordinance 0-97-
522, passed December 11, 1997, shall be deemed in full force and effect as of
the date public act 92-0526 or this chapter is repealed or becomes ineffective.
(Ord. 2002-664, 9-12-2002)
CHAPTER 10
AMUSEMENT TAX
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definitions
3-10-2: Scope
3-10-3: Imposed
3-10-4: Books And Records
3-10-5: Bond Required
3-10-6: Time For Payment
3-10-7: Penalty
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMUSEMENT: Any exhibition, performance or show for entertainment purposes,
including, but not limited to, any theatrical, dramatic, speaking, leadership
seminars, educational speaking seminars, musical or spectacular performance,
motion picture show, poultry or animal show, animal act, carnival, pumpkin
farm, hay ride, corn field maze, circus, rodeo, athletic contest, sport, game
or similar exhibition for public entertainment, including, without being
limited to, boxing, wrestling, skating, dancing, swimming, racing, or riding on
animals or vehicles, baseball, basketball, softball, football, tennis, golf,
hockey, track and field games, bowling, billiard and pool games. Amusement
shall be interpreted broadly to include all events where a ticket is paid.
LICENSEE: Any person, entity, or company that provides an amusement in exchange
for a paid admission.
PAID ADMISSION: An individual patron who pays a fee or surrenders evidence of
prepayment for the privilege of admission to the amusement.
(Ord. 0-98-525, 1-8-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1439, 8-14-2025l; Ord. 2025-1441, 9-
11-2025)
3-10-2: SCOPE:
   The amusement tax provided for in this chapter shall apply to all vendors.
(Ord. 0-98-525, 1-8-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1439, 8-14-2025)
3-10-3: IMPOSED:
   A.   Any vendor shall pay to the village an amount equal to forty five cents
($0.45) for each "paid admission", entering into or upon the property,
amusement area, or grounds of the vendor.
   B.   This amusement tax shall be in addition to and not instead of any other
fees required by this code.
   C.   Exemption: However, the amusement tax shall not apply to governmental
agencies (e.g., library districts, school districts, park districts).
(Ord. 0-2006-773, 5-11-2006, eff. 7-1-2006; amd. Ord. 2025-1439, 8-14-2025)
3-10-4: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
   Accurate books and records shall at all times be kept and maintained by the
vendor showing the paid admission tickets issued and used, any prepaid
certificates presented on each day and the attendance at such amusement. The
duly authorized representative or representatives of the village shall at all
reasonable times have access to the admission records of any vendor for the
purpose of examining and checking the same and ascertaining whether or not the
proper amount has been or is being paid to the village as herein provided.
(Ord. 0-98-525, 1-8-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1439, 8-14-2025)
3-10-5: BOND REQUIRED:
   In the event the vendor shall operate an amusement on a temporary basis
(i.e., for a period less than a year) then the vendor shall provide a bond
executed by the vendor as principal and by a surety acceptable to the village,
said bond to guarantee the payment of the tax imposed hereby and to be in an
amount sufficient to cover the estimated tax which shall become due by virtue
of the operation of the amusement.
(Ord. 0-98-525, 1-8-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1439, 8-14-2025)
3-10-6: TIME FOR PAYMENT:
   A.   The tax provided for in this chapter shall be due and payable to the
village on or before the last day of the month ("due date") following any month
during which the amusement is operated. The vendor shall supply, at the time of
payment, a report showing the paid admission tickets issued and used, any
prepaid certificates presented on each day of operation, and the attendance for
which the tax provided herein is being paid. All payments and reports required
herein shall be delivered to the office of the village clerk.
   B.   If for any reason any tax is not paid on the due date, and such
nonpayment continues for ten (10) days after written notice to vendor, a
penalty at the rate of two percent (2%) per month on the amount of tax which
remains unpaid, accruing from the due date, shall be added and collected.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided and after
expiration of the applicable cure period, upon the request of the Village
President, the Village Attorney shall bring or cause to be brought an action to
enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the Village in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 0-98-525, 1-8-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1439, 8-14-2025)
3-10-7: PENALTY:
   Any vendor failing or refusing to file the necessary return, who makes a
fraudulent return or who fails to pay the amount found to be due as herein
provided shall upon a finding of guilty be punished by a fine of not less than
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) in addition to the amount of tax and any interest due from
such vendor as may be liable in a civil action as herein provided. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each month the vendor fails or refuses to
pay the amount found to be due as herein provided.
(Ord. 0-98-525, 1-8-1998; amd. Ord. 2025-1439, 8-14-2025)
CHAPTER 11
PREPARED FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definitions
3-11-2: Tax Imposed
3-11-3: Collection Of Tax
3-11-4: Books And Records
3-11-5: Transmission Of Tax Collection
3-11-6: Late Payment Penalty
3-11-7: Transmittal Of Excess Tax Collections
3-11-8: Enforcement, License Suspension, Revocation
3-11-9: Penalty
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcohol, spirits, wine or beer as defined, set forth and
regulated in the South Barrington Village Code, as amended, which is sold at
retail either for consumption on the premises where sold or is sold in its
original package for consumption off the premises.
PREPARED FOODS: Any solid, liquid (including both alcoholic and nonalcoholic
liquid), powder or other food substance used or intended to be used for human
consumption and which has been prepared for immediate consumption on and/or off
the premises.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: To obtain for use or consumption in exchange for a
consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any other
nature, and not for resale.
RETAIL FOOD FACILITY:
   A.   Establishments subject to regulation pursuant to South Barrington
Village Code, as amended, including, but not limited to, any food delivery
vehicle, or food or beverage vending vehicle that sells at retail alcoholic
liquor, food or beverage in the Village whether or not such retail food
facility use is conducted along with any use(s) in a common premises or
business establishment such as a food store, department store, or office
building.
   B.   Includes, but is not limited to, those establishments commonly
described as an inn, restaurant, eating place, drive-in restaurant, bakery,
buffet, cafeteria, cafe, lunch counter, fast-food outlet, catering service,
coffee shop, diner, sandwich shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge,
soft drink parlor, ice cream parlor, tearoom, delicatessen, movie theater,
mobile food or beverage or ice cream vehicle, hotel, motel, club, concession
stand, and publicly and privately owned athletic clubs, health clubs, golf
courses, and parks.
RETAIL LIQUOR FACILITY: Any establishment licensed under and/or subject to the
provisions of this Chapter, as amended.
RETAILER: An owner and/or operator who sells or offers for sale prepared foods
and/or alcoholic liquor for use of consumption and not for resale. An owner
and/or operator includes an individual, partnership, joint venture, limited
liability company, limited partnership, corporation (including a dissolved
corporation) and any other business entity, and a member or employee of any
such entity, who as such officer, employee or member is under the duty to
comply with the provisions of this Section. Any duty or liability imposed by
this Section of the South Barrington Village Code upon the parties described
herein shall be joint and several. (Ord. 0-99-569, 5-13-1999, eff. 6-1-1999)
3-11-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax, in addition to any and all other taxes imposed, is hereby levied and
imposed upon the retail purchase of alcoholic liquor and prepared foods at any
"retail food facility" or "retail liquor facility", as defined, within the
Village, at the rate of one and one-half percent (11/2%) of the purchase price
of such alcoholic liquor and prepared foods, excluding other taxes imposed
thereon, the ultimate incidence of and the liability for payment of which shall
be borne by the purchaser. (Ord. 0-99-569, 5-13-1999, eff. 6-1-1999)
3-11-3: COLLECTION OF TAX:
The retailer of each retail food facility and each retail liquor facility
within the Village shall have the duty to collect and account for the tax
imposed on each purchaser at the time the consideration is paid by the
purchaser. (Ord. 0-99-569, 5-13-1999, eff. 6-1-1999)
3-11-4: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The retailer of each retail food facility and each retail liquor facility
within the Village shall have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books,
records and accounts, showing the gross receipts for sale of prepared foods and
alcoholic liquor and the tax collected each business day, which shall be made
available to the Village for examination and for audit by the Village upon
reasonable notice and during customary business hours. (Ord. 0-99-569, 5-13-
1999, eff. 6-1-1999)
3-11-5: TRANSMISSION OF TAX COLLECTION:
The retailer of each retail food facility and each retail liquor facility
within the Village shall have the duty to cause to be filed, a sworn prepared
food and beverage tax return with the Village Treasurer for each retail food
facility and retail liquor facility located within the Village. The return
shall be prepared and submitted on forms prescribed by the Village and filed
with the Village by the filing date and at the same quarterly time intervals or
frequencies as the Sale and Use Tax Return, Form ST-1, is due to be filed with
the Illinois Department of Revenue. The return shall also be accompanied by
payment to the Village of all taxes imposed by this Chapter which are due and
owing for the time period covered by the return. The return shall also be
accompanied by a copy of the Sale and Use Tax Return, Form ST-1, filed with the
Illinois Department of Revenue for sales within the Village during the same
time period. (Ord. 0-99-569, 5-13-1999, eff. 6-1-1999)
3-11-6: LATE PAYMENT PENALTY:
If any tax imposed by this Chapter is not paid when due, a late payment penalty
equal to five percent (5%) of the unpaid tax shall be added for each month, or
any portion thereof, that the tax remains unpaid and the late payment penalty
shall be paid along with the tax imposed. (Ord. 0-99-569, 5-13-1999, eff. 6-1-
1999; amd. Ord. 2024-1400, 4-11-2024)
3-11-7: TRANSMITTAL OF EXCESS TAX COLLECTIONS:
If any retailer collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed
hereby, but which amount is purported to be the collection of the tax, or if a
retailer collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax
imposed herein and does not for any reason return it to the purchaser who paid
it before filing the return for the period in which it occurred, that person
shall account for and pay over those amounts to the Village along with the tax
properly collected. (Ord. 0-99-569, 5-13-1999, eff. 6-1-1999)
3-11-8: ENFORCEMENT, LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION:
Payment and collection of the tax and any late payment penalty may be enforced
by action in any court of competent jurisdiction and failure to collect,
account for and pay over the tax and any late payment penalty shall be cause
for suspension or revocation of any Village license issued for the prepared
food facility or retail liquor facility applicable to the premises thereof, all
in addition to any other penalties in this Chapter. (Ord. 0-99-569, 5-13-1999,
eff. 6-1-1999)
3-11-9: PENALTY:
Any retailer operating a retail food facility or retail liquor facility within
the Village who fails or omits to collect, account for, pay over to the Village
the tax and any late payment penalty, if any, imposed by this Chapter, or fails
to maintain or allow examination of the books and records required in Section
3-11-4 of this Chapter, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each offense. Each day a violation of this Chapter continues shall be
considered a separate violation. (Ord. 0-99-569, 5-13-1999, eff. 6-1-1999)
CHAPTER 12
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION:
3-12-1: Scope
3-12-2: Definitions
3-12-3: Notices
3-12-4: Late Payment
3-12-5: Application Of Payment
3-12-6: Requirements For The Assessment Of Locally Imposed And Administered
Taxes
3-12-7: Credits And Refunds
3-12-8: Audit Procedure
3-12-9: Appeal Process
3-12-10: Interest And Penalties
3-12-11: Abatement
3-12-12: Installment Contracts
3-12-13: Statute Of Limitations
3-12-14: Voluntary Disclosure
3-12-15: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
3-12-16: Internal Review Procedures For Liens
3-12-1: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in
connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 0-2001-623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
ACT: The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act".
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village treasurer, or his or her designee, who is
charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and
administered taxes, along with staff, employees or agents to the extent they
are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax
administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to
implement the terms of this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The
exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be
inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village, not an agency or department
of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under
the property tax code or fees collected by the village, other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village. (Ord. 0-2001-623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-3: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, proper notice is deemed to have been given in
writing by first class or overnight mail to the last known address of the
addressee, or by personal service or delivery. (Ord. 0-2001-623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-4: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate
postage prepaid. (Ord. 0-2001-623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-5: APPLICATION OF PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first, to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second,
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third, to the penalty for
the applicable period. (Ord. 0-2001-623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-6: REQUIREMENTS FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED
TAXES:
   A.   Any notice of tax assessment due must be sent by United States
registered or certified mail.
   B.   The local tax administrator shall send a written statement to a
taxpayer whenever the local government issues a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
statement shall include the following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process. (Ord. 0-2001-623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-7: CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
   B.   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund for all
locally imposed and administered taxes shall be one year after the end of the
calendar year in which payment in error was made. The village shall not grant a
credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or
penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the village.
   C.   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund, which consists of a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled
check or receipt for payment;
         d.   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within forty five (45) days of the receipt by the local tax
administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator
shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, based on
a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or
the grant of a credit. (Ord. 0-2001-623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
   A.   A taxpayer must be notified in writing of a proposed audit of any
locally administered tax. Each notice of audit shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   B.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours not less than
seven (7) days from the date the notice is given. A reasonable effort should be
made to schedule the audit on a date and time convenient to the taxpayer, but
such audit shall be conducted within thirty (30) days from the date notice is
given.
   C.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   D.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer (or tax
collector) fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
period, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   E.   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within forty five (45)
days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   F.   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 0-2001-623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-9: APPEAL PROCESS:
The procedure for appealing a determination of tax due or an assessment is as
follows:
   A.   A taxpayer who believes his or her determination of tax due or
assessment is in error may file with the local tax administrator a written
appeal setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's appeal. The written appeal
must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of
receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment.
   B.   If a timely written appeal is filed, the local tax administrator shall
review the determination or assessment, and all documentation provided by the
taxpayer. If the local tax administrator determines the original determination
or assessment was in error, he or she shall correct the determination of tax
due or assessment accordingly. If the local tax administrator determines the
original determination of tax due or assessment was correct, he or she shall
reject the taxpayer's appeal, and the original determination or assessment
shall stand. The local tax administrator shall rule on the taxpayer's appeal
within sixty (60) days of receipt of the written protest, and shall provide
written notice to the taxpayer of his or her decision.
   C.   If a written appeal is not filed within the forty five (45) day period,
the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and
owing without further notice.
   D.   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest. In no event shall the time for filing a written
protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety
(90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period. (Ord. 0-2001-
623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-10: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   A.   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be six
percent (6%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days
and the number of days elapsed.
   B.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a
failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 0-2001-
623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-11: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing. (Ord. 0-2001-623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-12: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 0-2001-623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-13: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing.
   A.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   B.   If any tax return is not filed or, if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years after the end of the calendar
year in which return for the applicable period was due or after the end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed,
whichever occurs later.
   C.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 0-2001-623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-14: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 0-2001-623, 1-11-
2001)
3-12-15: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via the village's
standard procedure for publication of ordinances. Copies of all tax ordinances
shall be made available to the public upon request at the village clerk's
office. (Ord. 0-2001-623, 1-11-2001)
3-12-16: INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   A.   Remove the lien at the village's expense;
   B.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   C.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 0-
2001-623, 1-11-2001)
CHAPTER 13
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
SECTION:
3-13-1: Title
3-13-2: Short Title
3-13-3: Purposes
3-13-4: Definitions
3-13-5: Grant Of Franchise
3-13-6: Requirement Of A Franchise
3-13-7: Franchise Nonexclusive; Limiting Number Of Franchises
3-13-8: Franchise Area
3-13-9: Term Of Franchise
3-13-10: Franchise Applications
3-13-11: Surety Or Guaranty Agreement Required
3-13-12: Contents Of Franchise Agreement
3-13-13: Franchise Fees
3-13-14: Assignment Or Transfer Of Franchise
3-13-15: Franchise Renewal
3-13-16: Right To Purchase System
3-13-17: Continuity Of Service
3-13-18: Procedures In The Event Of Termination Or Expiration
3-13-19: Regulatory Authority
3-13-20: Regulatory Responsibility
3-13-21: Technological, Service And Performance Review
3-13-22: Rates
3-13-23: Security Fund
3-13-24: Construction And Completion Security
3-13-25: Insurance
3-13-26: Indemnification
3-13-27: System Design
3-13-28: Emergency Override
3-13-29: Service To Franchise Area
3-13-30: Extension Of System
3-13-31: Cablecasting Facilities
3-13-32: Interconnection
3-13-33: Institutional Network
3-13-34: System Construction Schedule
3-13-35: As Built Maps And Drawings
3-13-36: Construction Standards
3-13-37: Technical Standards
3-13-38: System Tests
3-13-39: Street Occupancy
3-13-40: Provision Of Service
3-13-41: Services To Be Provided
3-13-42: Public Sector Subscriber Service
3-13-43: Public, Educational And Government Access Channels And Facilities
3-13-44: Cable Channels For Commercial Use
3-13-45: Open Books And Records
3-13-46: Records And Reports Required
3-13-47: Annual Reports
3-13-48: Copies Of Federal And State Reports
3-13-49: Liquidated Damages
3-13-50: Franchise Violation; Notice And Procedures
3-13-51: Franchise Revocation And Termination
3-13-52: Other Remedies
3-13-53: Rights Of Individuals
3-13-54: Consumer Protection And Customer Service Provisions
3-13-55: Rights Reserved To The Village
3-13-56: Equal Opportunity Employer
3-13-57: No Waiver By The Village
3-13-58: Severability
3-13-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the VILLAGE OF SOUTH BARRINGTON CABLE
COMMUNICATIONS ENABLING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-2: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the SOUTH BARRINGTON CABLE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2002-
666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-3: PURPOSES:
The purposes of this chapter are:
   A.   To establish franchise procedures and standards which encourage the
growth and development of cable systems within the village of South Barrington
and which assure that cable systems are responsive to the needs and interests
of the local community;
   B.   To assure that the village can continue to fairly and responsibly
protect the public health, safety and welfare;
   C.   To establish a local policy concerning cable communications;
   D.   To promote competition in cable television service;
   E.   To establish local authority with respect to the regulation of cable
systems to ensure that any cable operator will abide by all local ordinances,
rules and regulations;
   F.   To provide for the development of cable communications as a means of
communication for and between the citizens and the public institutions of the
village of South Barrington;
   G.   To provide for the payment of franchise fees to the village for the use
of the village streets and public ways in the construction and operation of a
cable communications system, and to compensate the village, to the extent
permitted by law, for costs both directly related and incidental to the
awarding of the cable television franchise;
   H.   To provide for remedies and to prescribe penalties for violations of
this chapter and for any and all franchise agreements granted hereunder;
   I.   To provide for consumer protection in regard to the construction and
operation of a cable system;
   J.   To provide for the regulation, where allowed, of rates and fees charged
by a company under this chapter; and
   K.   To ensure that cable television subscribers receive high quality cable
communications service. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number
include the singular number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and
"may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary
meaning.
AFFILIATE(S): When used in relation to any person, means another person who
owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or
control with, such person.
AS BUILT DRAWING: A document submitted to the village that accurately locates
the cable system facilities constructed or located within public ways of the
village.
AS BUILT MAPS: Maps showing the completed cable system facilities in the
franchise area.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Any service tier which includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals and the public, educational, and government
access channels.
CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, the cable television
consumer protection and competition act of 1992, and the telecommunications act
of 1996, as the same may be amended from time to time.
CABLE OPERATOR: Any person or group of persons who:
   A.   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly, or through one
or more affiliates, owns a significant interest in such cable system;
   B.   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management and operation of such a cable system; or
   C.   Operates an open video system or multichannel video system, as defined
in the cable act.
CABLE SERVICE:
   A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other
programming services;
   B.   Subscriber interaction, if any which is required for the selection or
use of such video programming or other programming service; and
   C.   To the extent consistent with the cable act, the term cable service
shall include high speed internet access, and other data transfer services.
CABLE SYSTEM (SYSTEM, OR CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM): A facility, consisting
of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service
which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers
within the village.
CHANNEL (CABLE CHANNEL): A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television
channel as a television channel is defined by the federal communications
commission by regulation.
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS UNIT: Any commercial building or establishment that is not
a dwelling unit.
COMMERCIAL USE: The channel capacity designated for commercial use as defined
and required by federal law by persons unaffiliated with the cable operator.
COMPANY: The natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation,
association, joint venture, or organization of any kind granted a franchise by
the village under this chapter and its lawful successors, transferees or
assignees.
CONVERTER: An electronic device which converts signals from one form to
another.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees of the village.
CUSTOMER SERVICE REPRESENTATIVE (CSR): An individual employed by the cable
company to answer the telephone, write service and installation orders, answer
subscribers' questions, receive and process payments, and perform other
subscriber service related activities.
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units that, when measured by a cable plant
mile, meets the numerical requirement established in this chapter or the
franchise agreement, so as to require the operator to provide cable service.
DOWNSTREAM CHANNEL: The direction of signal transmission from the headend to
the subscriber terminals.
DROP CABLE OR SERVICE DROP: The coaxial or fiber cable that connects the feeder
portion of the distribution system to the subscriber's premises.
DWELLING UNIT: A single-family residential building or a unit in a multi-family
residential building.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL: A cable television channel, or channels,
specifically designated for noncommercial use by the local noncommercial
educational institutions.
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC): The present federal agency of that
name as constituted by the communications act of 1934, or any legally appointed
or elected successor.
FRANCHISE: The authorization, or grant issued by the village which authorizes
the construction and operation of the cable system within the village.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: That separate contract by which the corporate authorities
grant the company the right and franchise to operate a cable system within the
village.
FRANCHISE AREA: That portion of the village for which a franchise is granted
under the authority of this chapter. Except as otherwise required by applicable
law, the franchise area shall be the corporate limits of the village including
all territory thereafter annexed to the village.
FRANCHISE FEE: The fee that a company is required to pay to the village
pursuant to this chapter for the right, privilege and franchise to construct,
install, maintain and operate a cable communications system within the streets
and public ways of the village for the purpose of providing cable service to
persons in the village. The term franchise fee does not include:
   A.   Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any
such tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or
their services, but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly
discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);
   B.   Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by the
cable operator for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;
   C.   Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the
franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
   D.   Any fee imposed under title 17, United States Code.
GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL: That channel, or channels, set aside for the
exclusive noncommercial use of local government as determined by the village.
GROSS REVENUES: All revenue received by a company, or its affiliates, derived
directly or indirectly from and in connection with the operation of the
company's cable system to provide cable service within the village, including,
but not limited to, revenues, fees, receipts or charges from or for: basic tier
cable service; any tier of video programming service other than basic service;
any optional, premium, per channel or per program service; high speed internet
access service, digital music service, any installation, disconnection,
reconnection, change in service or other customer service; rentals of
converters, remotes or other customer premises equipment; commercial leased
channels or channel access; advertising sales revenue, including a per
subscriber share of revenues received for advertising carried on one or more
cable systems in addition to the company's cable system within the village;
revenues from home shopping channels; the sales of programming guides; and such
other revenue sources as may now exist or hereafter develop, provided that such
revenues, fees, receipts or charges may lawfully be included in the gross
revenue base on which the village may calculate and collect franchise fees.
Gross revenues shall not include any amounts refunded to subscribers, any
unpaid subscriber or advertiser accounts and any sales tax, telecommunications
tax, utility message tax or other taxes imposed directly upon any subscriber or
user by the village, the state or other governmental unit and collected by the
company on behalf of and for remittance to the village, the state or other
governmental unit. As used herein, annual gross revenues shall mean gross
revenues attributable to a twelve (12) month accounting period, or portion
thereof.
GUARANTY: An agreement or promise to answer for the debt, default, or
miscarriage of another. Secondarily responsible for debt, default, or
miscarriage.
HEADEND: The control center of a cable system, where incoming signals are
amplified, converted, processed and combined into a common cable along with any
origination cablecasting, for transmission to subscribers. Headend usually
includes antennas, preamplifiers, frequency converters, demodulators,
modulators, processors, and other related equipment.
INSTALLATION: The connection from system feeder cable to the subscriber's
converter or terminal and the provision of service.
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK (I-NET): A communications network comprised of
frequencies (upstream) that connect schools, and units of local government,
etc., to the cable system headend for transmission downstream to the subscriber
network and/or a closed nonpublic network. The I-Net may be constructed of a
separate trunk line or may be incorporated as a certain set of frequencies on
the subscriber trunk line.
INTERCONNECT: The process whereby two (2) or more cable systems are connected.
LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL: A channel which carries programming that is produced
by the operator or its designated agent, or a channel which carries programming
determined by the operator to reflect the needs, interests, and concerns of the
communities served.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, cooperative, association, trust,
partnership, joint venture, combination or other legally recognized entity.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL: A cable television channel specifically designated as a
channel available to the public for the production of noncommercial television
programming operating under rules established by the village.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS (PEG ACCESS CHANNELS): The
channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental access
programming.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES (PEG ACCESS FACILITIES):
The facilities and equipment utilized for the production and playback of
public, educational and government access programming.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any real property owned by the village or any other
governmental unit that is not otherwise defined herein as a public way. A
franchise granted under this chapter does not authorize the use of any public
property by the company.
PUBLIC WAY: The surface, the airspace above the surface, and the area below the
surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard,
drive, bridge, tunnel, parkways, or other public right of way now or hereafter
held by the village which shall entitle the village and the company to the use
thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the company's cable
system.
SCHOOLS: All public and private elementary and secondary schools, junior
colleges, colleges, and universities which have been granted a certificate of
recognition by the Illinois state board of education, pursuant to Illinois
state statutes, and which are located within the franchise area.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person who elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service
provided and authorized by the company by means of or in connection with the
cable system, and who pays the charges therefor.
TRANSFER (FRANCHISE TRANSFER): Any transaction or series of transactions which,
singularly or collectively, result in the sale, assignment or transfer of all
or a majority of the assets of the company, or the cable system, or a change of
twenty five percent (25%) or more of the ownership or working control of the
company, of the ownership or working control of the franchise, or of the
ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or working
control of the company, the franchise or cable system. Franchise transfers
require village approval as provided in this chapter. Transactions between
affiliates of the company are not exempt from village approval, except as
specifically provided in a franchise agreement between the village and the
company.
TRAP: A passive devise used to block a channel or channels from being received
by a cable subscriber (negative trap), or used to remove an interfering carrier
from a channel that a subscriber wants to receive (positive trap).
TRUNK (TRUNK LINE): The main distribution lines leading from the headend of the
cable system to the various areas where feeder lines (cables) are attached to
distribute signals to the subscribers.
UPSTREAM CHANNEL: The direction of signal transmission from the subscriber
terminals to the headend.
VILLAGE: The village of South Barrington. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-5: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   In the event that the village shall grant to a company a nonexclusive,
franchise to construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct a cable system
within the franchise area, or a renewal of an existing franchise, said
franchise or renewal shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide
the services of a cable system as required by the provisions of this chapter
and the franchise agreement. The franchise agreement shall include those
provisions of the company's application for franchise or application for
renewal that are finally negotiated and accepted by the village and the
company.
   B.   Any franchise granted under the terms and conditions contained herein
shall be consistent with federal and state laws and regulations.
   C.   Any franchise granted is hereby made subject to the general provisions
of this chapter now in effect or hereafter made effective. Nothing in the
franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the village regarding
permits, fees to be paid or manner of construction.
   D.   The company shall acknowledge that its rights under this chapter and
the franchise are subject to the police power of the village to adopt and
enforce generally applicable ordinances necessary to the health, safety and
welfare of the public; and the company shall agree to comply with all generally
applicable laws and ordinances enacted by the village pursuant to such power.
(Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-6: REQUIREMENT OF A FRANCHISE:
No person shall construct, install, maintain, or operate a cable system within
the village, or within any public ways of the village, unless a franchise has
first been obtained pursuant to this chapter, and unless such franchise is in
full force and effect. Such franchise shall not take the place of any other
license or permit which may be legally required of the company in order to
conduct such a business, or to construct or install buildings, structures,
facilities, or equipment within the village. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-7: FRANCHISE NONEXCLUSIVE; LIMITING NUMBER OF FRANCHISES:
   A.   Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The village may grant any
number of franchises subject to applicable federal and state law. The village
may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily
limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local
considerations such as:
      1.   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate multiple cables in
addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems, such as
electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage.
      2.   The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition,
such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the
disruption arising from numerous excavations of the rights of way.
   B.   In the event the village grants an additional franchise to use and
occupy the public ways for the purpose of operating a cable system, said
additional franchise should only be granted under the same terms and conditions
as those imposed on the company previously granted a franchise pursuant to this
chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in order to avoid the village's receipt
of redundant or outdated equipment, to the extent that the company previously
granted such a franchise has provided specific equipment in satisfaction of its
obligation to support public, educational or governmental programming, the
village may require the subsequent franchisee to provide alternative equipment,
providing that the total financial commitment for said equipment is equal to
that provided by the previously granted franchise. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-8: FRANCHISE AREA:
Except as otherwise required by applicable law, the franchise area for any
franchise granted by the village shall be the corporate limits of the village
including all territory thereafter annexed to the village, unless otherwise
stated in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-9: TERM OF FRANCHISE:
The term of the franchise shall be as established in the franchise agreement
and shall take full effect and be in full force from and after the effective
date of the franchise agreement, and the same shall continue in full force and
effect for the term specified in the franchise agreement unless otherwise
extended, terminated or revoked for cause as allowed pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-10: FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS:
   A.   The application for a cable television franchise must contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
      1.   A clear description of the identity of the applicant including names
and residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the
applicant and/or persons having an ownership interest of five percent (5%) or
greater;
      2.   A legal description and/or clear identification of the area intended
to be serviced by the applicant;
      3.   A detailed description of the physical facility proposed, including
channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics, and headend
which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
         a.   A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served
including identification of trunk line locations, and if requested, a
computerized map in a format compatible with the village's computer software,
         b.   A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed
classifications of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all
rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation
charges and cable service charges,
         c.   A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the
actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant,
         d.   A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other
instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any
subscriber, and
         e.   A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all
agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or
implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person,
firm or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the
application and the granting of the franchise;
      4.   Detailed projected financial pro forma for a period of ten (10)
years showing projected number of subscribers, rates, all system revenues,
operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, and income
statements. All information is to be presented in the format required by the
village;
      5.   Proof of financial support for the system construction as evidenced
by a letter from the lending institution and/or other financial entity;
      6.   A description of applicant's prior operational experience including
a list of other franchises held by the applicant identified by state, city/
village and the date of franchise expiration;
      7.   A detailed description of the customer service and technical support
operations;
      8.   Representations that the general partner, any principal or partner,
or principal stockholder has never been convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude, or is presently under indictment charging such a crime; the
applicant and/or its parent corporation is not, nor has been, a party to
litigation, or cause of action, in any court of law or proceeding by the
securities and exchange commission, the FCC, or any other governmental body, or
administrative agency relevant to the holding of any franchise agreement, or
actions of the applicant in any business endeavor; and
      9.   Any additional information that the village deems relevant.
   B.   A fee of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for analysis of the
application is required to accompany the application for an initial franchise.
A condition of any initial franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
the company's agreement to reimburse the village's out of pocket expenses in
connection with the initial franchise grant.
   C.   Upon receipt of a complete application for an initial franchise, a
public hearing shall be held at a time and date approved by the corporate
authorities. Within ninety (90) days after the close of the public hearing, the
corporate authorities shall make a decision based upon the technical,
financial, and legal qualifications of the applicants, the applicants'
performance in other franchise areas and such other information as the board
deems relevant. No provision of this chapter shall be deemed, or construed, as
to require the corporate authorities to grant a franchise.
   D.   Any grant of a franchise shall become effective through the execution
by the village and the company of a franchise agreement subject to the terms
and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-11: SURETY OR GUARANTY AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
The village may require a company to provide a surety or guaranty agreement
which establishes that the parent company, or one or all general partners,
accepts liability for the debt and performance of the partnership upon the
partnership's default. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-12: CONTENTS OF FRANCHISE AGREEMENT:
In addition to those matters required to be included in the franchise agreement
by virtue of this chapter, the franchise agreement shall contain such further
conditions or provisions as may be included in the company's proposal and/or
negotiated between the village and the company, except that no such conditions
or provisions shall be such as to conflict with any provisions of this chapter
or other applicable law.
Each franchise agreement shall also contain the following express
representation by the company:
   A.   The company has carefully read the terms and conditions of this chapter
and the franchise agreement and accepts all of such terms and conditions and
agrees to abide by the same.
   B.   The company acknowledges that it has carefully read the terms and
conditions of this chapter and expressly waives any claims that any provisions
thereof are unreasonable or arbitrary or void, except as to those provisions
which are preempted now or hereafter by superseding provisions of federal or
state law.
   C.   The company acknowledges that it has not been induced to accept the
franchise by any promise, oral or written, by or on behalf of the village or by
any third person, regarding any term or condition of this chapter or the
franchise agreement not expressed therein.
   D.   The company represents that no promise or inducement, oral or written,
has been made to any village employee, agent or official regarding receipt of
the franchise. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-13: FRANCHISE FEES:
   A.   The company shall pay to the village a franchise fee in an amount of
five percent (5%) of the company's annual gross revenues.
   B.   Payment of the franchise fee is in addition to and exclusive of any and
all authorized taxes, business license fees, permit fees, levies or assessments
previously in effect or subsequently adopted by the village so long as said
taxes, fees, levies or assessments are of general applicability.
   C.   To the extent permitted by applicable law or regulations, franchise
fees in excess of five percent (5%) may be enacted by appropriate amendment to
this chapter by the corporate authorities and collected by the village after
sixty (60) days' written notice to the company.
   D.   Franchise fees are to be paid quarterly and not later than sixty (60)
days following the last day of the quarter. The franchise fees are to be mailed
by certified mail, or may be hand delivered, to the village manager's office.
   E.   Each franchise fee payment shall be accompanied by a verified financial
statement in a format as set forth in the franchise agreement that clearly
states the gross revenues for the quarter said payment is rendered. The
financial statement shall be signed by the company's controller, or other
employee knowledgeable of the accuracy of the figures used in the computation
and the corresponding payment to the village.
   F.   Any franchise fee which remains unpaid in whole or in part after the
date specified in this chapter shall be delinquent and shall thereafter accrue
interest as set forth in the franchise agreement.
   G.   The village shall have the right to inspect the company's income
records, worksheets, journals, financial statements, and other such financial
records as may be necessary and appropriate to verify the accuracy of the
franchise fee payments or other payments owed to the village. The village may
use its own personnel or may hire an outside certified public accountant to
conduct an audit or "agreed upon procedures" financial review to recompute and
verify the franchise fee payment and compliance with the financial terms of
this chapter. Any additional amounts due to the village as a result of an audit
shall be paid with applicable interest within thirty (30) days following
written notice to the company. Said notice shall include a copy of the audit
report.
   H.   Upon termination of the franchise and/or at the expiration of the term
provided thereof, or otherwise, the company shall continue to make the
quarterly statements and certifications as provided in this section until such
time as all payments due the village under this chapter have been paid and
accounted for to the reasonable satisfaction of the village. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-
12-2002)
3-13-14: ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   The company's franchise shall not be assigned or transferred without
the prior written consent of the village. As used in this section, the terms
"assigned" and "transferred" shall mean any transaction or series of
transactions defined as a transfer in this chapter.
   B.   No consent from the village is required prior to the granting of a
security interest in any of the company's assets by pledge, mortgage or other
hypothecation to secure an indebtedness.
   C.   The company shall notify the village in writing of any foreclosure or
any other judicial sale of the franchise or of a substantial part of the assets
of the company or of the cable system. Such notification shall be considered by
the village as notice of a franchise transfer and the provisions of this
section governing the application for village consent to the transfer shall
apply.
   D.   The company, and any proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise,
shall submit a written application to the village containing or accompanied by
such information as is required in accordance with applicable law and FCC
regulations.
   E.   For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such
franchise transfer, the village may inquire into the legal, financial,
technical and other qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling
party to operate and maintain the system, to comply with all franchise
obligations for the remainder of the franchise term, and to promptly cure any
present or ongoing franchise violations or defaults. The company and the
prospective transferee or controlling party shall provide such information as
reasonably requested by the village in connection with such inquiry.
   F.   The consent of the village shall not be unreasonably delayed or denied.
As prescribed by the cable act (47 USC section 537), the village shall be
deemed to have consented to a proposed transfer if the village fails to render
a final decision on the request for approval of the proposed transfer within
one hundred twenty (120) days following the village's receipt of the written
application for consent to the transfer, unless the village and the applicant
agree in writing to extend the time for the village to review the application
and to grant or deny its consent. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-15: FRANCHISE RENEWAL:
Franchise renewal shall be as prescribed by applicable law. The village and
company, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time
during the term of the franchise. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-16: RIGHT TO PURCHASE SYSTEM:
The village shall have the right to purchase the system under the conditions
set forth in the cable act (47 USC section 627), as follows:
   A.   If a renewal of a franchise is denied and the village acquires
ownership of the cable system or effects a transfer of ownership of a cable
system to another person, such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market
value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern
but with no value allocated to the franchise itself.
   B.   If a franchise is revoked for cause and the village acquires ownership
of the cable system or effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to
another person, such acquisition shall be at an equitable price within the
meaning of the cable act. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-17: CONTINUITY OF SERVICE:
   A.   Subject to applicable federal and state law, the company shall continue
to provide cable service for a reasonable period of time not to exceed twenty
four (24) months following the expiration of the term of the franchise or the
effective date of any revocation or termination of the franchise.
   B.   In the event of a change of franchisee, or in the event a new operator
acquires the system, the company shall cooperate with the village, new
franchisee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers.
During such period, the company shall be entitled to the revenues for any
period during which it operates the system and shall be entitled to reasonable
costs for its services when it no longer operates the system.
   C.   In the event the company fails to operate the cable system for seventy
two (72) consecutive hours without prior approval of the village or without
just cause, the village may, at its option, operate the cable system or
designate an operator until such time as the company restores cable services.
If the village is required to fulfill this obligation for a company, the
company shall reimburse the village for all reasonable costs or damages that
are the result of the company's failure to perform.
   D.   During any period in which the company continues to provide service as
provided in subsection A of this section, the company is entitled to all
revenues collected, less any franchise fees or other monies owed to the
village.
   E.   During any period of time in which the company continues to provide
service as provided in subsection A of this section, the village will assist
and use its best efforts to assist the company in providing a satisfactory
basis for the company to continue providing services under the franchise
agreement; provided, however, that the company is not required during any such
period to provide or continue to provide service if the revenues collected are
less than the operating costs incurred by the company. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-
2002)
3-13-18: PROCEDURES IN THE EVENT OF TERMINATION OR EXPIRATION:
   A.   In the event a franchise expires without right of renewal, is revoked,
or is otherwise terminated, the company shall remove the tangible assets of its
system from the village's rights of way within one year unless the company
receives permission to abandon some or all of its system or has received
permission to transfer the system.
   B.   In removing its plant, structures and equipment, the company shall at
its own expense restore and repair any property damaged during the removal
process and shall leave all streets and public ways in as good condition as
prevailed prior to the company's removal of its equipment and appliances,
without affecting the electrical, telephone or other cable wires or
attachments. The village shall inspect and approve the condition of the streets
and public ways after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance as
provided herein, and the security fund, shall continue in full force and effect
during the period of removal and until full compliance by the company with all
the terms and conditions of this section.
   C.   In the event of a failure by the company to complete any work required
by this section the village may cause such work to be done and the company
shall then reimburse the village for the costs thereof within thirty (30) days
after receipt of an itemized list of such cost, or the village may recover such
costs through the security fund or letter of credit provided by the company.
(Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-19: REGULATORY AUTHORITY:
The village shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the
provisions of this chapter and applicable law. The village may, at its sole
option, delegate some or all of its regulatory authority under this chapter or
the franchise agreement to a joint regulatory agency, provided that only the
corporate authorities may revoke a franchise pursuant to this chapter. (Ord.
2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-20: REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITY:
The village acting alone or acting jointly with other franchising authorities
may exercise or delegate regulatory responsibility, including, but not limited
to, the following areas:
   A.   Administering and enforcing the provisions of the cable television
franchise(s).
   B.   Coordination of the operation of public, educational and government
access channels and facilities.
   C.   Providing technical, programming and operational support to public
agency users, such as government departments, schools and healthcare
institutions.
   D.   Establishing procedures and standards for use of channels dedicated to
PEG access use, if provided for in any franchise agreement.
   E.   Planning expansion and growth of public benefit cable services.
   F.   Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications with
other local, state or national telecommunications networks.
   G.   Formulating and recommending long range telecommunications policy.
(Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-21: TECHNOLOGICAL, SERVICE AND PERFORMANCE REVIEW:
At village's sole option, upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the company,
the village and the company shall meet and/or conduct public review of the
performance and quality of service of the system.
   A.   Topics for discussion and review may include, but shall not be limited
to, services provided, application of new technologies, system performance,
programming, developments in the law, and technical and economic feasibility of
system expansion or upgrading. Either the village or the company may select
additional topics for discussion.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the review the village
may issue a report with respect to the adequacy of system performance and
quality of service. If inadequacies are found, village may direct the company
to correct the inadequacies within a reasonable period of time.
   C.   Failure of the company, after due notice, to correct any inadequacies
found during the review may be a violation of a specific provision of the
franchise or this chapter. The village may, at its sole discretion, exercise
any remedy within the scope of this chapter considered appropriate. (Ord. 2002-
666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-22: RATES:
   A.   The company shall establish rates for its service categories that shall
be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area.
   B.   The company shall maintain and file with the village a complete
schedule of subscriber rates including all fees and charges for services. The
company shall notify the village at least thirty (30) days prior to any change
in rates. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-23: SECURITY FUND:
On the effective date of the franchise, the company shall establish a permanent
security fund with the village in the amount of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) in cash, an irrevocable letter of credit, corporate surety bond or
other instrument which complies with the requirements of this chapter and is
approved by the village attorney, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld. The security fund shall be maintained at the sole expense of the
company so long as any part of the system is located within the public ways of
the village.
   A.   The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete performance
of this chapter and the franchise agreement, including payment of any costs,
expenses, damages or loss the village pays or incurs because of any act or
omission attributable to the company that constitutes a violation, default or
failure to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of
the village, and the payment of any liquidated damage amounts, penalties,
judgments, fees or taxes due the village.
   B.   In the case of any default or failure of the company to pay any
liquidated damages, penalties, judgments, fees or taxes due the village in
connection with the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system
and the provision of cable service within the village pursuant to the
franchise, the village may assess the security fund pursuant to the applicable
procedures set forth in section
3-13-50 of this chapter, or in the franchise agreement.
   C.   The company shall promptly pay any undisputed liquidated damages,
penalties, judgments, fees or taxes due the village. If the company fails to
pay any undisputed amounts due the village within thirty (30) days after
written notice from the village, the village may withdraw the amount stated in
the notice from the security fund.
   D.   The company shall replenish the security fund to its full amount within
thirty (30) days after written notice from the village that monies have been
withdrawn from the fund.
   E.   The rights reserved to the village with respect to the security fund
are in addition to all other rights and remedies of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or authorized by law, and no action or proceeding to
exercise rights with respect to the security fund shall constitute an election
of remedies or a waiver of any other rights the village may have. (Ord. 2002-
666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-24: CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION SECURITY:
   A.   Prior to commencing any work within public ways of the village that
exceeds twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in value, the company shall
furnish the village with a construction bond written by a corporate surety
authorized to do business in Illinois, equal to one hundred percent (100%) of
the estimated cost of the system, or portions of the system, to be constructed,
modified, repaired, or replaced within the public ways of the village, or one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), whichever is less. Such instrument
shall be in a form acceptable to the village.
   B.   The construction security shall remain in force until sixty (60) days
after substantial completion of the work, as determined by the village
engineer, including restoration of public ways and other public or private
property affected by the construction. After expiration of said sixty (60) day
period, the construction security shall be released and the instrument shall be
canceled.
   C.   The construction security shall guarantee:
      1.   Timely completion of construction;
      2.   Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical
codes and standards;
      3.   Proper location of the facilities in the public ways of the village
as specified in plans approved by the village; and
      4.   Restoration of the public ways and any other public property
affected by the construction within the public ways.
   D.   Notwithstanding the construction security provided by the company, the
company is responsible for completion of all construction work, including
restoration, in accordance with the permit and approved plans for such work,
and the material requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement. Any
default or breach in performance of such work shall be promptly cured by the
company. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-25: INSURANCE:
   A.   As a part of the indemnification provided by the provisions of this
chapter, but without limiting the same, the company shall upon award of the
franchise and prior to commencement of construction of the system, file with
the village clerk, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and
effect at its sole expense, evidence of a policy or policies for the following:
      1.   Commercial General Liability Insurance: Comprehensive or commercial
general liability insurance, including, but not limited to, coverage for bodily
injury, personal injury, and property damage shall be maintained at the sum(s)
of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence and ten million dollars
($10,000,000.00) aggregate.
      2.   Business Automobile Liability: Comprehensive automobile liability
including, but not limited to, nonownership and hired car coverage as well as
owned vehicles with coverage for bodily injury and property damage, shall be
maintained at the sum(s) of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) per accident.
      3.   Property Loss: Fire insurance with coverage for extended perils on
the franchise property used by the company in the conduct of franchise
operations in an amount adequate to enable the company to resume franchise
operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by this insurance.
      4.   Workers' Compensation Insurance: Workers' compensation insurance in
such coverage, with statutory limits, as may be required by the state of
Illinois.
   B.   The policy or policies shall specifically recognize and cover the
indemnification provisions of this chapter. The village and its officers,
agents, and employees shall be named as an additional insured, and the policy
or policies shall contain cross liability endorsements. Said insurance shall
provide that the insurance provided by the company shall be primary and that
any provision of any contract of insurance or other risk protection benefit or
self-insurance policy purchased or in effect or enacted by the village and any
other insurance or benefit shall be in excess thereof.
   C.   The insurer or insurers shall have Best insurance rating of at least
A-, VII or the highest rating attributable to insurance carriers by a
recognized rating agency and shall be authorized to write the required
insurance, and shall be approved by the state of Illinois.
   D.   The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by the company
in full force and effect during the entire term of the franchise. All
certificate(s) shall contain the following endorsement:
Should any of the above described policies be canceled before the expiration
date thereof, the issuing company will mail 30 day prior written notice to the
holder named on the certificate.
   E.   In the event of the cancellation of any insurance policy required
herein or upon the company's failure to procure said insurance, the village
shall have the right to terminate the franchise agreement or, alternatively, to
procure such insurance and charge the cost thereof to the company. Such costs
may be paid from the security fund established in this chapter or from the
construction bond, or by any other means deemed appropriate by the village.
(Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-26: INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   As a condition of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the
company shall agree to the extent permitted by law, to defend, indemnify and
hold the village and its officers, agents and employees free and harmless from
and against any and all claims, actions, suits, damages, costs, expenses and
liabilities, including the reasonable fees and expenses of their attorneys,
expert witnesses and consultants, court costs and fines, which may be incurred
by them, asserted against them, or sought to be imposed upon them,
individually, jointly or severally, and which arise directly or indirectly out
of or are connected in any way with the grant of the franchise or the
construction, installation, maintenance, operation or condition of the
company's cable system pursuant to a franchise granted hereunder except to the
extent those damages, claims, awards and judgments arise from the negligence of
the village, its officers, agents and employees, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Any negligent, tortious or wrongful act or omission of the company,
and its officers, agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors resulting in
personal injury, bodily injury, sickness or death to any person, or in loss or
damage of any kind to the property of any person including the company and its
officers, agents, employees, licensees and invitees.
      2.   Any negligent, tortious or wrongful act or omission of the company,
and its officers, agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors resulting in
damage to, loss of, destruction or unauthorized use of any trademark, trade
name, copyright, patent or other intangible property rights of any person
including libel, slander and invasion of privacy.
      3.   Loss or damage of any kind related to company's failure to comply
with the provisions of this chapter, or of the franchise agreement, or of any
federal, state or local law or regulation applicable to the company or the
cable system.
   B.   As a condition of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the
company shall assume for its officers, agents, employees, contractors and
subcontractors all risk of dangerous or hazardous conditions in, on or about
any public ways of the village, except for latent conditions actually caused by
the wilful or negligent acts of the village or its employees.
   C.   The indemnity obligation of the company shall not extend to injuries,
judgments or liabilities to the extent they arise out of the negligence or
wilful misconduct on the part of the village, or its officers, agents or
employees while acting on behalf of the village.
   D.   As a condition of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the
company shall agree that, except to the extent caused by the gross negligence,
malicious or intentional wrongful acts, or the wilful misconduct of the
village, or its officers, agents or employees while acting on behalf of the
village, the village and its officers, agents or employees shall not be liable
to the company for any claims for damage to, or loss of, all or any part of the
company's cable system arising out of any public work, public improvement,
alteration of any municipal structure, change in the grade or line of any
public way of the village, the elimination, discontinuing or closing of any
public way of the village, or other exercise by the village of its lawful
authority over the public ways.
   E.   As a condition of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the
company shall recognize the village's right to exercise its police powers over
the public ways of the village in case of fire, disaster or other emergency as
reasonably determined by the village, and agree that the village shall not be
liable to the company for any damage to the company's cable system or other
property when such damage results from the exercise by the village of its
police powers in order to protect the public in case of fire, disaster or other
emergency. When practicable, as determined by the village, the village agrees
to consult with the company prior to the exercise by the village of such police
power, where the exercise may affect the company's cable system and to permit
the company to take necessary actions to protect the public and the company's
cable system or other property. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-27: SYSTEM DESIGN:
The cable communications system shall be constructed in accordance with the
design, construction, and rebuild requirements contained in the franchise
agreement. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-28: EMERGENCY OVERRIDE:
The company's system shall have an audio emergency override system that can be
activated by the village. The override shall be capable of providing an audio
signal over all NTSC channels of the company's system. Additionally, the
company may in a franchise agreement be required to provide an audio/video
override. The village shall be solely responsible for the content of all
transmissions over the emergency override. The company shall not be liable for
any claim or cause of action arising from the village's transmission, or
failure to transmit, over the emergency override. The village agrees to
indemnify and hold the company harmless from any damages or penalties arising
out of the negligence of the village, its employees or agents in using such
service. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-29: SERVICE TO FRANCHISE AREA:
The company shall design a cable system in such a manner as to have the
capability to pass by every single-family dwelling unit and multiple dwelling
unit building, within the franchise area. Service shall be provided to business
locations under the terms and conditions set forth in the franchise agreement.
Cable system construction and provision of service shall be nondiscriminatory,
and the company shall not delay or defer service to any part of the franchise
area on the grounds of economic preference. Service shall be provided to
subscribers in accordance with the schedules specified in the franchise
agreement. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-30: EXTENSION OF SYSTEM:
   A.   The company shall initially construct or rebuild the cable system so
that cable service from the newly constructed or rebuilt system is extended and
can be provided within a reasonable time to any dwelling unit that exists
within the franchise area.
   B.   After completion of initial construction or rebuild of a cable system,
the company shall extend the system to and offer the services of the system to
potential subscribers within any area of the village, including subdivisions
which are hereafter developed or annexed within the corporate limits of the
village, where there are at least a total of twenty (20) residential dwelling
units with occupancy permits per cable plant mile. The company shall design,
construct and operate the system in accordance with the schedules specified in
the franchise agreement. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-31: CABLECASTING FACILITIES:
The company shall provide cablecasting facilities in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-32: INTERCONNECTION:
   A.   The cable system shall be designed in such a manner as to allow the
company to interconnect with adjacent cable systems operated by the company or
by the company's parent company, affiliate, or subsidiary. The company shall
interconnect between said systems, which shall permit the sharing of
programming on public, educational, and government access channels, and for
emergency purposes as set forth in the franchise agreement.
   B.   Subject to the limitation of applicable federal and state law, the
village may require the company to participate in interconnecting the cable
television system to other cable systems as set forth in the franchise
agreement. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-33: INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK:
   A.   All companies shall, as part of any application for an initial or
renewed franchise, propose the design and construction of an institutional
network that shall connect school and local government unit buildings and
facilities designated by the village and that meets the identified needs of the
village for the purpose of transmitting two-way telecommunications signals
among the designated school and local government entities.
   B.   The institutional network shall be capable of carrying voice, full
motion video, audio, and data communications.
   C.   The company shall design, construct, operate and maintain the
institutional network as provided in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 2002-666,
9-12-2002)
3-13-34: SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE:
   A.   The company shall comply with the requirements of the system
construction schedule contained in the franchise agreement.
   B.   The company shall provide the village with monthly reports of all
construction and system activation during the initial construction or rebuild
of the cable system. Reports shall identify the location to which service is
proposed, the time at which the construction will be completed, the time for
activation of the service line, the date the area has been turned over to
marketing, and other information which will assist the village in determining
that the company is extending service to the entire franchise area. After
initial construction or rebuild of the cable system is completed, the company
shall provide an annual report of system construction, if any. The company and
the village shall meet for periodic construction conferences. (Ord. 2002-666,
9-12-2002)
3-13-35: AS BUILT MAPS AND DRAWINGS:
   A.   The company shall provide to the village three (3) sets of as built
maps and drawings of the cable system in document form, and one set in
electronic form, within ninety (90) days after initial construction or rebuild
of the cable system is substantially completed.
   B.   Within sixty (60) days after completion of any construction or work
that results in any addition, extension, rebuild or removal of the system
within the public ways of the village, the company shall furnish the village
with three (3) sets of as built maps and drawings in document form, and one set
in electronic form, accurately depicting the location of all cables, wires, and
facilities constructed or relocated as part of such work.
   C.   The as built maps and drawings submitted in document form shall be in a
reproducible medium reasonably acceptable to the village, and shall be on
sheets not to exceed twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") and
drawn at a scale of one inch to twenty feet (1":20').
   D.   The as built maps and drawings submitted in electronic form shall use
the state plane coordinate system, shall be in AutoCad or other format approved
by the village, and shall be on three and one-half inch (31/2") floppy disks or
other electronic storage medium approved by the village.
   E.   The as built maps and drawings submitted to the village in electronic
form will be used to create atlas information and will be documented into an
overall utilities atlas. If the company desires, it may provide separate sets
of electronic form as built maps and drawings, one set for the village's public
records, and one set containing any proprietary information that the village
would agree to protect from public disclosure, as provided in section
3-13-45 of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-36: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Village Codes And Permits: The company shall comply with all applicable
village construction codes, permit procedures and ordinances regulating public
ways. The village shall be entitled to charge reasonable permit and inspection
fees to recover the special nonrecurring inspection costs imposed by the
construction or rebuild of the cable system. Any fees or charges paid, so long
as generally applicable to entities, including, but not limited to, like users
of the public right of way and not discriminatory, shall be paid in addition to
the franchise fee.
   B.   Compliance With Safety Codes: All construction practices shall be in
accordance with all applicable sections of federal and state occupational
safety and health acts and any amendments thereto as well as all state and
local codes where applicable.
   C.   Compliance With Codes: All installation of electronic equipment shall
be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with the
provisions of the national electrical code, the national electrical safety
code, the Illinois commerce commission's rules for construction of electric
power and communication lines, and all applicable federal, state and local
codes.
   D.   Construction Standards And Requirements: All of the company's plant and
equipment, including, but not limited to, the antenna site, headend and
distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable,
coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be
installed, located, erected, constructed, rebuilt, replaced, removed, repaired,
maintained, and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, so as
not to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      1.   Initial Construction Or System Rebuild Communications: During the
initial construction or rebuild of the cable system, the company shall provide
advance written notice to residents when performing construction in the public
easements, utility easements or otherwise on private property in the area in
which they live, utilizing door hangers, letters or bill stuffers.
      2.   Other Construction Communications: The company shall provide advance
written or other notice to residents when performing scheduled system
construction in the public easements, utility easements or otherwise on the
resident's private property. Said notice may utilize door hangers, letters,
bill stuffers or personal communication from a company representative to a
resident. Further, the company shall use its best efforts to notify residents
when performing nonscheduled system construction, including unanticipated work
associated with a service call or service interruption.
   E.   Safety, Nuisance Requirements: The company shall at all times employ
ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods
and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage,
injury or nuisance to the public.
   F.   Personnel: The company is responsible for all of its personnel,
including its contractors, agents, employees and subcontractors engaged in
system construction and maintenance.
   G.   General Duties: The company shall, before commencing any construction
in the public ways, comply with all requirements of JULIE. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-
12-2002)
3-13-37: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
The company shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a
manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards,
governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and any detailed standards
set forth in the franchise agreement. In addition, the company shall provide to
the village, upon request, a written report of the results of the company's
periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC and franchise
standards and guidelines.
   A.   Twenty Four Hour Operation: The system shall be designed and shall be
maintained to provide twenty four (24) hour continuous operation.
   B.   Uniform And Strong Signals: Subject to the FCC standards the system
shall produce, for reception on subscriber's receivers, which are in good
working order, a picture which is free from any significant interference or
distortion. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-38: SYSTEM TESTS:
If there are recurring problems or complaints the company will perform
reasonable tests at the request of the village, including partial repeat tests,
different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal,
at the company's expense. The village may require the company to prepare a
report to the village on the results of those tests, including a report
identifying any problem found and steps taken to correct the problem. The
company will endeavor to arrange for such special tests so as to minimize
hardship or inconvenience to subscribers. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-39: STREET OCCUPANCY:
   A.   The company should utilize existing conduits and other facilities
whenever practicable, and shall not construct or install new, different, or
additional conduits or other facilities on public property until the written
approval of the village is first obtained, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld. The company shall not acquire any vested interest in any
location for any wire holding structure, and such conduits or other facilities
shall be temporarily or permanently removed, relocated, changed or altered by
the company on the same terms and conditions, if any, established by the
village for telephone and electric utilities.
   B.   All installations shall be underground. All cable passing under the
roadways shall be installed in conduit.
   C.   The company shall notify the village at least ten (10) days before
commencement of any construction in any streets within the village. The village
shall cooperate with the company in granting any permits required, providing
such grant and subsequent construction by the company shall not unduly
interfere with the use of such streets and that the proposed construction shall
be done in accordance with all applicable provisions of the village codes.
   D.   All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed
and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners, and at all times shall be kept and maintained
in a safe, adequate and substantial condition and in good order and repair. The
company shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain
in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and
accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the
public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices shall be
used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all
members of the public. Any fixtures placed in any street or public way by the
company shall be placed in such manner as not to interfere with the usual
travel on such street or public way.
   E.   The company shall restore to the village standards and specifications,
at its own expense and in a manner approved by the village, any damage or
disturbance caused to any street, public way or to public property as a result
of its operations or construction on its behalf. The company shall guarantee
and maintain such restoration for a period of one year against defective
materials or workmanship. The company shall restore any damage or disturbance
to private property which may result from operations or construction by it or
on its behalf to the property's preconstruction condition.
   F.   Whenever, in case of fire, disaster, or other emergency, it becomes
necessary in the judgment of the village's officials to remove or damage any of
the company's facilities, no charge shall be made by the company against the
village for restoration and repair, unless such acts amount to malicious
conduct by the village.
   G.   The company, at its own expense, shall protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate, or remove, any property of the company when in the
opinion of the village manager, the same is required by reason of traffic
conditions, public safety, street vacation, street construction, change or
establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes,
power lines, signal lines, transportation facilities, tracks, or any other type
of structure or improvement by governmental agencies, whether acting in a
governmental or a proprietary capacity.
   H.   At the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit
issued by the village or other appropriate governmental authority and upon at
least forty eight (48) hours' notice, the company shall temporarily raise,
lower, or cut its wires as may be necessary to facilitate such move. The direct
expense of such temporary changes, including standby time, shall be paid by the
permit holder, and the company shall have the authority to require payment in
advance.
   I.   The company shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts.
   J.   All cables passing under any roadway shall be installed in conduit,
unless the construction permit issued for such work contains an express waiver
of this requirement and approval of an alternative installation. (Ord. 2002-
666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-40: PROVISION OF SERVICE:
After service has been established by activating trunk and feeder cables for
any area meeting the density requirements as set forth in the franchise
agreement, the company shall provide service to any requesting potential
dwelling unit subscriber within the area within thirty (30) days from the date
of request, provided such subscriber provides appropriate identification and
pays any outstanding balance due on previous accounts and any advance charges
required for new service. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-41: SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED:
The company shall provide the broad categories of video programming and other
services in order to meet community needs, as specified in the franchise
agreement. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-42: PUBLIC SECTOR SUBSCRIBER SERVICE:
   A.   The company will provide at least one drop and one outlet at each
school building and local unit of government building as set forth in the
franchise agreement at no charge. The company may charge the school or local
unit of government for the actual costs for internal cable wiring within the
school or local unit of government building for the installation of the outlets
in excess of the number agreed to in the franchise agreement. Costs shall be
for actual costs of materials and the company's labor. The company shall work
with the school or local unit of government in determining the design of the
installation.
   B.   The company shall provide such number of outlets to the institutional
network at each school and/or local unit of government buildings identified by
the village, as provided in the franchise agreement or other applicable
agreement.
   C.   The company shall provide such equipment for the cablecasting of live
and/or prerecorded programming from schools and local unit of government
buildings as set forth in the franchise agreement or other applicable
agreement. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-43: PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS AND FACILITIES:
   A.   The company shall establish and provide dedicated access channels for
public, educational and government access. The number of such channels shall be
as set forth in the franchise agreement.
   B.   The company shall be required to provide PEG access facilities and
equipment as specified in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-44: CABLE CHANNELS FOR COMMERCIAL USE:
The company shall designate channel capacity for commercial use as required by
applicable law. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-45: OPEN BOOKS AND RECORDS:
   A.   Upon written request, the village may inspect the books, records, maps
and other documents in the control or possession of the company that directly
pertain to the franchise when reasonably necessary: 1) to enforce this chapter
or to assess compliance with the franchise; 2) to exercise any lawful
regulatory power of the village; or 3) as may otherwise be necessary or
appropriate in connection with any proceeding the village may or must conduct
under applicable law with respect to the company's cable system. The company
shall produce the requested books, records and maps at the company's local
office in the Chicago metropolitan area not later than thirty (30) days after
the request for production. Requests for extensions of time to respond shall
not be unreasonably denied. Records shall be exempt from inspection pursuant to
this section to the extent required by applicable laws regarding subscriber
privacy.
   B.   To the extent provided herein, trade secrets and proprietary,
privileged or confidential information obtained from or provided by the company
that would cause competitive harm to the company if disclosed will not be
publicly disclosed by the village, subject to the provisions of subsection D of
this section.
   C.   Any such information claimed to be so privileged, and that part of any
document claimed to contain such privileged information ("confidential
information"), shall be appropriately marked by the company as a trade secret,
or as privileged, confidential or proprietary commercial information, and shall
be accompanied by a written request for nondisclosure upon submission of the
information to the village. Nondisclosure requests shall identify the portion
of the materials claimed to be privileged from disclosure and shall contain a
plain statement of the reasons for withholding the information from public
inspection.
   D.   The village shall protect the confidential information from disclosure
to third parties with the same degree of care afforded to its own confidential
and proprietary information. Information shall not be considered to be
privileged, confidential or proprietary to the extent that: 1) it is or becomes
publicly available other than through the village; 2) it is required to be
disclosed by a governmental or judicial order; 3) it is required to be
disclosed by statute or other applicable law. Upon request, the village shall
enter into a written confidentiality agreement incorporating these conditions
prior to inspection of any records claimed to be privileged from disclosure as
provided in subsection C of this section. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-46: RECORDS AND REPORTS REQUIRED:
The company shall provide the following quarterly reports in a form acceptable
to the village:
   A.   A report showing the number of service calls by type during the
preceding quarter.
   B.   A report showing the number of outages during the preceding quarter.
   C.   A report stating the subscriber totals for each category of service for
the village including current subscribers, new subscribers, reconnects,
disconnects, secondary connects and pay units.
The company shall provide the village such other or additional information as
the village may request from time to time, provided that such other or
additional information relates to the scope of the village's regulatory
authority. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-47: ANNUAL REPORTS:
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the close of the company's fiscal
year, the company shall submit a written annual report in a form approved by
the village. Such report shall include, without limitation, the following
information:
   A.   A copy of the company's annual report, if any, and its parent company's
annual report.
   B.   A list of the company's officers, members of its board of directors,
and any general partners of the company;
   C.   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent
(5%) or more of the voting interest in the company and its parent;
   D.   A list of residential areas in the company's service area where service
is not available, and a schedule for providing service, if applicable;
   E.   A verified annual financial statement which shall accurately present
the company's annual gross revenues for the twelve (12) month period and all
franchise fee payments for the twelve (12) month period;
   F.   Current subscriber manual or handbook and related materials, any rules
and procedures published by the company for I-Net users. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-
2002)
3-13-48: COPIES OF FEDERAL AND STATE REPORTS:
Upon request, the company shall submit copies of any public document issued by
or filed with, any federal or state regulatory agencies which are nonroutine in
nature that will materially and directly affect the company's cable television
operations within the franchise area. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-49: LIQUIDATED DAMAGES:
   A.   Franchise Agreement: The company's failure to perform certain
obligations under this chapter or the franchise agreement, or its failure to do
so in a timely manner, may result in damage to the village that is difficult to
determine. The franchise agreement may set forth a liquidated sum or sums to be
reasonably paid in light of the anticipated loss caused by a breach or failure
to perform and, in the event of such breach or failure to perform, the company
shall pay such amounts to the village as liquidated damages.
   B.   Assessment Of Liquidated Damages: Before assessing liquidated damages
against the company, the village shall give written notice to the company, and
an opportunity to cure the breach or failure to perform as provided in the
franchise agreement. Unless different procedures or time periods are prescribed
in the franchise agreement, the procedures and time periods for imposing
liquidated damages shall be the same as the procedures set forth herein for
determining and remedying franchise violations. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-50: FRANCHISE VIOLATION; NOTICE AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   General: The company shall comply with the requirements of this chapter
and the franchise agreement at all times during the term of its franchise.
   B.   Material Violations: If the village has reason to believe that the
company has committed a material violation of this chapter or the franchise
agreement, the village may act to remedy the violation in accordance with the
procedures set forth below. A material violation shall include:
      1.   Construction or operation in the village or in the public ways of
the village without a required permit, license or authorization.
      2.   Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
      3.   Unauthorized franchise transfer.
      4.   Material misrepresentation by or on behalf of the company in any
application to the village or in any report or document required to be filed
with the village.
      5.   Failure to construct, complete, relocate or remove all or any part
of the cable system as required by this chapter or the franchise agreement.
      6.   Failure to provide the services, facilities or resources required by
this chapter or the franchise agreement.
      7.   Failure to pay taxes, franchise fees, costs or penalties when and as
due the village.
      8.   Failure to file required documents, applications or reports,
including financial reports, with the village.
      9.   Failure to deliver evidence of the company's insurance coverage as
specified in section
3-13-25 of this chapter.
      10.   Failure to file and maintain with the village all required bonds.
      11.   Failure to establish and maintain the security fund required
pursuant to section
3-13-23 of this chapter.
      12.   Failure to restore any amount withdrawn from the security fund
within the time specified in section
3-13-23 of this chapter.
      13.   Failure to commence or complete construction within the time
specified in the franchise agreement hereof.
      14.   Systemic failure to comply with the customer service standards as
required by section
3-13-54 of this chapter.
      15.   Failure to comply with the material provisions of this chapter.
      16.   Failure to comply with the material terms of the franchise
agreement.
   C.   Notice Of Material Violations: Written notice shall be given to the
company setting forth the nature of the material violation and a reasonable
period of time for the company to correct the violation. Unless the village
determines that the violation is of such a nature that a lesser period of time
is warranted for remedying the violation, the company shall be given thirty
(30) days after receipt of such notice to remedy the violation.
   D.   Answer To Notice Of Violations: Within thirty (30) days, or such other
period of time specified by the village in its notice to the company, the
company shall respond in writing to the village:
      1.   That it contests the village's notice of violation and requests an
opportunity to be heard as provided herein. The company shall submit supporting
documentation with its response to the notice.
      2.   That it contests the village's notice of violation for the reasons
that the violation was beyond the reasonable control of the company and
requests an opportunity to be heard as provided herein. The company shall
submit supporting documentation with its response to the notice.
      3.   That the company will remedy the violation within the time specified
by the village in its notice to the company.
      4.   If the company contends that an extended period of time is
reasonably needed to remedy the violation, it shall submit a written request
for an extension, together with supporting documentation that the company
cannot reasonably remedy the violation within the time period specified by the
village in its notice to the company. The village shall not unreasonably deny
an extension of time to remedy the violation. If the village grants the
extension, the company shall proceed to remedy the violation within the
extended time prescribed, provided that the company also informs the village on
a regular basis of the steps being taken to remedy the violation.
   E.   Hearing: The village shall give the company not less than fourteen (14)
days' written notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing to be
held before the corporate authorities. At the public hearing, the corporate
authorities shall hear and determine the issues and render its findings and its
decision. If a hearing officer has been appointed by the village, the hearing
officer shall hear the relevant evidence and shall render a record of the
administrative hearing and recommended findings and decision to the corporate
authorities.
   F.   Determination: If the company fails to submit a written response to the
village's notice of violation as provided in subsection D of this section, or
if the company fails to remedy the violation within the time period specified
by the village in its notice to the company, or any extensions thereto granted
by the village, or if the corporate authorities are persuaded after a hearing
that the company has committed a material violation as provided herein, the
corporate authorities may, after giving the company an opportunity to be heard:
      1.   Order the company to remedy the violation within a reasonable period
of time specified by the corporate authorities.
      2.   Assess liquidated damages against the company in accordance with the
franchise agreement.
      3.   Impose any lesser sanction permitted by the franchise agreement.
(Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-51: FRANCHISE REVOCATION AND TERMINATION:
   A.   Causes For Revocation: A franchise granted by the village pursuant to
this chapter is subject to revocation in the event of any substantial breach of
the franchise agreement or default in performance of the company's performance
of the franchise. The following events, acts or omissions on the part of the
company may be considered cause for revocation of the franchise and termination
of the franchise agreement:
      1.   Repeated failure, after notice and an opportunity to cure, to comply
with the material provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Repeated failure, after notice and an opportunity to cure, to comply
with the material terms of the franchise agreement.
      3.   Repeated failure to cure material violations of this chapter or the
franchise agreement within a reasonable time after notice from the village.
      4.   Material fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining the franchise.
      5.   Wilful failure to pay taxes, franchise fees, costs or penalties when
and as due the village.
      6.   Wilful failure to maintain required insurance coverage.
      7.   Failure to restore system wide service after forty eight (48)
consecutive hours of interrupted service, provided the company's failure to
restore system wide service is not caused by circumstances or events beyond the
company's reasonable control.
      8.   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the company.
   B.   Notice Of Substantial Breach: Written notice shall be given to the
company setting forth:
      1.   The nature of the substantial breach or default by the company;
      2.   A written demand that the company correct the violation;
      3.   Notice that any failure to correct or remedy the substantial breach
or default within thirty (30) days, or such other period of time as may be
stipulated in the franchise agreement, may be cause for revocation of the
franchise.
   C.   Answer To Notice Of Breach: Within thirty (30) days after the village's
written notice to the company, the company shall respond in writing to the
village, together with documentation in support of its response:
      1.   That it contests the village's notice of substantial breach and
requests an opportunity to be heard as provided herein.
      2.   That corrective action has been implemented by the company and the
substantial breach or default has been cured.
      3.   That corrective action has been implemented by the company and is
being actively and diligently pursued in accordance with a written corrective
action plan to be submitted to the village.
   D.   Hearing: If requested by the company, or if the village is not
satisfied that sufficient corrective action is being actively and expeditiously
pursued by the company to remedy the substantial breach or default, the village
shall schedule a public hearing to hear and determine the issues and to
consider whether sufficient cause exists to revoke the franchise. The village
shall give the company not less than fourteen (14) days' written notice
specifying the village's intent to consider the revocation of the company's
franchise pursuant to this chapter, and the date, time and place of the public
hearing to be held before the corporate authorities, or a hearing officer
appointed by the corporate authorities. If a hearing officer has been
designated, the hearing officer shall hear the relevant evidence and shall
render a record of the administrative hearing and recommended findings and
decision to the corporate authorities.
   E.   Determination: After hearing the relevant evidence or considering the
administrative record of the hearing, the corporate authorities shall determine
whether or not a substantial breach or default by the company has occurred,
whether it has been cured or a satisfactory corrective action plan has been
submitted and is being actively and diligently pursued, and whether cause
exists to revoke the franchise. The company shall be given an opportunity to be
heard in connection with those issues. If the corporate authorities are
persuaded that a substantial breach or default has occurred, the corporate
authorities shall consider the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the
substantial breach or default, as reflected by the following factors, in
considering whether some lesser sanction or cure, if any, should be imposed:
      1.   Whether the conduct was egregious.
      2.   Whether substantial harm resulted.
      3.   Whether the violation was intentional.
      4.   Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements.
      5.   Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
   F.   Ordinance: If the corporate authorities determine that cause exists to
revoke the franchise, it may by ordinance declare the company's franchise to be
terminated and revoked, provided that the village may grant the company an
additional period of time to remedy the substantial breach or default before
such ordinance is fully effective. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-52: OTHER REMEDIES:
   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial
remedies that the village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of
this chapter or of any franchise agreement entered into pursuant to this
chapter.
   B.   Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate and
distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs
or continues. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-53: RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS:
   A.   The company shall construct, install, maintain and operate its cable
television system so as to protect the privacy rights of each subscriber and
user in accordance with the cable act as amended and the FCC rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   B.   No cable line, wire, amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment
owned by the company shall be installed by the company in the subscriber's
premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any
required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon
subscriber's property shall be presumed. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-54: CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Conflicting Provisions: The provisions of this section shall supersede
any contradictory or inconsistent provision in federal, state or local law, or
in an initial or renewal franchise agreement. Any provision in federal, state
or local law, or in an initial or renewal franchise agreement, that imposes a
higher obligation or requirement on the company than is imposed by this section
or that imposes an obligation or requirement on the company not imposed by this
section shall not be deemed to be contradictory or inconsistent with this
section.
   B.   Customer Service Obligations: Unless superseded by this section a
company shall comply with the FCC customer service obligations, 47 CFR chapter
1, section 76.309, as amended.
   C.   Customer Service Plan: A company shall submit to the village a detailed
customer services plan within sixty (60) days after the effective date hereof
or sixty (60) days prior to commencement of service to its first subscriber,
whichever date is later, and shall update the plan as necessary to keep it
accurate and complete. Such plan shall, at a minimum, demonstrate that the
facilities, personnel, repair, complaint and adjustment procedures, telephone
and other information systems of the company are sufficient to ensure timely,
efficient and effective services to customers. The company's customer services
plan shall also be consistent with the standards of the cable television
industry and the requirements set forth in this section.
   D.   Cable System Customer Service/Call Center Hours And Telephone
Availability:
      1.   For purposes of this section the term "normal business hours" shall
mean those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open
to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some
evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours.
      2.   A company shall establish and maintain such business offices and
customer service/call centers and provide personnel, telephone service and
other equipment as needed to ensure timely, efficient and effective service to
customers. Such personnel shall include one person designated by the company to
act as a liaison between the company and the village regarding customer service
issues. All customer service/call centers of the company shall have a locally
listed, toll free or collect telephone number with an access line available to
subscribers twenty four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. Trained
company representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone
inquiries twenty four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
      3.   The company's customer service/call center and bill payment location
will be open at least during normal business hours and will be located within
five (5) miles of the village. The company's business offices shall be open, at
a minimum, from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. for six
(6) days a week. Upon a showing of changed circumstances or for other good
cause shown, the village may permit a reduction in the company's business
office hours, and such permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Additionally, at various times during the day, the company shall cablecast the
address, telephone number and office hours of its business offices, customer
service/call centers and bill payment locations on a local origination channel
received by all subscribers.
   E.   Telephone Answer Time:
      1.   Normal Operating Conditions: For purposes of this section, the term
"normal operating conditions" shall mean those service conditions which are
within the control of the company. Those conditions which are not within the
control of the company include, but are not limited to, natural disasters,
civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or
unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the
control of the company include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay
per view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
      2.   Answer Time Standards: Under normal operating conditions, telephone
answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed
thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be
transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These
standards shall be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the time under
normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
      3.   Surveys And Equipment: The company will not be required to acquire
equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering
standards above unless the cable administrator determines that a sufficient
record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply.
      4.   Busy Signals: Under normal operating conditions, the customer will
receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
   F.   Installations, Outages And Service Calls: Under normal operating
conditions, each of the following four (4) standards will be met no less than
ninety five percent (95%) of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
      1.   Standard installations will be performed within seven (7) business
days after an order has been placed. "Standard" installations are those that
are located up to two hundred feet (200') from the existing distribution
system.
      2.   The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service
calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at
maximum, a three (3) hour time block between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. six (6) days a week. The company may schedule
service calls and other installation activities outside of the above days and
hours for the express convenience of the customer.
      3.   The company may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the
close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
      4.   If a company representative is running late for an appointment with
a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the
customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary,
for the specific day and time requested by the customer. The customer may
request that the appointment take place anytime between the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on Monday through Saturday.
   G.   Communications Between Companies And Cable Subscribers:
      1.   Refunds: Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than
either:
         a.   The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the
request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier, or
         b.   The return of the equipment supplied by the company if service is
terminated.
      2.   Credits: Credits for service will be issued no later than the
customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is
warranted.
   H.   Subscriber Complaints: The company shall promptly respond to and
resolve all subscriber complaints. The company shall maintain records of such
complaints setting forth the date and nature of the complaint and any action
taken in response thereto. Such records shall be available to the village
during the company's normal business hours and retained in the company's files
for not less than three (3) years. A statistical summary of such records shall
be prepared by the company and submitted to the village on a monthly basis for
the life of the franchise. Complaints will be categorized by type of service
that is the subject of the complaint.
   I.   Outages And Service Interruptions:
      1.   Definitions: For purposes of this subsection I, the following terms
shall be defined as follows:
    BUNDLED SERVICES: Cable television service provided to a subscriber in
conjunction with one or more cable and/or telecommunication related services,
including, but not limited to, cable modem and telephone service.
   OUTAGE: A service interruption affecting three (3) or more subscribers of
the company. The term "outage" shall include loss of service of cable
television, telephone, or cable modem, or any combination thereof.
   SERVICE INTERRUPTION OR INTERRUPTION: The loss of picture or sound on one or
more cable television channels.
      2.   Record Keeping: The company shall maintain records of all service
interruptions. Such records shall indicate the type of service interrupted
(e.g., cable television, telephone, or cable modem), estimated number of
subscribers affected, the date and time of first notification of the
interruption, the date and time service was restored, the cause of the
interruption and a description of the corrective action taken. Such records
shall be available to the village during the company's normal business hours
and retained in the company's files for not less than three (3) years. Such
records shall be submitted to the village on a monthly basis, commencing twelve
(12) months after service is provided to the first subscriber. The company
shall provide such records in paper documentary form, as well as in such
electronic forms and formats as the cable administrator may require. The
village shall provide service interruption information, as appropriate, to
federal and/or state regulatory authorities.
      3.   Response Time: Excluding conditions beyond the control of the
company, the company will begin working on service interruptions promptly and
in no event later than twenty four (24) hours after the interruption becomes
known. The company must begin actions to correct other service problems the
next business day after notification of the service problem.
      4.   Customer Credits: The company shall provide a credit or, in the case
of a customer terminating service, a refund, to each customer of the company
subject to a service interruption. The credit or refund shall be for the entire
day on which the interruption occurs and for each additional day the
interruption continues. The credit or refund shall apply to all services
interrupted by the interruption. The company shall provide such credit or
refund regardless of whether the customer requests a credit or refund or
otherwise contacts the company. The company shall provide each such credit or
refund pursuant to the following schedule:
   CREDITS TO CUSTOMERS
Standards Of Customer Service Minimum Compensation  For Noncompliance
Standards Of Customer Service             Minimum Compensation  For
                                          Noncompliance
RESPONSIVENESS
Guaranteed 7 Day Residential Installation And Service:
 Company shall complete standard          Free installation, or, if the
 installations and service requested by a installation fee has been waived for
 customer within 7 business days after    promotional reasons, then 1 month's
 order has been placed.                   basic service; for a service
                                          violation, $15.00 credit
 Company shall provide customers seeking  Free installation, or, if the
 nonstandard installations with a total   installation fee has been waived for
 installation cost estimate and an        promotional reasons, then 1 month's
 estimated date of completion.            basic service
 All underground cable drops shall be
 buried no less than 12 inches deep and   $10.00 credit
 work shall be completed in no more than
 3 calendar weeks from the installation.
Residential Installation And Service Appointments:
 All company customers wanting
 installation of cable or service may
 choose any available 3 hour time block   $25.00 credit
 between 9:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. 6 days a
 week.
 The company may not cancel an            $25.00 credit or the guarantee
 appointment with a customer after 5:00   offered by the company, whichever is
 P.M. on the day before the scheduled     greater
 appointment.
 If the company cannot make an
 appointment for any reason, the company  $25.00 credit, or the guarantee
 shall contact the customer before the    offered by the company, whichever is
 end of the scheduled appointment and     greater
 reschedule at the convenience of the
 customer.
 If the company technician arrives within
 the agreed upon time, and the customer
 is absent, the technician shall leave    $10.00 credit if the customer is not
 written notification of arrival and      contacted within 48 hours
 return time, and the company shall
 contact the customer within 48 hours to
 reschedule.
TV Reception Difficulties And Cable Modem Internet Connection:
 The company shall make repairs promptly, 1 day's free service for each day in
 and interrupt service only for good      which there is a service interruption
 cause, during periods of minimum use of  for each customer in the affected
 the system, and for no more than 24      area
 hours, except where unavoidable.
 The company shall provide clear          1 day's free service for each day in
 television reception that meets or       which reception falls below FCC
 exceeds FCC technical standards.         standards
 The company shall meet all               1 day's free service for each day in
 specifications advertised for internet   which any advertised specification is
 services.                                not met for affected customers
 If a customer experiences poor video or
 audio reception due to company           1 day's free service for each day
 equipment, the company shall repair the  after the customer has called and the
 problem no later than the next day,      problem remains uncorrected
 unless otherwise agreed to with the
 customer.
Problem Resolution:
 The company shall be able to provide
 credit, waive fees, schedule
 appointments and change billing cycles.
 Any difficulties that cannot be resolved $10.00 credit
 by the customer service representatives
 shall be referred to a supervisor who
 shall make best efforts to contact the
 customer within 24 hours.
 In the case of difficulties that cannot
 be resolved, the supervisor shall make
 best efforts to contact the customer
 within 4 hours and resolve the problem   $10.00 credit
 within 48 hours or within such other
 time frame as is acceptable to the
 customer and company.
Billing, Credits And Refunds:
 Customers shall receive a clear and
 concise bill monthly. The company shall
 respond to a customer's billing inquiry
 made by telephone or e-mail within 48    $10.00 credit
 hours, and to a written billing inquiry
 within 2 weeks of receipt of the
 inquiry.
 The company shall allow 30 days from the
 date a subscriber bill is sent before    $10.00 credit
 imposing an administrative fee not to
 exceed $1.50 per bill.
 If a customer requests disconnection of
 any or all services, billing for
 affected services shall end on the same
 day, or on the future date for which the
 disconnect is ordered. The company shall $10.00 credit or refund if the
 issue a credit or refund within 15       customer's account has closed
 business days after the close of the
 customer's billing cycle following the
 return of the equipment and request for
 disconnection.
 Deposits shall accrue interest at a fair
 market rate. Within 10 days after
 termination of service for any reason,   $10.00 credit or refund if the
 the company shall repay any deposit with customer's account has closed
 a statement showing accrued interest to
 the customer less any sums owed to the
 company.
Respectful Treatment Of Property:
 The company shall replace any trees or   $25.00 credit plus any additional
 shrubs damaged during any installation   repairs or reimbursement if the
 or repair.                               company fails to replace or repair
                                          the damage
 The company shall restore any damaged    $25.00 credit plus any additional
 property to the same condition it was    repairs or reimbursement if the
 before damage occurred.                  company fails to replace or repair
                                          the damaged property
 The company will give notice to property
 owners before entering premises,
 specifying the work to be done. In the   $15.00 credit if the company fails to
 event of an emergency, the company shall provide notice or enters premises
 attempt to contact the property owner or without permission, plus any
 legal tenant in person, and shall leave  additional repairs or reimbursement
 a door hanger notice in the event
 personal contact is not made.
 All company personnel shall clean up
 debris caused by the company's           $15.00 credit plus cleanup and
 activities at a work site and properly   disposal of debris
 dispose of cable materials.
Services For Customers With Disabilities:
 The company will deliver and pick up
 converters at the home of customers with
 disabilities. In the case of a
 malfunctioning converter, the technician $25.00 credit
 shall provide another converter, hook it
 up and ensure that it is working
 properly, and shall return the defective
 converter to the company.
 The company will provide TDD/TYY service
 through trained operators who can
 provide any assistance regularly         $25.00 credit
 available from a customer service
 representative at no charge.
 The company will install, at no charge,
 any closed captioning device purchased   $25.00 credit
 by a hearing impaired customer.
 The company will provide free use of a   $25.00 credit and provision of remote
 converter remote control unit to         control unit
 mobility impaired customers.
CUSTOMER INFORMATION
 Upon installation, or at a customer's    Provide customer with the
 request, the company will provide the    information. $10.00 credit for
 following requested information and      failure to provide
 credit information:
 A. Products and services offered;
 B. Complete range of service options and
    prices;
 C. Customer service standards;
    Instruction on use of cable TV,
 D. interactive TV, internet service,
    remote and on standard VCR hookups;
 E. Billing, collection and disconnect
    policies;
 F. Customer privacy requirements;
    Complaint procedure, containing the
 G. name of the designated person or
    agency to whom the complaints should
    be addressed;
 H. Use and availability of A/B switch;
 I. Use and availability of parental
    control/lockout device;
    Special services for customers with
 J. visual, hearing or mobility
    disabilities;
 K. Days, times or operation, and
    locations of the service centers;
 L. A copy of this section.
 The company shall provide customers and
 the village with written notification of $10.00 credit for each affected
 any change in rates, programming, or     customer
 channels at least 30 days before the
 date of the change.
 All officers, agents, and employees of
 the company, its contractors and
 subcontractors in personal contact with
 the customer shall have a visible        $10.00 credit
 identification card with their name and
 photograph and shall orally identify
 themselves upon first contact with the
 customer.
 All customer service representatives
 shall identify themselves orally to
 callers immediately following the        $10.00 credit
 greeting during each telephone contact
 with the public.
 Each customer service representative,
 technician, or employee of the company
 in each contact with a customer shall
 state the estimated cost of the service,
 repair, or installation orally prior to
 delivery of the service or before any    $10.00 credit
 work is performed, and shall provide the
 customer with an oral statement of the
 total charges before terminating the
 telephone call or before leaving the
 location at which the work was
 performed.
CUSTOMER PRIVACY
 For any violation of privacy per federal The customer has the choice of either
 or state law.                            a check for $150.00, or a credit to
                                          customer account in the same amount
SAFETY
 When the company receives notice that an
 unsafe condition exists with respect to
 its equipment, company shall investigate At least $40.00 a day for each 24
 such condition immediately, and shall    hours' delay in responding to the
 take such measures as are necessary to   customer safety concerns
 remove or eliminate any unsafe
 condition.
SATISFACTION GUARANTEED
 The company will guarantee customer
 satisfaction for every customer who
 requests new or upgraded cable service
 or other service of receiving the
 service and receive a pro rata credit in The customer will have the
 an amount equal to the pro rata charge   opportunity to cancel upgraded cable
 for the remaining days of service being  service or other service within 30
 disconnected if the customer is          days
 dissatisfied with the service, except
 where a free promotion has been offered,
 there shall be no charge for any kind
 for the service of for disconnection of
 the service.
 
   J.   Construction Information: Prior to commencement of construction of an
area, the company shall exercise its best efforts to inform the residents
thereof of the nature and timetable for such construction and shall provide the
residents with the procedures for filing complaints.
   K.   Written Explanation Of Services: At the time the company solicits the
residents of an area for subscription of cable television services, and again
upon actual installation of service, the company shall provide such residents a
simple written explanation of all products and services offered, the options
for and prices of such products and services, the parental lockout device,
installation and service maintenance procedures, cable television services use
instructions, programming channel positions, billing, late fee and complaint
procedures and privacy rights of the subscriber. The information and materials
required by this section shall also be available in the Spanish language.
   L.   Installation Time Schedule: The company shall fill all reasonable
orders for a standard installation of its services within seven (7) business
days and all other reasonable orders within thirty (30) days after the date of
such order. For purposes of the time period for installation as opposed to any
costs charged, "standard" installations are those that are located up to two
hundred feet (200') from the existing distribution system. A request shall be
deemed reasonable if: 1) the services requested are uniformly available on the
company's cable television system; 2) the services are requested in a portion
of the franchise area where the company's cable television system has been
constructed and activated; 3) the company in cooperation with appropriate
agencies can accomplish a proper physical extension of its cable television
system to a person's premises within such seven (7) or thirty (30) days; and 4)
the company can obtain access to a person's premises. If the company fails
within such seven (7) or thirty (30) day period to provide the service
requested, the company, upon request of the person requesting service, shall
within thirty (30) days thereafter promptly refund any and all deposits or
advance payments made by such person. The company shall maintain a record of
all installation requests detailing when and what action was taken. (Ord. 2002-
666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-55: RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE VILLAGE:
   A.   Eminent Domain: Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair
or affect, in any way or to any extent, the power of the village to acquire
property through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and
just value; and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or
to modify or abridge, whether for a term or in perpetuity, the village's right
of eminent domain.
   B.   Police Powers: The company's rights are subject to the police powers of
the village to adopt and enforce ordinances as the corporate authorities may
deem necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the
public. The company shall comply with all generally applicable laws and
ordinances enacted pursuant to that power.
   C.   Other Legal Rights And Powers: In addition to any rights specifically
reserved to the village by this chapter, the village reserves to itself every
right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of this chapter
or the franchise.
   D.   Right To Make Rules And Regulations: There is hereby reserved to the
village the right to adopt rules and regulations as it shall find necessary or
appropriate to implement the terms and conditions of this chapter; provided,
however, that such rules and regulations are within the scope of the
obligations imposed by this chapter and franchise agreements granted pursuant
to this chapter, and do not conflict with the provisions of applicable federal
and state laws and regulations. Before any such rules and regulations are
adopted, the village shall give notice to the company and afford the company an
opportunity to be heard.
   E.   Variance: The village reserves the right to grant variances from the
strict application of any provision of this chapter, except those required by
federal or state law, if the village determines: 1) that it is in the public
interest to do so, and 2) that the strict enforcement of such provision will
impose an undue hardship on the company. To be effective, such variance shall
be evidenced by writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the
village. A variance of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a
variance of such provision subsequent to such instance, nor shall it be deemed
a variance or waiver of any other provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-
12-2002)
3-13-56: EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER:
The company shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor shall it bar or discharge
from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in
terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of age, race, creed,
color, national origin, or sex. The company shall comply with the provisions of
the cable act and Illinois law relating to employment. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-
2002)
3-13-57: NO WAIVER BY THE VILLAGE:
The company shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement by reason of any failure
of the village to enforce prompt compliance. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
3-13-58: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or provision of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional as conflicting with
any federal, state or local law rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect
by any federal or state court, or administrative or governmental agency of
competent jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, the FCC, or is held by
such court or agency to be modified in any way to conform to the requirements
of any such law, rule or regulation, such provision shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining parts of this chapter, which shall be
applied and construed as reasonably as possible in the absence of the
invalidated provision. (Ord. 2002-666, 9-12-2002)
CHAPTER 14
AMUSEMENT DEVICES; GAME ROOMS
SECTION:
3-14-1: Definitions
3-14-2: License Required, Game Rooms
3-14-3: Application For License
3-14-4: Investigation Fee
3-14-5: Restriction On Issuance Of License
3-14-6: Examination Of Applicant Or Licensee
3-14-7: Regulations For Operation Of Game Rooms
3-14-8: License Fees
3-14-9: Taxation For Amusement Devices
3-14-10: Display Of License
3-14-11: Simulated Video Or Mechanical Gaming Services Prohibited
3-14-11-1: Video Gaming Prohibited
3-14-12: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applicable:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: A machine, game, table or device which is designed, intended,
displayed or kept as an amusement game, test of skill or entertainment, and may
be operated by the public upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate,
disc, the use of which is made available for any valuable consideration, which
device is operated by the manipulation of buttons, dials, balls, wheels,
trigger devices or electrical impulses, whether or not registering a score,
offering a prize or offering free replays. "Amusement device" shall include,
but not be limited to, devices commonly known as pinball machines, marble
machines, video games, excluding, however, "simulated video or mechanical
gaming devices" as herein defined, electronic games, skill ball, pool, billiard
and snooker tables (whether coin operated or not), and all games, operations or
transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated. Not
included within the definition of "amusement device" are regulation bowling
alleys, children's rides and jukeboxes. An "amusement device" does not include
a video gaming terminal as defined in the video gaming act 1 .
GAME ROOM: Any business establishment having two (2) or more amusement devices,
whether or not operated as a principal use.
JUKEBOX: Any device, machine or mechanism designed solely for the production or
reproduction of music.
OPERATOR: Any person or entity which leases or operates a business
establishment which is or has contained within it a game room.
OWNER: Any person or entity who owns or leases an amusement device or devices.
SIMULATED VIDEO OR MECHANICAL GAMING DEVICE: Any video poker machine, video or
mechanical slot machine (excluding inoperable antique slot machines as defined
by section 28-1(b)(7) of the Illinois criminal code 2 ), video or mechanical
bingo machine, or other devices which involve any game of chance or amusement
based upon poker, blackjack, dog racing or horseracing, craps, any card or dice
game, or any similar device operated by means of the insertion of a coin,
token, slug, currency, or similar object. A simulated video or mechanical
gaming device includes a video gaming terminal as defined in the video gaming
act 3 . (Ord. 2004-705, 3-11-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 2009-890, 10-8-
2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 230 ILCS 40/5.
2 1. 720 ILCS 5/28-1(b)(7).
3 2. 230 ILCS 40/5.
3-14-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, GAME ROOMS:
It shall be unlawful to own or operate a game room without first having
obtained a license to do so and to own or operate a game room which does not
comply with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2004-705, 3-11-2004, eff. 5-1-
2004)
3-14-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license required from the owner or operator of a game room
shall be made to the village clerk, in writing, signed by the applicant, if an
individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof if a corporation, verified by
oath or affidavit. The application fee for a new license shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00), except that no application fee shall be required for the
initial license of any game room in operation on or prior to the effective date
hereof. The application shall include the following information and statements:
   A.   The applicant's business name and mailing address.
   B.   The name and address of the applicant's business if such business was
in operation prior to the passage of an ordinance requiring the aforesaid
license, or if a proposed business, the name and address of the proposed game
room.
   C.   If applicable, the date of the filing of the "assumed name" of the
business as filed with the Cook County clerk.
   D.   A drawing of the existing and proposed layout of the premises drawn to
scale and showing the number of and location of amusement devices, aisles,
counters and other significant details.
   E.   The date of the formation of the business or partnership, as the case
may be, or if an Illinois corporation, the date of its incorporation; or in the
case of a foreign corporation, the state where it was incorporated and the date
of its becoming qualified under the Illinois business corporation act to
transact business in the state of Illinois, as well as a description of the
character of the business or in the case of a corporation, the objects for
which it was formed.
   F.   If the applicant is a sole owner or partnership, the name, sex, date of
birth, place of birth, driver's license number, position and percentage of
ownership in the business of each owner or partner. If the applicant is a
corporation, the name, sex, date of birth, place of birth, driver's license
number and position of the principal corporate officers, and any person who
owns five percent (5%) or more of the shares of the applicant business entity.
The name, sex, date of birth, place of birth, driver's license number of the
manager at the location of the game room.
   G.   Whether the applicant is an owner or operator of any other game room
within the state, and, if so, the name and address of such other operation(s).
   H.   If the game room is not the principal business at the location
specified on the application, a statement as to the type of business which will
be the principal business at the location in question.
   I.   Whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of any retailers'
occupation tax; and, if so, the reasons therefor.
   J.   A statement as to whether the applicant has made application in another
municipality for a retail local liquor license or a game room license and
whether such application has been approved or denied and, if denied, the
reasons for such denial.
   K.   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a gambling
offense or felony, and, is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of
any matter contained in this chapter, laws of the state or ordinances of the
village.
   L.   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by a
federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
   M.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
state of Illinois or of the United States or any ordinances of the village in
the conduct of his business in the village. (Ord. 2004-705, 3-11-2004, eff. 5-
1-2004)
3-14-4: INVESTIGATION FEE:
There shall be filed with each application for a license to operate a game room
a nonrefundable background investigation fee of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) to assure the applicant's qualification to hold a game room license
in the village of South Barrington. No investigation fee shall be required for
any applicant that currently holds a valid village of South Barrington retail
liquor license provided the ownership interest in the liquor license is
identical to the ownership interest of the game room. No investigation fee
shall be required for any currently operating game room that is in operation on
or prior to the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2004-705, 3-11-2004, eff. 5-1-
2004)
3-14-5: RESTRICTION ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
No such license shall be issued to:
   A.   An applicant who is not a resident of the village.
   B.   An applicant who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he resides.
   C.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is the keeper
of a house of ill fame.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality including, but not limited to, sex
offenders requiring registration pursuant to state statutes.
   F.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause or whose license issued by an Illinois state regulator has been revoked.
   G.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license under a first
application.
   H.   A partnership, unless all the members of such partnership shall be
qualified to receive a license.
   I.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
village.
   J.   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois business corporation
act to transact business in Illinois.
   K.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   L.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license
is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
   M.   Any law enforcing public official, any president of the village board
of trustees, any member of a village board of trustees, or any president or
member of a county board; and no such official shall be interested in any way,
either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of
amusement devices.
   N.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of amusement devices or
gaming devices or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges
for any such violation.
   O.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   P.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by
any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of paragraph 28-1 of, or as
prescribed by paragraph 28-3 of the "criminal code of 1961", of the state of
Illinois, approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as
prescribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
   Q.   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period.
   R.   A partnership, to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device
stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax
period.
   S.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent
(20%) of the stock of such corporation has been issued a federal gaming device
stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period.
   T.   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period. (Ord. 2004-705, 3-11-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-14-6: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT OR LICENSEE:
At any time during the pendency of an application or during a license period,
the village president personally or through the chief of police shall be
authorized to compel the owner or operator of the game room to submit to an
examination concerning the operation of the game room and to request production
of any books and records which, in the judgment of the person conducting the
investigation, are material to the determination of whether the applicant or
license holder is qualified to receive or to retain a license under the
provisions of this chapter. The person conducting the investigation shall have
the right to require the person being investigated to answer any charges made
in any written objection received to the issuance or continuation of the
license. The failure of any applicant to appear at the time and place fixed for
the examination or a failure to produce books and records as requested, unless
for good cause shown, shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the license.
(Ord. 2004-705, 3-11-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-14-7: REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION OF GAME ROOMS:
In addition to any other relevant regulations or conditions as may be imposed
by this code, the following items shall constitute additional rules and
regulations for the operation of any game room operating within the village.
Neither the owner nor operator of a game room shall cause or permit the
operation of a game room to take place contrary to these regulations.
   A.   Manager:
      1.   Game Rooms With Five Or More Amusement Devices: Whenever any game
room with five (5) or more amusement devices installed on the premises is
operating, a manager of not less than twenty one (21) years of age shall be
present in the game room.
      2.   Game Rooms With Four Or Less Amusement Devices: Whenever any game
room with four (4) or less amusement devices installed on the premises is
operating, a manager of not less than eighteen (18) years of age shall be
present in the game room.
   B.   No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed in the game room
unless the game room is an incidental use to a business that holds a valid
South Barrington local liquor license.
   C.   If the game room is not an incidental use to another business
authorized to sell tobacco products, no tobacco products shall be sold on the
premises.
   D.   Signs shall be posted in the game room denoting any curfew law then in
force within the village.
   E.   No person under sixteen (16) years of age shall be permitted to operate
an amusement device between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and two
thirty o'clock (2:30) P.M. on days in which school is in session, unless said
person is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian.
   F.   The manager or other security personnel shall periodically inspect the
area outside of the entrance and, where applicable, parking lot adjacent to
assure that persons are not allowed to congregate in such areas where the
congregation of such persons takes place under conditions which cause
disturbances to patrons of other business establishments, nearby residents or
property owners. The owner or operator of the game room or his agent will
direct such persons to leave the premises and, absent their compliance with
such request, he will sign a complaint for trespass or other applicable
violation of the laws of the state or village.
   G.   All game rooms operated as a primary business will close not later than
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.; provided, however, that where the game room is
located as a nonprimary operation in a premises where alcoholic liquor is sold,
the game room may continue in operation until the usual closing hour of that
establishment; or where a game room is located as a nonprimary operation in a
movie theater, the game room will close thirty (30) minutes prior to the end of
the last movie show.
   H.   No gambling shall take place within the game room.
   I.   No cash prizes shall be awarded within the game room.
   J.   Neither the owner nor the operator of the game room shall cause or
permit loud noises or disturbances to take place within the game room. Persons
who cause such loud noises or disturbances shall be promptly expelled by the
game room management.
   K.   Amusement devices within game rooms shall be placed so that there is a
clear and unobstructed view of all amusement devices so that the manager, or a
designated supervisor, may monitor the operation of the amusement devices. The
placement of such devices shall not obstruct entrances or aisles. There shall
be a minimum of forty (40) square feet per amusement device. The owner,
operator or applicant shall submit at the time of application a drawing
indicating the proposed location of amusement devices within the game room.
After a license has been issued, the location of machines may not be changed
unless the new placement of machines is in compliance with those standards set
forth within this chapter.
   L.   Number Of Devices: No game rooms shall have more than the number of
amusement devices licensed pursuant to this chapter and no licensed game room
may have more than twenty (20) amusement devices. (Ord. 2004-705, 3-11-2004,
eff. 5-1-2004)
3-14-8: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   The license fee for the operator of any game room shall be as follows:
 
Class A - 20 amusement devices       $1,000.00
Class B - 11 to 19 amusement devices 500.00
Class C - 2 to 10 amusement devices  50.00
 
   B.   The license period shall be from July 1 to June 30 of each year.
   C.   The license fees shall be due in full upon the issuance of the licenses
and are not transferable. Where the event which results in a license fee being
payable shall take place during the second half of a license year, the amount
of the license shall be prorated to one-half (1/2) of the annual license fee.
   D.   No refund shall be given in the event that a license is voluntarily
terminated or revoked. (Ord. 2004-705, 3-11-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-14-9: TAXATION FOR AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any amusement device located within the village
which is available for public use upon the payment of a fee. The amount of the
annual tax shall be as follows:
 
Amusement device                               $100.00 per device (sticker)
Pool, snooker or billiards table (whether coin 50.00 per table (sticker)
operated or noncoin operated)
Transfer fee                                   5.00 per device (sticker)
 
For all amusement devices for which a sticker has been previously issued, such
annual tax shall be due and payable on or before July 1 of each year. When an
amusement device that is not a substitute for another amusement device ("new
amusement device") is installed during the first half of the year, the entire
annual tax shall be due and payable. When any such new amusement device is
installed during the second half of the year, one-half (1/2) of the annual tax
shall be due and payable. The annual tax for such devices shall thereafter be
due and payable on or before July 1 of the following year. Upon payment of the
tax, the taxpayer shall receive a sticker which shall be affixed to each device
upon which the tax is imposed. In the event that the device upon which the tax
was imposed is to be permanently withdrawn from the village, and another
machine permanently substituted in its place, the taxpayer, upon the payment of
a transfer fee, may receive an additional sticker. At the time that the annual
tax is paid, and at the time that the transfers are requested, the taxpayer
shall inform the village as to the exact device for which the tax is being
paid. (Ord. 2004-705, 3-11-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-14-10: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
All licenses required of persons or entities pursuant to this chapter shall be
displayed in a prominent location on the premises of a game room, visible to
both the public and any law enforcement officer. (Ord. 2004-705, 3-11-2004,
eff. 5-1-2004)
3-14-11: SIMULATED VIDEO OR MECHANICAL GAMING SERVICES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or partnership to keep,
locate, maintain or operate any simulated video or mechanical gaming service
within the village. (Ord. 2004-705, 3-11-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
3-14-11-1: VIDEO GAMING PROHIBITED:
Video gaming as authorized by the video gaming act 1  is prohibited within the
corporate limits of the village of South Barrington. For the purposes of this
section, "video gaming" means the possession, use or operation of any
electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, is available to
play or simulate the play of a video game, including, but not limited to, video
poker, line up, and blackjack, utilizing a video display and microprocessors in
which the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for
cash. (Ord. 2009-890, 10-8-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
3-14-12: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The village board, upon the recommendation of the village president or some
person or committee delegated by the village president to carry out the
functions ascribed to the village president pursuant to this chapter, may
revoke or suspend any license issued by the village to the owner or operator of
a game room. If a committee is delegated, the village president may serve on
the committee. The committee shall determine which member shall write its
recommendation to the village board. Provided, however, that no such license
shall be so revoked or suspended except after a public hearing conducted by the
village president or a designee with not less than three (3) days' written
notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and
defend. After conducting the hearing, the village president or designee shall
prepare a report summarizing the evidence and making a recommendation to the
village board. The village board may accept the recommendation of the village
president or designee or by motion fine the licensee in an amount not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per offense, revoke or suspend the
license for a period other than that period recommended by the village
president or designee. In any instance where an alleged violation is the first
charge attributable to the premises, the village president or designee, after a
hearing as provided above and without the need for a consideration of the
matter by the village board, may suspend the license of the game room for a
period of not to exceed seven (7) days.
In the event the village president has reason to believe that any continued
operation of the game room will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community, he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for
such conclusion and without further notice or hearing, order the licensed
premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the owner and operator
an opportunity to be heard during that period. In the event the game room
license is revoked, no new license for a game room shall be issued for the
premises within a period of one year from the date of the revocation. (Ord.
2004-705, 3-11-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
CHAPTER 15
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
SECTION:
3-15-1: Definitions
3-15-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
3-15-3: PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
3-15-4: Applicable Principles
3-15-5: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
3-15-6: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
3-15-7: Late Fees/Payments
3-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
   A.   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this
definition.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   B.   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   C.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 2008-847, 2-14-2008)
3-15-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   C.   Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten
(10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the village.
   D.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
   E.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
   F.   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2008-847, 2-14-2008)
3-15-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to section
3-15-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be zero percent (0%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village
or its designee for PEG access support in the village.
   C.   Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village
or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth
in subsection 3-15-2D of this chapter.
   D.   Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   E.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be
credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 2008-847, 2-14-2008)
3-15-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 2008-847, 2-14-2008)
3-15-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 2008-847,
2-14-2008)
3-15-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Requirement: The village has the right to inspect the grantee's
income records and the right to an audit of its books and records in order to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter; provided,
however, that such audit shall take place within sixty (60) months following
the close of each of the grantee's fiscal years. The holder shall comply with
the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video
service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records
and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of
the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the village's submission of an invoice for
the sum.
   C.   Filing Annually: The grantee shall file annually with the village no
later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the end of the grantee's fiscal
year, a copy of a gross revenues statement certified by an officer of the
grantee. (Ord. 2008-847, 2-14-2008)
3-15-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 2008-847, 2-14-
2008)
CHAPTER 16
PAVEMENT SEALANTS (APPLICATORS)
SECTION:
3-16-1: Definitions
3-16-2: Product Identification
3-16-3: License Required
3-16-4: Certification
3-16-5: License Fee
3-16-6: Nontransferability Of License
3-16-7: Review And Approval
3-16-8: Penalties
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
APPLICATOR(S): Any person(s) that is licensed by the village to apply pavement
sealants or any individual applying pavement sealants.
PAVEMENT SEALANT, PAVEMENT SEAL, OR SEALCOAT: A liquid that is applied to
asphalt surfaces or in some occasions on any surface, to protect the surfaces
from damage or further damage usually due to the freezing and thawing cycles,
UV rays and traffic.
POLYCYCLIC AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS (PAH): Known carcinogens which are toxic to
mammals, birds, fish, amphibians and plants. In humans PAH have been linked to
blood, kidney, liver, lung, scrotal, skin and stomach cancers, with children
under age six (6) at increased risk of cancer. (Ord. 0-2016-1129, 8-11-2016)
3-16-2: PRODUCT IDENTIFICATION:
The village of South Barrington will request the material safety data sheet
(MSDS) (or called the safety data sheet (SDS)), for the sealant product to be
used by the contractor, and will scrutinize the chemical abstract service (CAS)
numbers on the ingredient list of the product and will refrain from using any
product with the following identifiers:
Coal Tar Based Sealants Other High PAH Sealants
Coal Tar Based Sealants     Other High PAH Sealants
a. CAS#65996-92-1           a. CAS#64742-90-1
b. CAS#65996-93-2           b. CAS#69013-21-4
c. CAS#65996-89-6           c. Steam cracked petroleum residues
d. CAS#8007-45-2            d. Steam cracked asphalt
e. Coal tar                 e. Pyrolysis fuel oil
f. Coal tar pitch           f. Pyrolysis oil
g. Coal tar distillates     g. Heavy aromatic pyrolysis oil
h. RT-12                    h. Heavy fuel oil (HFO)
i. Refined tar              i. Heavy pyrolysis oil (HPO)
j. Refined coal tar pitch   j. Ethylene tar
k. Coal tar pitch volatiles k. Ethylene bottoms
l. Tar                      l. Related terms
m. Related terms
 
As other coal tar and high PAH sealants are identified by descriptive terms
and/or are identified by CAS number, this additional product information will
be added to the product list stated above and will be excluded from use.
In any case, any sealant product that exceeds 0.1 percent total PAH by weight
will be excluded from use. If it is not clear if a sealant product contains a
high level of PAH by the descriptive terms and CAS numbers listed in this
section, then a product's total PAH content by weight may be determined by
independent laboratory analysis; alternately, a product's total PAH content by
weight may be estimated through the use of the MSDS (or SDS), independent
laboratory analysis, independent peer reviewed research, studies by
authoritative governmental bodies, or a combination of these sources. (Ord. 0-
2016-1129, 8-11-2016)
3-16-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any contractor to apply any pavement sealant, pavement seal,
or sealcoat, or any other sealant product to any public or private property
without first obtaining a license which must be renewed annually. Application
for a pavement sealant license shall be made on a form provided by the village
and shall, at a minimum, state the name, address, and contact information of
the person applying for the license and the person or persons who will be
applying the sealant, type of sealant, and other such information as may be
required by the village. (Ord. 0-2016-1129, 8-11-2016)
3-16-4: CERTIFICATION:
All persons applying for a pavement sealant license shall sign a certification
on a form provided by the village, certifying, at a minimum, that neither the
licensee nor any person acting under the license will apply products that
contain coal tar, coal tar derivatives, or coal tar mixtures ("coal tar
products") to any public or private property within the village. (Ord. 0-2016-
1129, 8-11-2016)
3-16-5: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for each paving sealant applicator is one hundred
dollars ($100.00) each year. (Ord. 0-2016-1129, 8-11-2016)
3-16-6: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
No license granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be assigned or
transferred, nor shall any such license authorize any person other than the
licensee named therein to do business or act under such license. (Ord. 0-2016-
1129, 8-11-2016)
3-16-7: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
The building officer shall review all applications for pavement sealant
licenses for each application and shall grant a pavement sealant license if the
application complies with all provisions of this chapter and this code. (Ord.
0-2016-1129, 8-11-2016)
3-16-8: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate
and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day on which such
person shall continue or permit any violation; and shall be subject to license
revocation. (Ord. 0-2016-1129, 8-11-2016)
CHAPTER 17
CONFLICT WITH COOK COUNTY EARNED SICK LEAVE ORDINANCE
SECTION:
3-17-1: Definitions
3-17-2: Earned Sick Leave
3-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
EMPLOYEE: An individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the
number of persons the employer employs. For purposes of this chapter,
"employee" does not mean an employee of the Village of South Barrington.
EMPLOYER: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, business trust, or any person or group of persons that
gainfully employs at least one (1) covered employee with a place of business in
Cook County. For purposes of this chapter, the term "employer" does not mean:
a) the government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the
government of the United States; b) an Indian tribe or a corporation wholly
owned by an Indian tribe; c) the government of the State or any agency or
department thereof; or d) units of local government, including the Village of
South Barrington. (Ord. 2017-1149, 3-9-2017)
3-17-2: EARNED SICK LEAVE:
Employers located within the territorial boundaries of the Village of South
Barrington shall not be required to offer earned sick leave to employees who
work at least eighty (80) hours within any one hundred twenty (120) day period.
No additional obligations with regard to earned sick leave adopted by the Cook
County Board of Commissioners shall apply to employers located within the
Village of South Barrington. (Ord. 2017-1149, 3-9-2017)
CHAPTER 18
CONFLICT WITH COOK COUNTY MINIMUM WAGE ORDINANCE
SECTION:
3-18-1: Definitions
3-18-2: Minimum Wage
3-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
COVERED EMPLOYEE: Any employee who in any particular two (2) week period,
performs at least two (2) hours of work for an employer while physically
present within the geographic boundaries of the Village of South Barrington.
For purposes of this definition, time spent traveling in the Village of South
Barrington that is compensated time, including, but not limited to, deliveries,
sales calls, and travel related to other business activity taking place within
the Village of South Barrington, shall constitute work while physically present
within the geographic boundaries of the Village of South Barrington; however,
time spent traveling in the Village of South Barrington that is uncompensated
commuting time shall not constitute work while physically present within the
geographic boundaries of the Village of South Barrington.
EMPLOYEE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in the Minimum Wage Law,
with the exception of all domestic workers, including domestic workers employed
by employers with fewer than four (4) employees, shall fall under the
definition of the term "employee". For purposes of this chapter, "employee"
does not mean an employee of the Village of South Barrington.
EMPLOYER: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, business trust, or any person or group of persons that
gainfully employs at least one (1) covered employee. To qualify as an employer,
such individual, group, or entity must maintain a business facility within the
geographic boundaries of the Village of South Barrington. For purposes of this
chapter, "employer" does not mean the Village of South Barrington. (Ord. 2017-
1149, 3-9-2017)
3-18-2: MINIMUM WAGE:
Employers located within the Village of South Barrington shall comply with all
applicable Federal and State of Illinois laws and regulations with respect to
the payment of minimum hourly wages for non-tipped employees, including but not
limited to wages established by the Fair Labor Standards Division Illinois
Department of Labor. No employer located within the Village of South Barrington
shall be required to pay non-tipped employees a minimum hourly wage in excess
of those wages established by Federal and State of Illinois laws, including,
but not limited to, the minimum wage rate established by the Fair Labor
Standards Division of the Illinois Department of Labor. No additional
obligations with regard to minimum wage adopted by the Cook County Board of
Commissioners shall apply to employers located within the Village of South
Barrington. (Ord. 2017-1149, 3-9-2017)
CHAPTER 19
LICENSING OF SINGLE FAMILY RENTAL PROPERTIES
SECTION:
3-19-1: Definitions
3-19-2: Licensing Requirements
3-19-3: Application Required
3-19-4: Licensing Fee, Term, And Renewal
3-19-5: Consent To Inspections And Right Of Access
3-19-6: Enforcement
3-19-7: Penalty
3-19-1: DEFINITIONS:
Words or phrases as used in this Chapter and not herein defined shall be
defined as provided by the current edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code, International Residential Code, National Electrical Code, and
the Illinois State Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Village.
 
BOARDING ROOM:           A room within a home that is rented for sleeping and
                         living quarters.
CODE OFFICIAL:           The Village Administrator or his/her designee.
                         The private roads and streets and private sidewalks
                         adjacent thereto, landscaping, retaining walls,
                         detention ponds, utility facilities, trash receptacles
                         and enclosures, playground equipment, swimming pools,
                         tennis courts, basketball courts or any other
COMMON AREAS (EXTERIOR): recreational facilities, trail areas, parking areas,
                         private drives, detached garages, lighting fixtures,
                         signage, mailboxes, street benches, entrance
                         monuments, perimeter fencing and such other
                         improvements or structures from time to time or at any
                         time located or constructed on a common area.
                         Any portion or part thereof of a multiple-family
                         dwelling having communal areas (laundry, furnace,
                         storage rooms, hallways, stairways, meeting rooms) and
                         all other areas located within a dwelling, outside of
                         a dwelling unit. Interior common areas shall also
                         include stoops, entrance doors, roofs, attics,
                         balconies, lighting fixtures, signage, railings,
COMMON AREAS (INTERIOR): patios, storage areas, garages, exterior building
                         surfaces, gutters and downspouts and any area of a
                         multiple-family dwelling or building to which the
                         owner is directly responsible for the proper
                         maintenance thereof. Nothing herein shall be construed
                         to permit or authorize the entrance into or access to
                         the interior of the individual units which are
                         occupied.
 
                          A building that contains one (1) or more dwelling
DWELLING:                 units used, intended, or designed to be used, rented,
                          or leased for living purposes.
                          A single unit providing complete, independent living
DWELLING UNIT:            facilities for one (1) or more persons, including
                          permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
                          cooking and sanitation.
MANAGING AGENT:           Any person or firm acting for another, with authority
                          to rent, manage, and make expenditures.
                          One (1) or more residential buildings, designed and
                          built as a group of individual dwelling units, which
                          contain three (3) or more dwelling units per building
                          and contain either or both interior and exterior
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: common areas as defined in this section. Each
                          building that is separated by another building by
                          virtue of a firewall or fire separation assembly, and
                          has its own address and individual, ground level,
                          outside entrance shall be considered a separate
                          building.
                          Any natural person living and sleeping in a dwelling
OCCUPANCY/                unit designated as his primary residence, or any
OCCUPANT:                 natural person having actual possession or control of
                          such dwelling or rooming unit.
OPERATOR:                 Any person who has charge, care, control or
                          management of a dwelling or dwelling unit.
                          Any person who, alone, jointly, or severally with
                          others, has legal title to any dwelling or dwelling
                          unit, with or without actual possession thereof; or
                          who has charge, care or control of any dwelling or
                          dwelling unit, owner, or other person; or is an
                          executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the
                          estate of the owner; is a mortgagee in possession, or
                          is a senior officer of a trustee of the association
OWNER:                    of unit owners of a condominium or homeowners'
                          association. Any person thus representing the actual
                          owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of
                          this Chapter, and the rules and regulations pursuant
                          thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner.
                          The term owner shall also mean any managing agent,
                          property agent, or any condominium or homeowners'
                          association having the charge, care or control of any
                          common area which part of the dwelling or dwelling
                          unit.
 
                             Any real property, including its land and that
                             which is affixed, incidental, or pertinent to
                             land, including but not limited to, any premises,
PROPERTY:                    room, house, building, or structure, or any
                             separate part or portion thereof, whether occupied
                             or leased for residential purposes, owned, leased
                             or used for commercial purposes, whether under
                             written or oral agreement.
                             A person, operator, firm, partnership,
                             corporation, or other legal entity designated in
                             writing by the owner to the Director of Community
PROPERTY AGENT:              Development to be responsible for compliance with
                             property maintenance of a single family dwelling
                             or a multi-family dwelling, and authorized to
                             receive any notices or citations.
                             All written and oral agreements of whatever
RENTAL OR LEASE AGREEMENT:   duration, which embody the terms and conditions of
                             the use and occupancy of a dwelling or dwelling
                             unit.
                             Residential structures or dwelling units, not
                             owner occupied, intended to be rented or leased,
                             including single family detached structures
                             containing only one dwelling unit, condominium
                             units, townhouse units, duplexes, and multiple-
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: family dwelling residential structures which are
                             intended to be used as a home, residence or
                             sleeping place by one (1) or more persons that
                             maintain a household, together with all land,
                             appurtenances, buildings and common areas, whether
                             rented or leased, with or without compensation, to
                             tenants, including family members.
 
                        Single family detached structures containing only one
                        (1) dwelling unit, condominium units, townhouse units,
                        and duplexes which are not owner occupied and intended
                        to be rented or leased, and intended to be used as a
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING: home, residence or sleeping place by one (1) or more
                        persons that maintain a household, together with all
                        land, appurtenances, buildings and common areas,
                        whether rented or leased, with or without compensation,
                        to tenants, including family members.
                        A person who has entered into an oral or written lease
                        with a landlord whereby the person is the lessee under
TENANT:                 the lease, or otherwise entitled to possession of the
                        property whether or not payment is provided for the
                        tenancy.
                        The Village Code of Ordinances of the Village of South
VILLAGE CODE:           Barrington, from time to time in effect, including all
                        codes adopted by specific reference.
                        The Village Administrator of South Barrington or his or
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:  her designated representatives. (Ord. 2020-1227, 3-11-
                        2020)
 
3-19-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required:
      1.   Single family dwelling rental licenses ("license") shall be
administered by the Village Administrator.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, managing agent, property agent, or other legal entity to operate,
maintain or offer for rent within the Village any single family dwelling,
whether vacant or occupied any part thereof, without first having obtained and
maintained a current license, as provided in this Chapter.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a single family
dwelling, or for any owner, managing agent, or property agent to allow anyone
to occupy a single family dwelling, or part thereof, which is not currently
licensed as provided for in this Chapter.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
managing agent, property agent, or other legal entity to offer for rent or to
occupy any vacant dwelling unit or any dwelling unit that becomes vacant in a
single family dwelling, or any part thereof, for which a license has been
revoked or while such license is under suspension.
      5.   Whenever an owner, managing agent, or property agent of a single
family dwelling fails to obtain a proper license, the code official shall
notify all tenants of the single family dwelling by first class mail, certified
mail, return receipt requested, and posting a notice on all entrances to the
single family dwelling indicating the following:
         a.   You are hereby notified that the owner, managing agent, or
property agent of this single family dwelling has failed to license this
property with the Village of South Barrington in violation of Title 3, Chapter
19 of the Village Code.
         b.   You must vacate this property within sixty (60) days of this
notice.
         c.   If you fail to vacate this property, you will be subject to a
minimum fine of $100.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00 for each day you remain
in the single family dwelling in violation of this Chapter.
      6.   Whenever an owner, managing agent, or property agent of a single
family dwelling fails to obtain a license, and allows persons to remain on the
property, it shall be considered a violation of this Chapter, until such time
as the owner, managing agent, or property agent obtains a license or takes
appropriate steps to vacate the property, including, but not limited to, filing
a suit for forcible entry.
      7.   No license shall be granted, and nothing in this Chapter shall be
construed as to allow, short term rentals of residential property in violation
of section
2-11 "Short Term Rentals" of the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Rental Agreements And Leases Required:
      1.   All rental agreements, leases, and renewal agreements shall be in
writing, signed by the tenant(s).
      2.   Each rental agreement, lease or renewal agreement shall contain the
following provisions and lease addendum stating the following:
         Tenants and all persons who reside in the leased premises, by assuming
possession of the same, agree that the landlord or his agents may release to
the Police Department any information concerning the identity of all occupants.
         The maximum occupancy restrictions for this property is _____________
occupants.
         The tenant(s) is(are) hereby notified that, upon proper notice, the
Village of South Barrington may conduct reasonable inspections of the rental
residential property, with the consent of the tenant, for purposes of
determining compliance with the Village of South Barrington requirements for
Licensing of Rental Residential Properties and other relevant provisions of the
Village Code.
         TENANT(S): Signature denotes the above information was provided by
your landlord and you have read and understand the information regarding the
Village Ordinance, and you are 18 years of age or older. (Use additional copies
of the addendum for additional tenant signatures.)
         Print Name Tenant 1: _________________________________
         Print Name Tenant 2: _________________________________
         Signature Tenant 1: __________________________________   
         Signature Tenant 2: __________________________________
         Date: _________________       Date: _________________
         Print Name Tenant 3: _________________________________
         Print Name Tenant 4: _________________________________
         Signature Tenant 3: __________________________________
         Signature Tenant 4: __________________________________
         Date: __________________      Date: ___________________
         LANDLORD: Signature denotes understanding of the above information and
that the information has been provided to the tenant(s). (Landlord signature
required on each addendum/tenant signature page submitted.)
         Print Landlord Name: _________________________________
         Landlord Signature: ___________________________________
         ( ) Landlord or ( ) Legal Representative       Date: ________
      3.   Except as provided herein, this Chapter is not intended to affect
the rights and obligations of the parties to a lease or rental agreement for
rental residential property.
   C.   Owner Responsibilities:
      1.   The owner, managing agent, or property agent of a single family
dwelling shall maintain a record for each property with the full legal name of
every tenant in each dwelling unit.
      2.   The owner, managing agent, or property agent of a single family
dwelling shall provide each tenant with the name and telephone number of a
responsible person that will be available on a twenty four (24) hour basis and
who has the authority to make repairs as needed.
      3.   The owner, managing agent, or property agent of a single family
dwelling shall, prior to occupancy, inform each tenant in writing of the
maximum number of persons, per dwelling unit, allowable by the International
Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended by the Village.
      4.   The owner, managing agent, or property agent shall report to the
Village Administrator any changes in the designation of the managing agent
within seven (7) days of the change. (Ord. 2020-1227, 3-11-2020)
3-19-3: APPLICATION REQUIRED:
   A.   Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, managing
agent, property agent, or other legal entity that intends to operate, maintain
or offer for rent within the Village any single family dwelling, or part
thereof, whether vacant or occupied, shall submit an application for a license
to the Village Administrator.
   B.   Each application filed with the Village Administrator shall state:
      1.   The full legal name, address, and home and work telephone numbers of
every owner of record.
      2.   If the single family dwelling is held in a trust, the name, address,
and phone number of each trustee and each beneficial interest holder.
      3.   The address of the single family dwelling.
      4.   The number of dwelling units within the single family dwelling.
      5.   The full legal name and phone number of each tenant, eighteen (18)
years and older, and the number of minor children under eighteen (18) years of
age.
      6.   The name, address, and phone number of the managing agent and/or
property agent.
      7.   The name, address, and twenty four (24) hour phone number or numbers
of a contact person that will be available on a twenty four (24) hour basis,
and that has the authority to make or authorize repairs as needed.
      8.   The total square footage designated for living and sleeping
purposes, including individual room sizes, as stipulated by the International
Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended by the Village. (Ord. 2020-
1227, 3-11-2020)
3-19-4: LICENSING FEE, TERM, AND RENEWAL:
   A.   License Fee And Term:
      1.   An application for a license for rental or leasing of residential
properties must be submitted for review and approval at the Village Hall. The
permit fee is one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
         a.   All such fees shall be payable at Village Hall and shall be due
and payable on or before April 1 of each year.
         b.   If the completed license application is not submitted together
with the required fee prior to April 1 in any given year, the license fee shall
be increased by twenty five dollars ($25.00) on May 1 and on the first day of
each subsequent month until such time as a complete license application is
submitted and the required license fee is paid.
      2.   Fees shall not be prorated.
      3.   No refund of any license fee paid shall be made.
      4.   Each license granted hereunder shall be an annual license, the term
of which shall commence on April 1 of a given year and shall terminate on March
31 of the next year.
      5.   The owner, managing agent, or property agent is responsible for
obtaining a license each year the property is a rental residential property. If
it is determined that an owner, managing agent, or property agent has failed to
obtain a license, the owner, managing agent, or property agent shall be
responsible for paying the current license and the license fee for all previous
years the property was a rental residential property.
         a.   Such past due fees shall be established in accordance with
division A1b of this section.
         b.   The maximum past due fee for an annual license shall be three
hundred dollars ($300.00).
      6.   Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary, no
license shall be issued until such time as all fees, costs, and fines provided
for by this Code have been paid.
   B.   License Renewal:
      1.   Application for license renewal shall be made in the same manner as
for new applications; except, that such application shall state thereon that it
is for license renewal.
      2.   A license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall not be renewed
unless the applicant is in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter,
including the correction of outstanding code violations, and the payment of all
fees, costs, and fines provided for by the Village Code.
   C.   Non-Transferability Of License: A license for rental or leasing of a
single family dwelling cannot be transferred to another single family dwelling
or to a succeeding owner, managing agent, or property agent.
   D.   Changes In Ownership Or Occupancy:
      1.   Whenever there is a change in the ownership or in the occupancy of a
single family dwelling the owner shall, within thirty (30) days of such change,
provide written notification to the Code Official indicating such change.
      2.   No owner, managing agent, or property agent shall permit the
occupancy of any single family dwelling to exceed the maximum number of persons
allowable by the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and
amended by the Village. (Ord. 2020-1227, 3-11-2020)
3-19-5: CONSENT TO INSPECTIONS AND RIGHT OF ACCESS:
   A.   If any owner, managing agent, property agent, tenant, occupant, or
other person in control of rental residential property fails or refuses to
consent to free access and entry to the rental residential property under his/
her/its control for any inspection pursuant to this Chapter, and if the Village
has the probable cause necessary to obtain an administrative search warrant,
the Code Official or his designee may apply to the Circuit Court for an
administrative search warrant or other appropriate court order authorizing such
inspection.
   B.   Upon twenty four (24) hour notice to the owner, managing agent, or
property agent, the owner, managing agent, or property agent shall provide
access to such portions of the rental residential property which are otherwise
inaccessible to the Village inspectors. During any inspection of an
inaccessible portion of the rental residential property, the owner, managing
agent, or property agent shall designate an adult representative to accompany
Village inspector(s) during such inspection. (Ord. 2020-1227, 3-11-2020)
3-19-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement Authority: It shall be the duty of the Building Officer to
enforce the provisions of this Chapter, the Village Code, and the International
Code Council codes, as adopted and amended from time to time by the Village.
   B.   Violations:
      1.   The following shall constitute violations of this Chapter:
         a.   Failure of the owner, managing agent, or property agent of a
single family dwelling to license such property with the Village.
         b.   Failure to comply with the terms of this Chapter.
         c.   Failure of the occupants of a single family dwelling to vacate
such property within sixty (60) days after receiving notice from the Code
Official that such property is not properly licensed or that the license has
been revoked.
         d.   Failure of the owner, managing agent, or property agent of a
single family dwelling to vacate all tenants from said property within sixty
(60) days after the license has been revoked.
         e.   Failure of the owner, managing agent, or property agent of a
single family dwelling to maintain a single family dwelling in compliance with
applicable building, property maintenance and zoning ordinances.
         f.   For any person other than one authorized by the Code Official to
remove or deface any notices which have been posted pursuant to this Chapter.
   C.   License Suspension Or Revocation:
      1.   Suspension Procedures:
         a.   A license may be suspended by the Building Official when a
violation of applicable Village ordinances has been identified by the Village
and/or the owner, managing agent, or property agent has been properly notified
of the violation and given a period of time in which to correct the violation,
but has failed to do so. A license may also be suspended by the Code Official
when any information provided in the license application is determined by the
Code Official to be false.
         b.   When a license is suspended, the Code Official shall send notice
to the property owner, managing agent, or property agent and the tenant at the
last address provided on the most recent license application. The notice shall
be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall include
the following:
            (1)   Description of the single family dwelling sufficient for
identification;
            (2)   A statement of the reasons for the suspension;
            (3)   An explanation of the owner's right to appeal the suspension
to the Village Administrator; and
            (4)   If the owner changes his/her/its address or changes the
managing agent or property agent and fails to notify the Village Administrator,
such notice shall be sufficient if sent by certified mail to the owner's,
managing agent's, or property agent's last address provided on the last license
application.
         c.   An owner whose license has been suspended may request a re-
inspection prior to revocation. If, upon re-inspection, the Village
Administrator finds that the single family dwelling, in connection with the
notice which was issued, is now in compliance with this Chapter, then the Code
Official may reinstate the suspended license upon payment of a seventy five
dollar ($75.00) reinstatement fee. The request for a re-inspection shall not
stay the revocation of the license.
         d.   Any owner whose license has been suspended shall be entitled to
appeal the suspension to the Village President by filing a written petition
within twenty (20) days after the date of suspension. The Code Official shall
transmit to the Village President copies of all records and notices upon which
the suspension is based. A hearing shall be scheduled as soon as practical upon
receipt of a timely petition. The Village President, in considering any such
petition, may immediately revoke the license or continue the suspension to a
definite compliance date. The penalty for noncompliance shall be revocation by
the Village Administrator and/or prosecution of violations in the Circuit Court
or administrative hearings and any fines and penalties imposed by said court or
Administrative Hearing Officer. The Village President may dismiss the charges
and reinstate the suspended license upon proof of compliance or lack of
evidence of noncompliance. A seventy five dollar ($75.00) reinstatement fee may
be imposed after proof of compliance is shown.
      2.   Revocation Procedures:
         a.   A license may be revoked by the Village Administrator when a
petition for appeal has not been filed within twenty (20) days following the
date of issuance of an order of suspension. A license may be revoked by the
Code Official when, in the opinion of the Code Official, emergency conditions
exist in a single family dwelling that requires the immediate vacating of a
structure as specified in the International Property Maintenance Code.
         b.   A license which has been properly revoked as herein provided
shall not be reinstated. The owner may, however, obtain a new license after all
violations have been corrected and by following the procedures for obtaining a
new license and the payment of appropriate fees as set forth in this Chapter.
         c.   If a license is revoked without having the opportunity of a
suspension hearing, owner has the right to appeal that revocation. The appeal
shall conform to division C1d of this section. Such an appeal shall not operate
as a stay of revocation until such time as the Village President renders a
decision on the appeal, unless the Code Official grants a request for a stay
upon a showing of good cause by the owner.
         d.   Whenever a license is revoked, the Code Official shall send
notice to the property owner, managing agent, or property agent at the last
address provided on the most recent license application. The notice shall be
sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The Code Official shall also
notify all tenants of the single family dwelling by posting a notice on all
entrances to the single family dwelling. The notice to the tenants shall
include the following:
            (1)   You are hereby notified that the license for this single
family dwelling has been revoked pursuant to Title 3, Chapter 19 of the Village
Code.
            (2)   You must vacate this single family dwelling within sixty (60)
days of the date of this notice, except if said revocation is pursuant to a
declaration of emergency condition by the Code Official. If emergency
conditions exist, the notice to tenants shall provide for the immediate
vacation of the single family dwelling.
            (3)   If you fail to vacate this single family dwelling, you will
be in violation of Title 3, Chapter 19 of the Village Code and subject to a
minimum fine of $100.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00 for each day you remain
in the single family dwelling in violation of this Chapter.
   D.   Enforcement Costs: If any court of competent jurisdiction finds that
any owner, managing agent, or property agent has violated any provision(s) of
this Chapter, such court shall award to the Village all of the Village's costs
related to the enforcement of this Chapter, including, but not limited to,
court costs, attorney fees, building inspection costs, and administrative
costs. (Ord. 2020-1227, 3-11-2020)
3-19-7: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person, firm, or corporation in violation of any of the provisions
of this Chapter, in addition to other legal and equitable remedies available to
the Village shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to fines of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each violation. Each day during which a violation of this
Chapter continues or is permitted to exist shall be considered a separate and
distinct offense.
   B.   Exemptions: This Chapter shall not apply to the following properties:
      1.   Single family dwellings which are owner occupied;
      2.   Properties which are vacant and which are not intended to be rented;
      3.   Hotels, motels, and other structures which rent rooms to occupants
if such occupancy is transient only; and
      4.   Properties and uses licensed and inspected by the State of Illinois,
including, but not limited to, nursing homes, retirement communities and rest
homes.
   C.   Village Rights Retained: This Chapter shall not be construed to impede
in any way the right of the Village to inspect any property pursuant to any
other provisions of this Code or to seek penalties for violations of other
provisions of this Code.
(Ord. 2020-1227, 3-11-2020)
CHAPTER 20
RESERVED
CHAPTER 21
MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX
SECTION:
3-21-1: Short Title
3-21-2:    Definitions
3-21-3:    Tax
3-21-4:    Collection Of Tax By Public Utility
3-21-5:    Books And Records
3-21-1: SHORT TITLE:
   The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be known as the "Municipal Gas Use
Tax" and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village of
South Barrington, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or
political subdivision thereof.
(Ord. 2025-1444, 9-11-2025)
3-21-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A public utility as defined in Section 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act.
PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT: The Public Utilities Act as amended, (220 ILCS 5/1-101 et
sec.).
RETAIL PURCHASER: Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
SALE AT RETAIL: Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or
consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means
any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas.
(Ord. 2025-1444, 9-11-2025)
3-21-3: TAX:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, a tax is imposed on the
privilege of using or consuming gas in the Village that is purchased in a sale
at retail at the rate of five cents ($0.05) per therm with respect to bills
issued on or after November 1, 2025.
   B.   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on
the retail purchaser, and nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose
a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or
transporting gas.
   C.   The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas
delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated
to collect the tax pursuant to Section
3-21-4 of this Chapter on or before the payment due date of the public
utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the Village Treasurer
on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which
the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has been
designated to collect the tax pursuant to Section
3-21-4 or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public utility so
designated.
   D.   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United
States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the
Village.
   E.   A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the
tax imposed by this Chapter with respect to the use or consumption of the gas,
but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax
directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
   F.   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail
purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after November 1, 2025.
   G.   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this Chapter, whether as a result of mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be:
      1.   Credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this Chapter
from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; or
      2.   Subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become due; provided
that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing
of a claim therefore shall be so credited or refunded.
   H.   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
Chapter shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such
amount. (Ord. 2025-1444, 9-11-2025; amd. Ord. O-2025-1445, 10-9-2025)
3-21-4: COLLECTION OF TAX BY PUBLIC UTILITY:
   The Village President Village Treasurer, Village Manager and Village Finance
Director are each authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax
imposed by this Chapter with any public utility providing gas service in the
Village. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the
following provisions:
   A.   The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an
independent contractor;
   B.   The public utility will remit collected taxes to the Village Treasurer
no more often than once each month;
   C.   The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a
service fee equal to three percent (3%) of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the Village Treasurer; and
   D.   The public utility shall not be responsible to the Village for any tax
not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and such additional terms as
the parties may agree upon.
(Ord. 2025-1444, 9-11-2025)
3-21-5: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original
source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions
that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under
this Chapter. All such books and records shall, at all times during business
hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the Village.
(Ord. 2025-1444, 9-11-2025)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL HEALTH AND SAFETY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Aircraft Use of Land Less Than Ten Acres
4-1-2: Landfill Substances as Fill Prohibited
4-1-3: Bee Keeping Restricted
4-1-4: Trick Or Treating From Vehicles Located On Streets Or Rights-Of-Way And
Tailgating Prohibited
4-1-5: Cannabis And Tobacco Vending Machines Prohibited
4-1-1: AIRCRAFT USE OF LAND LESS THAN TEN ACRES:
The Village President and Board of Trustees deem it in the best interest of the
Village that aircraft be prohibited from landing on a ground area of less than
ten (10) acres. Therefore, it shall be unlawful for any person to ascent or
land any aircraft, including gliders, helicopters and parachutes, on any parcel
of property or lot within the Village which has a ground area of less than ten
(10) acres; provided, however, that the proscription shall not apply to an
emergency landing or to any medical helicopter.
Any person violating any provisions of this Section shall upon conviction
therefor be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 0-87-262, 1-8-87)
4-1-2: LANDFILL SUBSTANCES AS FILL PROHIBITED:
No substance which is considered landfill under the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency of the State of Illinois
shall be used for any filling of land within the Village except within an area
duly licensed and permitted to be a sanitary landfill. 1
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or use fill for land in the
Village without the approval required herein.
Any violation of this Section upon conviction thereof shall result in a five
hundred dollar ($500.00) fine for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each attempt to unlawfully transport or use fill. (Ord. 0-
84-205, 9-13-84)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 2 of this Title.
4-1-3: BEE KEEPING RESTRICTED:
   A.   Adoption of Preamble: The President and Board of Trustees hereby find
that the facts stated in the preamble to Ordinance 0-91-388 are true and
correct and hereby adopt the same as part of this Section.
   B.   Definitions: As used in this Section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
    APIARY: A place where a collection of one or more hives or colonies of bees
or the nuclei of bees are kept.
   BEES: Any stage of the common honeybee, Apis mellifera (L).
   COLONY: The entire honeybee family or social unit living together in a hive
or other shelter.
   HIVE: A frame hive, box hive, box, barrel, log gum, skep, or any other
receptacle or container, natural or artificial, or any part thereof, which may
be used or employed as a domicile for bees.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
organized group of persons, whether incorporated or not.
   C.   Keeping Bees Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person to raise,
maintain or keep bees or to raise, maintain or keep a beehive or apiary on any
residential lot located in the Village, except within an enclosed building or
structure.
   D.   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for any offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day a violation occurs or continues to exist. (Ord. 0-
91-388, 8-8-91)
4-1-4: TRICK OR TREATING FROM VEHICLES LOCATED ON STREETS OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND
TAILGATING PROHIBITED:
   A.   The Village Corporate Authorities are committed to promoting and
protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public and wish to ensure that
trick-or-treat visitations at vehicles located in streets or rights-of-way and
Tailgating are prohibited due to their inherently dangerous nature.
   B.   Definitions: As used in this Section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
      TAILGATE: An event in which an individual hosts or attends a social
gathering at a parked vehicle, typically in a parking lot or street for a
sports event. The act of attending or hosting such an event is known as
"tailgating."
      TRICK-OR-TREAT: The activity of asking for candy, or treats of the like,
during the Halloween season.
      VEHICLE: A mechanism used for transporting people or goods, such as a
car, truck, cart, or any motorized unit of transportation of the like.
   C.   Trick-or-Treat from Vehicles Located in Streets and Rights-Of-Way
Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, promote, or take
part in trick-or-treat activities when visiting someone's vehicle(s) located in
streets or rights-of-way.
   D.   Tailgating Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to attend or
host a tailgate.
   E.   Penalty: Any violation of this Section upon conviction thereof shall
result in a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed for each attempt to unlawfully
trick-or-treat from a vehicle or engage in Tailgating.
(Ord. O-2021-1296, 10-14-2021)
4-1-5: CANNABIS AND TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this Section, the following term shall have the
following meaning:
      SMOKING:
      (1)   Inhaling, exhaling, burning, ingesting or carrying any lighted
cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted product utilizing cannabis or tobacco
in any manner or in any form;
      (2)   Inhaling or exhaling from, turning on, powering, ingesting or
utilizing in any form any device intended for or useable for the atomization,
charring, burning, piezoelectronic ignition of or ingestion of products
utilizing cannabis or tobacco in any gaseous, smoke, aerosol, vaporous or other
similar form, including but not limited to the use of any e-cigarette, personal
vaporizer used with cannabis or cannabis derivatives or tobacco or tobacco
derivatives, any electronic cannabis or tobacco delivery system, e-pufler,
cartomizer or other similar device;
      (3)   Use of any other device intended for or useable for the gaseous,
smoke, aerosol, vaporous or other similar airborne ingestion of cannabis or
cannabis derivatives, or tobacco or tobacco derivatives; or
      (4)   Completing any of the foregoing actions utilizing cannabis or
tobacco. For purposes of this Section, any reference to the sale or
distribution of products or cigarettes shall be read to include any device
which is intended to be used for smoking as defined herein (including Hookahs,
e-cigarettes or other similar devices).
   B.   Vending Machines Prohibited: The sale of any device, good, or product
involving, relating to, or consisting of smoking from a vending machine or
similar automated dispensing machine is prohibited.
   C.   Penalties: A violation of this Section shall be subject to a fine of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred and
fifty dollars ($750.00).
(Ord. 2025-1435, 7-10-2025)
CHAPTER 2
SANITARY LANDFILL
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Permit Required
4-2-3: Permit Fee; Bond
4-2-4: Regulations
4-2-5: Enforcement
4-2-6: Penalty
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms and words are herewith defined
as set forth in this Chapter. All words used in the present tense shall include
the future tense; all words in the plural number shall include the singular
number, and all words in the singular number shall include the plural number;
unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
COMBUSTIBLE WASTE: All waste substances capable of incineration or burning, but
excluding explosive or highly flammable material.
GARBAGE: All animal and vegetable waste and all other putrescible matter.
HEALTH DIRECTOR: The Director of the Cook County Department of Public Health or
his authorized representative.
HEALTH OFFICER: The Health Officer of the Village of South Barrington or his
authorized representative.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE WASTE: All other waste substances not capable of incineration or
burning, including ashes, glass, metal, earthenware and the like.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PLANNING COMMISSION/ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS or PLANNING COMMITTEE: The Planning
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of South Barrington.
REFUSE: All waste substances including garbage as well as combustible and
noncombustible wastes.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A type of operation in which garbage and refuse or garbage
or refuse is deposited by plan on a specified portion of land, is compacted by
force applied by mechanical equipment, and then is covered by compacted
suitable covering material to a depth of at least six inches (6") to twelve
inches (12") over individual cells of garbage and refuse or garbage or refuse,
which are closed at the end of each day, and to a depth of at least twenty four
inches (24") over the finished landfill.
VILLAGE: The Village of South Barrington and the area within one and one-half
(11/2) miles of the corporate limits thereof.
VILLAGE BOARD or BOARD: The President and the Board of Trustees of the Village
of South Barrington. (Ord. 0-66-77, 6-16-66)
4-2-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any land, premises or property
within the Village, or within one mile of the Village limits, for the disposal
of any garbage and refuse, or garbage or refuse, without first making
application for and securing a permit to do so. The permit shall be granted and
issued by the Village Board, and shall be subject to and governed by the
following provisions: (Ord. 0-66-77, 6-16-66)
   A.   Application for Permit; Summary of Procedures: The application for a
permit to operate a sanitary landfill shall be filed with the Planning
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals and shall contain a description and plat of
the land on which the disposal of garbage and refuse, or garbage or refuse, is
proposed, a description of the sequence and plan of operation, type and
capacity of equipment to be used for operations, plans for fire, nuisance and
vermin control, existing and proposed roadways and easements, existing
topography and watercourses, together with a diagram and written statement
explaining the proposed location and extent of earthwork and fill operations,
proposed measures to control storm drainage and estimated daily or weekly
volume of garbage and refuse, or garbage or refuse to be placed in the sanitary
landfill. When all filling is completed, no site shall be filled in to a height
greater than the height of the adjacent terrain.
The application shall also include a statement of the estimated life of the
landfill and the intended use of the landfill after its completion.
The application shall be forwarded by the Planning Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals to the Health Officer for study, findings and recommendations; the
Health Officer shall return the application to the Planning Commission/Zoning
Board of Appeals with his findings and recommendations; the Planning
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall forward the application with the
findings and recommendations of the Health Officer and Planning Commission/
Zoning Board of Appeals to the Village Board.
The Village Board shall not grant a permit for a sanitary landfill operation
unless and until a public hearing shall have been held on such application;
provided, however, that no permit shall be granted by the Village Board unless
the location for which a permit is requested shall be in conformity with State,
County and Village ordinances. (Ord. 0-69-112, 10-9-69)
   B.   Action by Health Officer: The Health Officer shall, on receipt of a
sanitary landfill application, determine whether:
      1.   The site is suitable.
      2.   The public health and necessity require the granting of the permit
to the applicant.
      3.   The granting of the permit to the applicant is in the best interests
of the Village.
      4.   The granting of the permit would not create a hazard to the public
health or create a nuisance.
The Health Officer shall also notify the Cook County Health Director, the
Illinois State Department of Reclamation, State Geologist and the State
Department of Public Health for opinions on potential underground water
pollution.
The Health Officer shall make and attach a report of his findings in the above
matters to the application and forward it to the Planning Commission/Zoning
Board of Appeals.
   C.   Action by Planning Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals: The Planning
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall make a study as to the possible
effects of the proposed sanitary landfill operation upon the character of the
neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utility facilities and operations,
streets and other matters pertaining to the general welfare of the Village, and
shall advise the Village Board as to whether public convenience and necessity
will be served by granting a permit to the applicant.
   D.   Factors to be Considered: In determining whether public necessity and
convenience will be served by the granting of a permit to the applicant, both
the Health Officer and the Planning Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider the following matters:
      1.   The number of sanitary landfills necessary for the Village.
      2.   The locations best suited to serve the entire Village and conformity
with the provisions contained in this Village Code.
      3.   The length of time that a proposed location can be expected to be
used as a sanitary landfill.
      4.   The possible future effects on the area in the vicinity of the
proposed sanitary landfill.
   E.   Information to Village Board: After the studies, examinations, findings
and reports have been completed by the Health Officer and the Planning
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, the application shall be forwarded to the
Village Board with the reports and recommendations of the Health Officer and
the Planning Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals attached. (Ord. 0-66-77, 6-16-
66)
4-2-3: PERMIT FEE; BOND:
The permit to operate a sanitary landfill shall be granted by the Village Board
only after the following conditions have been met: Payment of an annual fee of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) and delivery to the Village of a cash or
corporate bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Said cash or
corporate bond shall run to the Village and shall be conditioned as follows:
   A.   That the permittee, his agents and servants, will comply with all of
the terms, conditions, provisions, requirements and specifications contained in
this Chapter.
   B.   That the permittee, his agents and servants, will faithfully operate
the sanitary landfill for which the permit is issued in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
   C.   That the licensee, his agents and servants, will save harmless the
Village from any expense incurred through the failure of the permittee, his
agents and servants, to operate and maintain the sanitary landfill as required
by this Chapter including any expense the Village may be put to for correcting
any condition or violation of this Chapter, or from any damages growing out of
the negligence of the permittee or his agents or servants.
   D.   Before acceptance, all bonds shall be approved by the Board of
Trustees. If a corporate bond is offered, it shall be executed by a company
authorized to transact business in the State of Illinois as a surety. If a cash
bond is offered, it shall be deposited with the Village Treasurer who shall
give his official receipt therefor, reciting that said cash has been deposited
in compliance with and subject to the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-66-
77, 6-16-66)
4-2-4: REGULATIONS:
In the operation or maintenance of any place for the disposal of organic and
refuse in the Village or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the Village
limits, all of the following rules and regulations shall be complied with: 1
   A.   Compaction Equipment: All permitted organic material and other refuse
shall be thoroughly compacted by equipment of a size and weight capable of
producing a downward or ground pressure of at least five (5) pounds per square
inch. Such equipment shall have sufficient weight and capacity to carry out all
necessary operations to the satisfaction of the enforcement officer. Sufficient
auxiliary equipment shall be maintained on the site or otherwise available to
permit operation in case of a breakdown.
   B.   Depth of Mixed Refuse: Mixed refuse material shall be spread out on the
working face of the landfill so that the depth does not exceed a maximum depth
of two feet (2') prior to its compaction.
   C.   Fire Safety; Wind-Blown Refuse: The areas shall be continually policed
to prevent fire and the blowing of papers; 2  and shall be covered at the end
of each day's operation, as well as when wind conditions warrant it through the
day, with sufficient material to prevent blowing papers and unsightly
conditions. The size of the active face on which refuse is being currently
deposited shall be kept to a minimum.
   D.   Cover Material: Cover material will consist of earth, loam, clay, sand,
etc., or a mixture of at least fifty percent (50%) earth and other inert
materials such as ashes, cinders or gravel. A minimum depth of twelve inches
(12") of compacted cover and spread cover material shall be kept on all
inactive faces of the landfill at all times. The active faces of the landfills
should be covered at the end of each day's operation, with at least six inches
(6") (before compaction) of cover material.
   E.   Procedure When Reaching Finished Grade: When the fill has been brought
up to two feet (2') below the desired finished grade, it shall be covered with
at least twenty four inches (24") of compacted cover material, graded and
seeded in such a manner as to prevent erosion.
   F.   Trench System: Where the "trench system" of sanitary landfill is used,
successive parallel trenches must be at least two feet (2') apart.
   G.   Fences; Barriers: The licensee or operator shall erect such temporary
or permanent fences or take such other measures as may be necessary to control
blowing of paper and other materials from the landfill.
   H.   Storage of Salvaged Materials: Any materials salvaged from the fill
must be stored in a building on or off the site in such a manner as to prevent
rat harborage and permit proper operation of the landfill. Such storage
building must be at least two hundred feet (200') from the working surface so
as not to interfere with the compacting and covering. All salvaged material
must be daily placed within the building provided so that none is left
uncovered during the night or on weekends.
   I.   Burning Prohibited: No materials deposited in the landfill shall be
burned there or anywhere in the Village. 3
   J.   Effluent Discharge: No sanitary landfill operation shall be placed
where seepage, drainage or pumpage of any material from the fill of such a
nature as would constitute an odor nuisance or health hazard flows into a
watercourse unless provision is made to treat such effluent in such a manner as
to purify it.
   K.   Access Road: The licensee shall provide an access road.
   L.   Road Conditions During Rain Storms or Snowfall: The license holder
shall also have available necessary equipment to assure that traffic may be
maintained on the access road or roads during periods of heavy rain or
snowfall.
   M.   Hours of Operation: Power equipment, tractors and draglines shall not
be operated on the landfill before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or after six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. on weekdays. The landfill shall not be in operation on
Saturdays or Sundays.
   N.   Water Supply: A water system with at least thirty (30) pounds per
square inch is necessary; the system shall have a minimum of a one and one-half
inch (11/2") diameter line or a five thousand (5,000) gallon storage reservoir
or tank. A pond or stream may be used as a storage reservoir, but reliable
pumps of adequate size must be available.
   O.   Location Restrictions: No portion of any sanitary landfill shall be
established nearer than one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') of any
designated residential or commercial district or state or federal highway, or
within five hundred feet (500') of any water wells or catch basins.
   P.   Deposit Of Certain Substances And Burning Prohibited: No hazardous
material, no sewage, oil sludges, waste chemicals, magnesium shavings,
insecticide containers or other poisonous containers, materials which produce
odor or dust and no bulky items shall be deposited. All brush shall be reduced
to chips. No burning shall be done on the premises 4 .
   Q.   Salvaging And Junkyard Operations Prohibited: No salvaging operation or
junkyard operation shall be carried on.
   R.   Rodent Control: Rodent control measures shall be carried on not less
than once each month, and shall be instituted in addition within twenty four
(24) hours of notice by inspectors that there is evidence of rodents on the
premises.
   S.   Dust Control: No dust shall be emitted by the operation; the site and
access drives shall be sprayed or otherwise treated to prevent dust emission.
   T.   Termination Of Landfill Operation: Immediately following the
termination of a landfill operation, whether voluntary or involuntary, all
structures, equipment and fences shall be removed from the site and the area of
final cover topsoil shall be seeded with grass or rye seed. (Ord. 0-66-77, 6-
16-1966)
   U.   Landfill Gas Management Systems: For the purposes of this section a
"landfill gas management system" is any system which collects the landfill gas
generated within a sanitary landfill in the process of the decomposition of the
material deposited therein and disposes of the landfill gas by flaring and/or
by processing the landfill gas for beneficial uses by adjuncts to the landfill
gas management system such as an electrical generating facility operated by the
energy from components of the landfill gas, or a gas recovery facility which
recovers for other uses the methane and/or other components of the landfill
gas. Any landfill gas management system which disposes of landfill gas by
flaring shall only be operated in a manner which does not generate any visible
light. Open flare landfill gas management systems or disposal systems are not
allowed. Any landfill gas management system is further required to be operated
pursuant to Illinois environmental protection agency permits and in compliance
with Illinois pollution control board regulations. (Ord. 2015-1101, 12-10-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  4-1-2 of this Title.
2 2. See Chapter 4 of this Title.
3 1. See Chapter 3 of this Title.
4 2. See chapter 3 of this title.
4-2-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Inspection And Enforcement: All inspection and enforcement action shall
be made by the village health officer; provided, that in addition, a consultant
may be retained by the president and board of trustees to assist in such
inspection and enforcement.
Inspection shall be made of the premises not less often than once each week. In
addition to weekly inspections, periodic inspection shall be made by making the
following tests: water samples of nearby watercourses shall be taken and
examined for chemical pollution or biological pollution; inspection shall be
made for evidence of rodents on the premises; and measurement shall be made of
the height of the landfill operation. Whenever evidence of pollution of nearby
watercourses is discovered, all necessary tests including test borings shall be
made to determine the source of pollution.
   B.   Revocation Of License: Any license issued under the provisions of this
chapter may be revoked by the village president and board of trustees for any
violation of any law or ordinance pertaining to the operation or maintenance of
such establishment. (Ord. 0-66-77, 6-16-1966)
4-2-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-66-77, 6-16-1966)
CHAPTER 3
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
4-3-1: Open Burning Prohibited
4-3-2: Allowed Material Burning
4-3-2-A: Fire Pit Regulations
4-3-3: Penalty
4-3-1: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
The village president and board of trustees deem it to be in the best interest
of the village to prohibit open burning. Therefore, it shall be unlawful to
burn paper, garbage, leaves, landscape debris, building construction or
demolition debris or any other combustible material in open fires or in metal
containers except as provided herein. (Ord. 01-646, 10-11-2001; amd. Ord. 2023-
1355, 3-9-2023)
4-3-2: ALLOWED MATERIAL BURNING:
Burning of firewood (cut and/or split wood pieces not longer than the fire pit
diameter and not stacked higher than the fire pit is high) and charcoal is
permitted in outdoor cookers, barbeque grills and ovens, outdoor fireplaces,
chimeneas, fire pits or outdoor warming stoves for cooking and recreational
purposes only. Such recreational and cooking fires shall be attended and
controlled to remain reasonable and safe. (Ord. 01-646, 10-11-2001; amd. Ord.
2020-1255, 12-10-2020; amd. Ord. 2023-1355, 3-9-2023)
4-3-2-A: FIRE PIT REGULATIONS:
All recreational fires shall be in an approved and permitted fire pit
structure. A building permit is required to construct a fire pit. All fire pits
shall be less than twenty-four inches (24") in height and shall be constructed
of non-combustible materials. Fire pit diameter and fuel is directly related to
the distance from the nearest combustible part of the house structure or other
combustible material such as tree branches nearby and overhead.
   A.   Fire pits are not permitted to be located less than twelve feet (12')
from the house.
   B.   Fire pits located between twelve feet (12') and fifteen feet (15') from
the house are only permitted to burn natural gas and/or LP gas as a fuel and
may not be greater than twenty-four inches (24") in diameter.
   C.   Fire pits located between fifteen feet (15') and twenty-five feet (25')
from the house can burn Class A fuel (wood), natural gas and/or LP gas and may
not be greater than thirty-six inches (36") in diameter.
   D.   Fire pits located more than twenty-five feet (25') from the house can
burn Class A fuel (wood), natural gas and/or LP gas and may not be greater than
forty-eight inches (48") in diameter. (Ord. 2020-155, 12-10-2020; amd. Ord.
2023-1355, 3-9-2023)
4-3-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(Ord. 01-646, 10-11-2001; amd. Ord. 2020-1255, 12-10-2020)
CHAPTER 4
LITTER CONTROL
SECTION:
4-4-1: Depositing Litter Prohibited
4-4-2: Vehicles To Be Covered
4-4-3: Penalties
4-4-1: DEPOSITING LITTER PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent, employee or
servant, to cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit in any manner in or upon any
public way or other public place in the village or any public water, drain,
sewer or receiving basin within the jurisdiction of the village, any kind of
dirt, rubbish, waste article, thing or substance whatsoever, whether liquid or
solid; nor shall any person cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit any of the
aforementioned items anywhere within the jurisdiction of the village in such
manner that it may be carried or deposited in whole or in part by the action of
the sun, wind, rain or snow into any of the aforementioned places; provided,
that this section shall not apply to the deposit of material under a permit
authorized by any ordinance of the village, or to goods, wares or merchandise
deposited upon any public way or other public place temporarily, in the
necessary course of trade, and removed therefrom within two (2) hours after
being so deposited. (Ord. 0-69-104, 4-5-1969)
4-4-2: VEHICLES TO BE COVERED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his or its agent, employee
or servant, to use any vehicle to haul any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste
articles or things or substance, whether liquid or solid, unless such vehicle
is covered to prevent any part of its load from spilling or dropping at all
times while such vehicle is in motion on any street or alley in the
municipality; provided, however, that the requirements herein for covering such
vehicles shall not apply to vehicles carrying brush cuttings, tree trimmings,
branches, logs and similar waste material if such matter is securely lashed to
such vehicle to prevent spilling or dropping as aforesaid. (Ord. 0-69-104, 4-5-
1969)
4-4-3: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-90-369, 8-23-1990)
CHAPTER 5
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND GASES
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-5A-1: Small Storage Limited
4-5A-2: Industrial And Commercial Use
4-5A-3: Use And Storage Within Buildings Restricted
4-5A-4: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
4-5A-5: Dry-Cleaning Plants
4-5A-6: Oil Burning Equipment
4-5A-7: Penalties
4-5A-1: SMALL STORAGE LIMITED:
   A.   Storage of flammable liquids of Classes I, II and III shall be in
accordance with the sections governing general storage and service stations 1
and except:
      1.   Personal Use: For personal or private use, not to exceed five (5)
gallons of crude petroleum, benzine, benzol, gasoline, naphtha and their
compounds may be kept on hand if stored in an approved safety container removed
from flame or open fire. Such storage must not be in any cellar, basement or
pit and should be in a room with direct ventilation to the outside and
preferably in an outbuilding or garage.
      2.   Farm Storage: Underground storage with approved dispensing pump is
recommended on farms, the installation to conform to sections governing service
stations 2 .
      3.   Containers of Sixty to Five Hundred Fifty Gallons' Capacity:
         a.   Flammable liquids in aboveground containers of sixty (60) to five
hundred fifty (550) gallons' capacity shall be stored outside buildings in
containers of single compartment design and constructed throughout of fourteen
(14) gauge metal or heavier and made vaportight by welding or equivalent
construction.
A fill opening shall be provided and shall be equipped with a closure designed
so that it may be locked.
A vent shall be provided to relieve such vacuum or pressure as will develop in
normal operation or from exposure to fire. Such vent shall have a free opening
of one and one-half inches (11/2") in diameter.
         b.   Containers as provided in this subsection a3 shall be kept
outside and at least fifty feet (50') from any building and shall be so located
or such additional distance to buildings shall be provided as will insure that
no vehicle equipment or vessel being filled directly from such container shall
be closer than fifty feet (50') to any building.
         c.   Containers as above may be of either of the following types:
            (1)   Containers With Top Openings Only: Containers constructed and
located as provided above may be designed with all openings in the top of the
tank and in such event shall be mounted and equipped as follows: stationary
containers shall be mounted on timbers or blocks approximately six inches (6")
in height so as to protect the bottom of the container from corrosion, from
contact with the ground and when so placed to be in a stable position; or
portable containers may be equipped with attached metal legs resting on shoes
or runners to be at least one tank diameter apart, which in turn rests upon the
ground, designed so that the container is supported in a stable position and so
that the entire container and its supports may be moved as a unit. Containers
shall be equipped with a tightly and permanently attached approved pumping
device having an approved hose of sufficient length for filling vehicles,
equipment or vessels to be served from the container. Either the pump or the
hose shall be equipped with a padlock on its hanger to prevent tampering. An
effective anti-siphoning device shall be included in the pump discharge.
Siphons or internal pressure discharge devices are prohibited.
            (2)   Containers Elevated for Gravity Discharge: Containers
constructed and located as above may be designed with an opening in the bottom
or the end of the tank for gravity dispensing of flammable liquids and shall be
mounted and equipped as follows:
               (A)   Supports to elevate the tank for gravity discharge shall
be of adequate strength and design to provide stability.
               (B)   Bottom opening for gravity discharge shall be equipped
with an internal safety valve which will close automatically in the event of
fire through the operation of an effective heat releasing device and which
likewise may be quickly operated manually. The gravity discharge outlet shall
be provided with an approved hose equipped with a self-closing valve at the
discharge end of a type that can be padlocked to its hanger to prevent
tampering.
      4.   Marking Containers: Containers for the storage of flammable liquids
in rural districts shall be conspicuously marked with the name of the product
which they contain and FLAMMABLE - KEEP FIRE AND FLAME AWAY. Containers of
sixty (60) to five hundred fifty (550) gallons' capacity shall bear the
additional marking KEEP 50 FEET FROM BUILDINGS. Clearance of fifty feet (50')
from buildings shall apply to other combustible structures, haystacks, etc.
      5.   Kerosene Storage: For personal or private use, ten (10) gallons of
kerosene may be stored aboveground in an approved safety can and sixty (60)
gallons may be stored for the retail trade within a building, provided storage
is in an approved tank. Tank shall set in a metal pan extending at least eight
inches (8") beyond outside of tank at sides and rear and eighteen inches (18")
in front. Tank shall be located on the first floor, where the influx of natural
light is sufficient to light the room, and reasonable ventilation must be
provided.
   B.   Gasoline Containers: All receptacles used for the keeping or storing of
gasoline, naphtha, benzine or benzol shall be colored red and no liquids other
than gasoline, naphtha, benzine or benzol shall be placed in such red
containers. This is in accordance with the Illinois Red Can Gasoline Law 1  and
a full compliance with the law will be enforced. Containers shall be metal, or
of a type approved by the Village President. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
 
Notes
1 1. See Articles B and C, respectively, of this Chapter.
2 2. See Article C of this Chapter.
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 127/2, ¶151.
4-5A-2: INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL USE:
   A.   Flammable liquids used in mixers for mixing or cleaning shall be piped
to mixers wherever feasible to avoid spillage and dispersion of flammable
vapors. Automatic shut-off valves shall be provided to prevent overfilling.
   B.   Class I or II flammable liquids shall not be drawn from containers
within a building except by means of a device drawing from top of tank or
container. Gravity discharge within a building of Class I or II liquids from
tanks, drums or containers other than safety cans is forbidden. Drums or
barrels in which flammable liquids have been stored shall have taps, plugs or
bungs replaced immediately after package has been emptied and shall be removed
to the outside.
   C.   Hand tools, scrapers and similar implements used in the mixing area
shall be of a type of material or metal that will not produce sparks.
   D.   Mixing rooms shall be provided with adequate mechanical ventilation to
prevent accumulation of flammable vapors. Fans shall operate whenever pumps or
mixers are in operation.
   E.   Mixing rooms shall be provided with flammable vapor detector alarms to
warn when flammable vapors are approaching an explosive range.
   F.   Approved dry powder or foam type automatic extinguishing devices shall
be installed above mixers in which flammable fluids are used for mixing or
cleaning.
   G.   Design and installation of electrical equipment in mixing rooms where
flammable liquids are used must comply with standards established in the
National Electric Code N.F.P.A., No. 70 (1965) for hazardous locations. (Ord.
0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5A-3: USE AND STORAGE WITHIN BUILDINGS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Use Restrictions:
      1.   The mixing, storing or handling of Class I and Class II liquids in
open containers is prohibited in any building, except in the compounding of
medicines and prescriptions in drugstores.
      2.   Dry cleaning or removal of spots from clothing or other material
with Class I and Class II liquids shall always be done out of doors, unless in
an approved dry cleaning plant.
      3.   Use of Class I and Class II liquids for cleaning floors, woodwork,
etc., shall be avoided.
   B.   Storage Within Public Buildings: No liquids of Class I or Class II
shall be kept or stored in any schoolhouse, public hall or place of assembly,
or in any public building, except for demonstration purposes or for industrial
or mechanical uses, and then only under competent supervision. (Ord. 0-80-151,
3-13-80)
4-5A-4: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Discharge Into Sewers: No liquids of Class I, II and III, or solutions
containing such liquids, shall be poured into any sewer or into any drain which
connects with a sewer system.
   B.   Use in Starting Fires: Flammable liquids shall never be used to start
or kindle fires in stoves, furnaces or otherwise.
   C.   Appliances Using Flammable Liquids: The use of any type, kind or make
of heating or lighting appliance using flammable liquids which, after a test by
a competent authority, is considered as introducing a distinct hazard to life
or property, shall be prohibited.
   D.   Location Near Open Flames: Flammable liquids shall always be kept away
from fire or open flame; fire or open flame shall always be kept away from
flammable liquids. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5A-5: DRY-CLEANING PLANTS:
The rules and regulations governing dry-cleaning plants shall conform to, and
be in accordance with the Standards for Dry Cleaning and Dry Dyeing Plants
published in NFPA pamphlet No. 32 in June 1956, by the National Fire Protection
Association. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-1980)
4-5A-6: OIL BURNING EQUIPMENT:
The rules and regulations governing oil burning equipment shall conform to, and
be in accordance with the Standards for the Installation of Oil Burning
Equipment, published in NFPA pamphlet No. 31, May 1957, by the National Fire
Protection Association. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-1980)
4-5A-7: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day or part
thereof the violation of this Chapter occurs or continues to occur shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-1980)
ARTICLE B. STORAGE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-5B-1: Definitions
4-5B-2: Location Of Tanks
4-5B-3: Tank Specifications
4-5B-4: Installation Of Tanks
4-5B-5: Storage Buildings
4-5B-6: Tank Trucks And Tank Wagons
4-5B-7: Loading And Unloading Operations
4-5B-7-1: Loading And Unloading Docks
4-5B-7-2: Tank Truck Unloading Operations
4-5B-7-3: Tank Truck Loading Operations
4-5B-7-4: Other Restrictions
4-5B-7-5: Presence Of Competent Person Required
4-5B-8: Storage Of Barrels And Drums
4-5B-9: Protection Of Property
4-5B-10: Approval Of Plans
4-5B-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
CLASSES OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS: Class I liquids. Liquids with a flash point at or
below twenty five degrees Fahrenheit (25°F) (-4°C) closed cup test.
Class II Liquids. Liquids with a flash point above that of Class I and at or
below seventy degrees (70°) Fahrenheit (21° centigrade) closed cup test.
Class III Liquids. Liquids with a flash point above that of Class II and at or
below two hundred degrees (200°) Fahrenheit (931/2° centigrade) closed cup
test.
The flash point shall be determined with the Elliott, Abel, Abel-Pensky or the
Tag closed cup testers, but the Tag closed cup test (standardized by the United
States Bureau of Standards) shall be authoritative in case of dispute. All
tests shall be made in accordance with the methods adopted by the American
Society for Testing Materials.
Representative examples of the classes of flammable liquids are:
CLASS I CLASS II CLASS III
CLASS I           CLASS II       CLASS III
Ether             Alcohol        Kerosene
Carbon bisulphide Amyl acetate   Amyl alcohol
Gasoline          Toluol         Turpentine
Naphtha           Ethyl acetate  Fuel oil
Benzol            Methyl acetate
Acetone           Methyl alcohol
Collodion
 
GENERAL STORAGE: Storage of Class I, II or III liquids other than for retail or
service station storage.
General storage tanks located in a bulk plant may be connected by piping to
service station underground tanks if, in addition to valves at the general
storage tanks, a valve is also installed within control of service station
personnel.
PUBLIC HALL: Any place which is used at any time for public meetings or the
assembling of people for amusement, instruction or religious worship. (Ord. 0-
80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5B-2: LOCATION OF TANKS:
   A.   Restricted Classes of Property: No storage tank shall be less than
three hundred feet (300') from any mine shaft, air or escape shaft for any
mine, nor from any schoolhouse, church, hospital or public hall. The distance
shall be measured from near edges of tanks in all directions to near point of
shaft or building.
   B.   Property Lines and Buildings:
      1.   The minimum distance from individual tanks to line of adjoining
property which is or may be built upon shall be not less than the following:
         a.   For tanks of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or less:
 
Tank Capacity (Gallons) Minimum Distance  (Feet)
3,000 or less           20
21,000 or less          25
31,000 or less          30
45,000 or less          40
50,000 or less          50
 
In case of tanks for the storage of crude petroleum, the foregoing minimum
clearances shall be doubled.
         b.   For tanks of more than fifty thousand (50,000) gallons to be used
only for the storage of refined petroleum products or other flammable liquids
not subject to boil over:
            (1)   Group A Tanks: If tank is equipped with (1) an approved
permanently attached extinguishing system or (2) an approved floating roof, the
distance shall be not less than the greatest dimension (diameter, length or
height) of tank, but such distance need not exceed one hundred twenty feet
(120').
            (2)   Group B Tanks: If tank is not equipped either with (1) an
approved permanently attached extinguishing system or (2) an approved floating
roof, the distance shall not be less than one and one-half (11/2) times the
greatest dimension (diameter, length or height) of the tank, but such distance
need not exceed one hundred seventy five feet (175').
         c.   For tanks of more than fifty thousand (50,000) gallons to be used
for the storage of crude petroleum or other flammable liquid subject to boil
over:
            (1)   Group C Tanks: If tank is equipped either with (1) an
approved permanently attached extinguishing system or (2) an approved floating
roof, the distance shall be not less than twice the greatest dimension
(diameter, length or height) of the tank, but such distance need not exceed one
hundred seventy five feet (175').
            (2)   Group D Tanks: If tank is not equipped either with (1) an
approved permanently attached extinguishing system or (2) an approved floating
roof, the distance shall be not less than three (3) times the greatest
dimension (diameter, length or height) of the tank, but need not exceed three
hundred fifty feet (350').
      2.   These distances shall apply also to other buildings on the property
except those necessarily connected with the installation (such as oil
warehouse, pumphouse, and garage).
      3.   In particular installations, these distances may be increased at the
discretion of the Village President after consideration of such special
features as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy and proximity of
buildings on adjoining property, height and construction of such buildings,
capacity and construction of proposed tanks and character of liquids to be
stored, degree of private fire protection provided and facilities of fire
departments to cope with oil fires.
      4.   Location of tanks with reference to railroad tracks over which
passenger trains are moved shall conform to the regulations of the Bureau of
Explosives of the Association of American Railroads (formerly American Railway
Association), 30 Vesey Street, New York City.
      5.   When general oil storage is maintained in connection with a filling
station, the distance from general storage tanks to filling station building,
tanks and equipment shall be the same as that required to property lines.
   C.   Distance Between Tanks: The minimum distance from tanks to adjacent
tanks shall be as follows:
Tank Capacity (Gallons) Minimum Distance  (Feet)
Tank Capacity (Gallons) Minimum Distance  (Feet)
300 or less             3
500 or less             3
1,000 or less           3
8,000 or less           3
12,000 or less          3
18,000 or less          3
24,000 or less          5
30,000 or less          10
48,000 or less          10
75,000 or less          13
100,000 or less         15
Over 100,000            One tank diameter
 
If tanks are of different capacities, the capacity of the larger tank shall
govern its distance to adjacent tanks.
   D.   High Water: Tanks shall be located so as to avoid possible danger from
high water.
   E.   Streams: When tanks are located on a stream without tide, they shall,
where possible, be downstream from burnable property. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5B-3: TANK SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Materials and General Construction:
      1.   Factory assembled tanks shall bear the label of Underwriters'
Laboratories or meet equivalent specifications. Field erected tanks shall meet
the specifications of the National Fire Protection Association, as published in
N.F.P.A. Pamphlet No. 30, in 1958, or those of the American Petroleum
Institute. No open tank shall be used.
      2.   Tanks shall be covered with asphaltum or other nonrusting coating or
paint.
      3.   All pipe connections shall be made through flanges or reinforcements
securely riveted, welded or bolted to the tank and shall be made tight.
      4.   All openings shall be made liquid and vaportight, except breacher
vents. Gaskets used shall be such as are not affected by heat or the contents
of tanks.
      5.   Covers for manholes, handholes and gauge holes shall be made tight
fitting and normally kept in place.
   B.   Venting of Tanks:
      1.   Normal Vents: Each tank over one hundred (100) gallons in capacity
shall have vent openings, except safety valves, provided with approved,
noncorrodible flame arresters so attached as to completely cover the openings.
Vent openings shall in no case be less than one and one- fourth inches (11/4")
in diameter, and where a power pump is used in filling tanks and a tight
connection is made to fill pipe, vent shall not be smaller than fill pipe.
      2.   Special Safety or Emergency Relief Vents: Additional vent openings
or safety valves adequate to relieve any excessive pressure due to external
heat shall be provided, of a type which shall be self-closing when pressure is
relieved.
The total area of vents shall be not less than twenty four (24) square inches
for tanks of twenty one thousand (21,000) gallons' capacity or less and not
less than seventy eight (78) square inches for tanks of more than twenty one
thousand (21,000) gallons' capacity. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5B-4: INSTALLATION OF TANKS:
   A.   Setting of Tanks:
      1.   Tanks more than one foot (1') above the ground shall have a firm
foundation and supports of noncombustible materials, bases of which shall be
below the frost line.
      2.   Unprotected steel as a support for tanks shall not be permitted.
      3.   No combustible materials shall be permitted under or within ten feet
(10') of any storage tanks except stairways to and walks on top, these
preferably to be of iron or steel.
   B.   Grounding of Tanks: All tanks shall be grounded electrically and
effectively to permanent moisture.
   C.   Materials and Design: Piping, valves and fittings for flammable liquids
shall be designed for the working pressures and structural stresses to which
they may be subjected. They may be of steel or other materials suitable for use
with the liquid being handled. Pipe-wall thicknesses, determined in accordance
with Section 3 of the American Standard Code for Pressure Piping (A.S.A. B31.1-
1951), shall be deemed to comply with this subsection; except, that carbon
steel pipe shall not be thinner than standard wall thickness listed in the
American Standard for Wrought-Steel and Wrought-Iron Pipe (A.S.A. B36.10-1950).
   D.   Pipes:
      1.   Runs: Piping shall be run as directly as possible and proper
allowance made for expansion and contraction.
      2.   Aboveground Pipes: Piping, when aboveground, shall be protected
against mechanical injury.
      3.   Underground Pipes:
         a.   Pipes shall not be surrounded or covered by cinders or other
material of corrosive effect, but preferably should be laid in sand, and where
carried in conduit, the openings of such conduit must be fully protected to
prevent escape of liquid under dangerous conditions.
         b.   Pipelines buried on railroad property shall be laid at a depth of
not less than three feet (3'); where they pass under tracks, they shall be laid
at least four feet (4') below bottom of ties.
         c.   Piping buried in Village streets or other areas where other
pipelines are carried shall be sealed in conduit. Joints of conduit shall be
sealed to prevent leakage and pitch shall be toward tank yard.
         d.   Underground piping shall be coated with asphaltum or other
corrosion resisting material.
      4.   Joints: Joints may be welded or of the ordinary screw type; if of
the screw type, they shall be made up with litharge and glycerine, lamp black
or shellac.
      5.   Tests: Piping, after installation, shall be tested at a pressure
fifty percent (50%) in excess of the working pressure and shall be proven
tight. Tests shall continue for thirty (30) minutes.
   E.   Valves:
      1.   Normal Valves: Each pipe attached to a tank shall be provided with a
valve at the tank, with no branches nor outlets between the tank and valve.
In case two (2) or more tanks are cross-connected, there shall be a valve at
each tank in each cross-connection. Tanks with different classes of liquids
shall not be cross-connected.
      2.   Emergency Internal Check Valves: In addition to any normal valves,
there must be an extra valve at each pipeline connection to any tank below
normal liquid level (regardless of when installed), which valve is effective
inside the tank shell and is operated both manually and by an effective heat
actuated device which, in case of fire, will automatically close the valve to
prevent the flow of liquid from the tank even though the pipelines are broken
from the tank. These extra valves are not required in crude oil tanks in oil
fields, on tanks in refineries or on tanks at terminals which are equipped with
a swing line or where facilities are provided to transfer the contents of the
tank to another tank in case of fire. On tanks installed prior to the effective
date of the heretofore applied regulations of the State Fire Marshall of the
State of Illinois, emergency check valves may be external if the size of the
opening makes it impractical to use an internal valve; provided the valve
incorporates a shear section and is so installed that any undue strain beyond
the valve will not cause failure between the valve and the tank; and provided
further, that when an opening on a previously installed tank is enlarged, an
internal valve be installed.
   F.   Diking:
      1.   Diking Required:
         a.   Individual tanks or groups of tanks, where deemed necessary by
the Village President on account of proximity to waterways, character of
topography or nearness to structures of high value, or to places of habitation
or assembly, shall be diked or the yard shall be provided with a curb or other
suitable means taken to prevent the spread of liquid onto other property or
waterways. Where a diked enclosure is required under this paragraph, the
volumetric capacity of the diked area shall be not less than the aggregate
capacity of the tanks within the diked area, except where approved fire control
equipment is provided, the capacity of the diked area shall be not less than
the capacity of the largest tank within the enclosure.
Sufficient distance shall always be allowed for the building of a dike at such
time as a dike may be required.
         b.   Tanks or groups of tanks containing crude petroleum or other
liquids which have a tendency to boil over shall be diked.
      2.   Capacity: Dikes surrounding tanks containing crude oil or other
flammable liquid subject to boil over shall have a capacity of not less than
the capacity of the tank surrounded and in addition shall have a suitable
coping or deflector pointing inward, so designed and constructed as to minimize
the effect of the boil over wave. Dike shall be not less than fifty feet (50')
from the shell of the tank surrounded.
      3.   Materials and Construction:
         a.   Dikes shall be constructed on earth, clay, solid masonry or
reinforced concrete not higher than one-half (1/2) of the height of the tank or
tanks enclosed, so constructed as to afford adequate protection.
         b.   Earthwork embankments shall be firmly and compactly built of good
earth or clay from which stones, vegetable matter and other foreign material
have been removed. They shall have a flat section at the top not less than two
and one-half feet (21/2') wide and a slope of at least one to one forty five
degrees (45°) on both sides.
         c.   Masonry or concrete dikes shall have footings below the frost
line.
         d.   If a concrete floor covering is provided for the area enclosed by
a concrete dike, a sump shall be provided at some convenient place, attached to
which shall be a pump of approved design so that any accumulation of water or
oil may be removed immediately.
      4.   No Openings Permitted: Embankments or dikes shall be continuous with
no openings for piping or roadway.
   G.   Pumps:
      1.   Enclosed Pumps and Motors:
         a.   Motors and pumps shall be located in a separate building not less
than ten feet (10') from tanks, loading docks, warehouses, garages and property
lines, except as provided in paragraph G2 herein. Any pumphouse hereafter
erected shall be of noncombustible construction.
         b.   Motor shall be of the polyphase, nonsparking or explosionproof
type, and shall be grounded to permanently moist earth.
         c.   If pumphouse is electrically lighted, lights shall be of the
vaporproof type, wiring shall be in sealed conduit, and the light switch shall
be of the explosionproof type, oil bath type or shall be placed outside the
building.
         d.   Motor starting switches shall be of the explosionproof type or
oil bath type if in a hazardous area.
         e.   Screened openings of not less than sixty four (64) square inches
each shall be constructed in opposite corners of floor line to provided proper
ventilation.
         f.   All doors of pumphouse shall open outward.
         g.   Doors shall be left open at all times when pumps are in
operation.
      2.   Unenclosed Pumps and Motors: If pumps and motors are located
entirely in the open, with no enclosure whatever, they may be located at or
under the loading dock. Motors and electrical equipment shall comply otherwise
with the provisions of paragraph G1 herein.
   H.   Pumps and Pipelines Associated With More Than One Flammable Liquid:
      1.   Gasoline and naphtha shall never be handled through the same pump
and pipelines as kerosene and fuel oils.
      2.   Pipelines shall have a definite color scheme for painting to
indicate the product which is being carried by the respective lines. The color
shall be red for gasoline and naphtha. Valves on lines to pumphouse shall be
tagged to denote the product handled and controlled by each valve.
      3.   Pumps delivering to or taking supply from tanks or tank car shall be
provided with valves on both suction and discharge of pump. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-
13-80)
4-5B-5: STORAGE BUILDINGS:
   A.   Warehouses:
      1.   Any warehouses hereafter erected or converted for the storage of
flammable liquids shall have noncombustible walls, roofs and floors and shall
be so constructed that refuse cannot accumulate under the floor.
      2.   Storage of liquids of Class I shall not be permitted. Storage of
liquids of Class II shall not be permitted except in original sealed containers
and no transfer of liquids in such containers to other containers shall every
be made inside the warehouse.
      3.   Warehouses shall be kept clean, neat and orderly, and free from
accumulation of grease and oil spillage.
      4.   The National Electrical Code as published in N.F.P.A. Pamphlet No.
70 in 1962 by the National Fire Protection Association, shall govern the
electrical installation.
   B.   Garages:
      1.   Floor of garage shall be of concrete or other noncombustible
material laid directly on the ground or on a well tamped and puddled fill.
      2.   Adequate ventilation shall be provided to carry off any inflammable
gases which may accumulate.
      3.   No connection to any house drainage or to any sewer system shall be
made from any garage waste basin, sink, floor drain or waste, unless an
adequate grease trap is provided ahead of such connection. This does not apply
to lavatories, toilets or wash or personal use, nor to downspouts carrying
surface water from the roof.
      4.   The National Electrical Code, as published in N.F.P.A. Pamphlet No.
70, in 1962, by the National Fire Protection Association, shall govern the
electrical installation. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5B-6: TANK TRUCKS AND TANK WAGONS:
   A.   Bulkheads: Compartment tanks shall be constructed with double bulkheads
unless they always carry the same class of liquids in the respective
compartments (Class I, II or III).
   B.   Separate Pipelines and Meters Required: Compartments of tank trucks
carrying different classes of liquids shall not be manifolded together.
Separate pipeline and meter shall be provided for each class of liquid to
eliminate hazard of mixing.
   C.   Distinguishing Numbers; Tags: Each compartment of tank shall be
numbered and the same number shall appear on pipeline at rear of truck
connected with that compartment. A serviceable metal tag shall be fastened
securely to each faucet, designating the contents of the compartment it
controls by lettering not less than one-fourth inch (1/4") high. Tags shall be
painted according to the same color scheme as the pipelines, 1  red always
indicating gasoline or naphtha.
   D.   Valves and Faucets:
      1.   Faucets shall be of the self-closing type.
      2.   All outlets of each cargo tank or compartment used for transporting
Class I or Class II flammable liquids or used for transporting Class III
flammable liquids having a viscosity less than forty five (45) second Saybolt
Universal at one hundred degrees (100°) Fahrenheit shall be equipped with a
reliable and efficient shutoff valve located inside the shell or in the sump
when it is an integral part of the shell, and designed so that the valve must
be kept closed except during loading and unloading operations. The operating
mechanism for the valve shall be provided with a secondary control, remote from
the fill openings and discharge faucets, for use in the event of accidents or
fire. The control mechanism shall be provided with a fusible section which will
permit valves to close automatically in case of fire. In every case there shall
be provided between the shutoff valve seat and discharge faucet a shear section
which will break under strain unless the discharge piping is so arranged as to
afford the same protection and leave the shutoff valve seat intact.
      3.   The outlets of each cargo tank used for transporting liquids having
a viscosity equal to or greater than forty five (45) seconds Saybolt universal
at one hundred degrees (100°) Fahrenheit shall be equipped with a suitable
shutoff valve, located internally, designed so that the valve will remain
operable is the external connection is sheared off.
   E.   Bumpers: Heavy bumper shall be provided across rear adequate to protect
all faucets in case of a rear-end collision.
   F.   Static Protection: Cargo tanks and vehicle chassis shall be
electrically bonded. Provision shall be made in the tank structure and vehicle
for the bonding of the vehicle to the fill page during the truck loading
operations. (Drag chains and straps, formerly specified for the purpose of
eliminating static charges, have been shown to be ineffective and their
elimination is recommended.)
   G.   Fire Extinguishers: Each tank truck or tank wagon shall carry an
approved fire extinguisher suitable for extinguishing gasoline and oil fires,
such as carbon tetrachloride, carbon dioxide, foam or powder.
   H.   Retail Sales from Tank Trucks Prohibited: No retail deliveries from
tank trucks or tank wagons shall be permitted in any public way or from
commonly used private roads in the Village, except in extreme emergencies for
relief purposes, and then only in quantities not to exceed two (2) gallons.
(Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 4-5B-4H2 of this Article.
4-5B-7: LOADING AND UNLOADING OPERATIONS:
4-5B-7-1: LOADING AND UNLOADING DOCKS:
   A.   Location:
      1.   Unloading Docks: Location of unloading site with reference to
railroad tracks over which passenger trains are moved shall be subject at all
times to the regulations of the Bureau of Explosives of the Association of
American Railroads, and all amendments thereto, (formerly American Railway
Association), 30 Vesey Street, New York City.
      2.   Loading Docks: Truck loading docks and platforms shall be located
not less than twenty five feet (25') from storage tanks, plant buildings and
property lines, except existing installations, which shall be not less than ten
feet (10').
   B.   Electrical Equipment: All electric lights at loading and unloading
docks shall be of vaporproof construction. Electric wiring shall be in sealed
conduit at docks and switches shall be of the explosionproof type or placed at
some point remote from the docks. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5B-7-2: TANK TRUCK UNLOADING OPERATIONS:
   A.   Grounding: Before unloading operations are started and before any
connection or contact is made with piping or other unloading equipment, the
tank car shall be electrically grounded in an effective manner. Permanent
electrical connection of not less than No. 0 copper cable shall be made between
the rails on which tank cars stand and the piping system of the storage plant.
Note: This connection may be accomplished in two (2) ways. The rails may be
bonded by means of standard rail bonds and connected to the permanent piping
system with No. 0 electric cable connections at each end of the loading or
unloading sections; or a similar connection may be made between each rail on
which cars stand and the permanent piping system.
   B.   Prohibited Methods of Unloading:
      1.   Unloading by Gravity: The withdrawal of liquids from tank cars
through bottom outlets shall not be permitted. Tank cars shall be unloaded
through dome (manhole) only. Pumps required to accomplish this shall be of
approved type and securely installed. However, fuel oils may be unloaded by
gravity.
      2.   Use of Compressed Air: The use of compressed air to discharge
contents of tank cars is prohibited, but this shall not be construed to prevent
the use of a standard system employing an inert gas, such as carbon dioxide or
nitrogen, as pressure generating medium for this purpose.
      3.   Unloading to Portable Containers: Unloading from tank cars to tank
trucks or to any other portable container shall not be permitted.
   C.   Dome Covers: After unloading pipe is inserted into dome of tank car and
before any pumping is done, dome shall be tightly covered with wet burlap or
some other type of cover equally effective. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5B-7-3: TANK TRUCK LOADING OPERATIONS:
Before loading operations begin, tank trucks shall be electrically bonded to
pipeline by means of a bonding device at loading dock. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5B-7-4: OTHER RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   All connections between tank cars and pipelines shall be in good
condition and not permit leakage.
   B.   Tank cars shall not be left connected to pipelines except when loading
or unloading is going on, and during all such times a competent man shall be
present and in charge.
   C.   The presence of flame lanterns, flame switch lights or other exposed
flame lights or fires during the process of loading or unloading is prohibited.
   D.   Sidings used in connection with tank car unloading operations shall not
be common to other users, or they shall be provided with necessary derails or
with warning signs in accordance with section 4, paragraph 697 (b) of the
Interstate Commerce Commission Regulations on the Transportation of Explosives.
   E.   The unloading of tank cars and all operations in connection therewith
shall be in full accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Interstate
Commerce Commission (See section 4, paragraph 697, Interstate Commerce
Regulations for the Transportation of Explosives effective October 1, 1930) and
all amendments thereto. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5B-7-5: PRESENCE OF COMPETENT PERSON REQUIRED:
During loading and unloading of tank trucks and tank wagons, a competent person
shall be present and in charge at all times. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5B-8: STORAGE OF BARRELS AND DRUMS:
   A.   Barrels and drums used for Class I liquids, whether full or empty,
shall be stored in the open or on open platforms in plant yard. Platforms may
have roofs, but all sides shall be open.
   B.   No open lights shall be permitted in such storage yard.
   C.   Caps, bungs and plugs shall be closed tightly immediately after
container is emptied.
   D.   Gasoline and naphtha shall be handled only in barrels or drums painted
red and properly labeled and no other liquids shall be handled in such red
barrels or drums. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5B-9: PROTECTION OF PROPERTY:
   A.   Fencing: Apparatus dispensing Class I flammable liquids into the fuel
tanks of motor vehicles of the public shall not be located at a bulk plant
unless separated by a fence or similar barrier from the area in which bulk
operations are conducted.
   B.   Maintenance: Property shall be kept free from weeds, high grass,
rubbish and litter, and shall be kept neat, clean and orderly throughout.
   C.   Fire Protections:
      1.   Open light or flame shall not be permitted on the property.
      2.   Approved chemical fire extinguishers, foam generators or other
smothering agents for extinguishing oil fires shall be provided. (Ord. 0-80-
151, 3-13-80)
4-5B-10: APPROVAL OF PLANS:
Drawings or blueprints made to scale shall be submitted in triplicate to the
Village President and shall be approved by him before any new installation,
addition or remodeling is undertaken. Drawings shall:
   A.   Show the plot of ground to be utilized and its immediate surroundings
on all sides; the complete layout of tanks, loading and unloading docks,
equipment and buildings; the capacity of each tank, kind of liquid to be
stored; type of tank supports; type of construction of each building; and all
clearances as provided in subsection 4-5B-2B and C, 4-5B-4G1 and 4-5B-7-1A2 of
this Article. In addition, the dimensions of any tank with a capacity of more
than fifty thousand (50,000) gallons shall be given.
   B.   Show the name of the person proposing the installation, the location
with respect to the Village, and shall name adjacent railroads and streets.
   C.   Designate passenger, freight, passing and side tracks and shall show
the clearances between tracks at the point where tank car will be placed for
unloading and nearest passenger tracks, and between unloading dock and closest
passenger tracks.
   D.   Be accompanied by an application for approval made out in triplicate on
blanks furnished by the Village President. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-1980)
ARTICLE C. SERVICE STATIONS 1
SECTION:
4-5C-1: Purpose
4-5C-2: Definitions
4-5C-3: Approval Of Plans
4-5C-4: Underground Storage And Storage Limits
4-5C-5: Tank Specifications
4-5C-6: Tank Location Restrictions
4-5C-7: Installation Of Tanks
4-5C-8: Pipes
4-5C-9: Pumps
4-5C-10: Labeling Containers And Pumps
4-5C-11: Unloading Operations
4-5C-12: Building Regulations And Requirements
4-5C-13: Safety Requirements
4-5C-14: Bulk Sales Prohibited
4-5C-15: Self-Service Regulations
4-5C-15-1: Self-Service Restricted
4-5C-15-2: Self-Service Station Permits
4-5C-15-3: Self-Service Station Rules
4-5C-15-4: Permit Issuance Refusal, Revocation Or Suspension
 
Notes
1 1. See also Title 3, Chapter 4 of this Code.
4-5C-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intention of the Village President by this Article to grant permits
for self-service stations in the Village under conditions providing maximum
safety from fire and explosion hazards to the owners of said station and to the
customers thereof and the public generally. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-1980)
4-5C-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Article, the terms specified in this Section have the meanings
ascribed to them as follows:
APPROVED SELF-SERVICE DISPENSING DEVICE: Any device for the dispensing of Class
I, II or III liquids into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles as approved by the
Village President pursuant to this Article.
ATTENDANT: The owner or any person who is paid wages by an owner of a service
station to dispense motor fuel at such service station.
OWNER: Any individual(s) or legal entity holding title, lease, license or any
interest in a service station or self- service station. The legal name,
residence and address of any individuals who are owners shall be filed with the
Village President.
SELF-SERVICE STATION: That portion of property of a service station where
flammable and combustible liquids used as motor fuels are stored and
subsequently dispensed from fixed approved dispensing equipment into the fuel
tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than the service station attendant.
SERVICE STATION: Any place of business where Class I, II or III liquids are
sold or offered for sale at retail, and dispensed into the fuel tanks of motor
vehicles. This definition shall also include the private storage and dispensing
of such products for the same purposes as those served by a service station,
whether the storage is maintained for the use or benefit of the owner, lessee,
agents or employees of either, or of any others.
The requirements covering service stations shall also govern underground
storage maintained at general storage plants and places other than service
stations, so far as applicable. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5C-3: APPROVAL OF PLANS:
Drawings or blueprints made to scale shall be submitted in triplicate to the
Village President and shall be approved by him before any new construction,
addition or remodeling is undertaken. Drawings shall carry the name of the
person proposing the installation, the location with reference to the Village,
and shall in addition show the following:
   A.   The plot to be utilized and its immediate surroundings on all sides;
all property lines to be designated and adjacent streets and highways to be
named.
   B.   The complete installation as proposed, including tanks and their
capacities, class of liquids to be stored, pumps, buildings, drives and all
equipment.
   C.   Clearance from tanks to property lines as required by this Chapter.
   D.   Type of construction of service station building or buildings, with
clear showing that there will be no basement, cellar or excavation under any
portion.
   E.   Location of basements, cellars or pits of other buildings on the
property or on adjacent property, and location of tanks with reference thereto
as required by this Chapter. If a building has no basement, cellar or pit, make
note to that effect.
   F.   Location of sewers, manholes, catch basins, cesspools, septic tanks,
wells or cisterns (whether on the property, on adjacent property or in
adjoining streets, highways or alleys), and location of tanks with reference
thereto as required by this Chapter. If there is no sewer, manhole or catch
basin in a street or alley, or no sewer, cesspool, septic tank, well or cistern
on a property, make notation to that effect in proper place.
   G.   Location of vent pipe outlets as required by this Chapter and location
of fill pipes as required.
   H.   Ventilation of greasing pit as required by subsection 4-5C-13C of this
Article, if greasing pit is located within a building or an enclosure.
   I.   A complete showing of type of heat and heating arrangement as required
by subsection 4-5C-12B2 of this Article.
   J.   Drawings shall be accompanied by an application for approval made out
in triplicate on blanks furnished by the Village President. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-
13-80)
4-5C-4: UNDERGROUND STORAGE AND STORAGE LIMITS:
   A.   Service station storage shall be underground and the combined capacity
of the storage tanks of Class I and Class II flammable liquids shall not exceed
thirty thousand (30,000) gallons.
   B.   Class III flammable liquids storage at service stations shall be
underground and shall not exceed thirty thousand (30,000) gallons.
   C.   Underground fuel oil tank connected to the station heater and
underground tank for receiving crank case drainings need not be counted in
computing the combined capacity.
   D.   The underground storage limit may be increased at industrial plants
where a larger storage is required for manufacturing operations and also at
airports, bus and truck terminals and installations where operating
requirements make a larger storage necessary and in segregated locations. (Ord.
0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5C-5: TANK SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Tanks shall bear label of Underwriters' Laboratories or meet equivalent
specifications.
   B.   Tanks shall be thoroughly coated on the outside with tar, asphaltum or
other suitable rust-resisting material.
   C.   Tanks shall not be surrounded or covered by cinders or other material
of corrosive effect. If the soil contains corrosive material, special
protection shall be provided. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5C-6: TANK LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Distance to Basements: Individual tanks of a capacity up to two
thousand (2,000) gallons shall be buried so that the tops of the tanks shall be
lower than all floors, basements, cellars or pits of buildings within ten feet
(10'), on or off the property, or tanks shall maintain a full clearance of ten
feet (10') thereto; for individual tanks of a capacity of more than two
thousand (2,000) gallons and up to six thousand (6,000) gallons, the distance
shall be twenty feet (20'); for individual tanks of a capacity of more than six
thousand (6,000) gallons and up to twenty thousand (20,000) gallons, this
distance shall be twenty five feet (25').
   B.   Distance to Sewers and Wells: Individual tanks of a capacity up to two
thousand (2,000) gallons shall be buried so that the tops of the tanks shall be
lower than the bottom level of all sewers, manholes, catch basins, cesspools,
septic tanks, wells or cisterns within ten feet (10'), on or off the property,
or tanks shall maintain a full clearance of ten feet (10') thereto; for
individual tanks of a capacity of more than two thousand (2,000) gallons and up
to six thousand (6,000) gallons, the distance shall be twenty feet (20'); for
individual tanks of a capacity of more than six thousand (6,000) gallons, the
distance shall be twenty five feet (25').
The term "sewer" includes a sewer line out of service station buildings;
provided, however, these clearances shall not be required to a sewer line out
of a service station if such sewer line is constructed throughout of cast iron
with leaded joints.
   C.   Distance to Property Lines: Individual tanks of a capacity up to two
thousand (2,000) gallons shall maintain a ten foot (10') clearance to property
lines; for individual tanks of a capacity of more than two thousand (2,000)
gallons and up to six thousand (6,000) gallons, the distance shall be twenty
feet (20'); for individual tanks of a capacity of more than six thousand
(6,000) gallons and up to twenty thousand (20,000) gallons, the distance shall
be twenty five feet (25'); provided, however, that these clearances on the side
adjacent to a public street, alley or highway may be waived by consent of the
authorities having immediate jurisdiction over the public street, alley or
highway if it can be shown that the required sewer clearances can be
maintained.
   D.   Distance to Special Classes of Property: Tanks and pumps shall maintain
a clearance of not less than three hundred feet (300') to any mine shaft, air
or escape shaft for any mine, and eighty five feet (85') to any schoolhouse,
hospital or church. The distance shall be measured from the nearest points of
tanks and pumps to the nearest points of buildings or shafts. (Ord. 0-80-151,
3-13-80)
4-5C-7: INSTALLATION OF TANKS:
   A.   Where tanks are not subject to being driven over, they shall be buried
so that their tops will be not less than two feet (2') below the surface of the
ground or beneath twelve inches (12") of earth and a slab of reinforced
concrete not less than four inches (4") in thickness; slab shall be set on a
firm, well tamped earth foundation and shall extend at least one foot (1')
beyond the outline of the tank in all directions.
   B.   Where tank site is subject to traffic by heavy vehicles, the total
coverage above the top of the tank shall be not less than three feet (3');
provided, however, that where the area over tanks is paved with reinforced
concrete not less than six inches (6") in thickness, the total coverage may be
reduced to two feet (2').
   C.   Where necessary to prevent floating, tanks shall be securely anchored
or weighted.
   D.   Tanks shall be set on a firm foundation and surrounded with fill sand
well tamped in place.
   E.   Tops of tanks shall be below the level of any piping to which tanks may
be connected.
   F.   Tanks installed under the floor of a building or structure shall be so
located with respect to building foundations and supports that the loads
carried by the latter cannot be transmitted to the tank. Fill openings and vent
pipes must be outside and the installation must comply with all other
requirements established in this Chapter. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5C-8: PIPES:
   A.   General Requirements: Piping shall conform to the requirements set out
in Article B of this Chapter.
   B.   Vent Pipes:
      1.   Each tank shall be provided with a vent pipe, connected with the top
of the tank and carried up to the outer air. Pipe shall be arranged for proper
drainage to storage tank and its lower end shall not extend through top of tank
for a distance of more than one inch (1"); it shall have no traps or pockets.
      2.   Upper end of pipe shall be provided with a goose-neck or "T"
attachment, or weatherproof hood.
      3.   Vent pipe shall be of sufficient cross-sectional area to permit
escape of air and gas during the filling operation and in no case less than one
and one-fourth inches (11/4") in diameter. If a power pump is used in filling
storage tank and a tight connection is made to the fill pipe, the vent pipe
shall not be smaller than the full pipe.
      4.   Vent pipe shall terminate outside of building not less than twelve
feet (12') above top of fill pipe, not less than four feet (4'), measured
vertically and horizontally, from any window or other building opening, and not
less than fifteen feet (15'), measured horizontally, from any opening into the
basement, cellar or pit of any building, and in a location which will not
permit pocketing of gas. If a tight connection is made in the filling line, the
terminus of vent pipe shall be carried to a point one foot (1') above the level
of the highest reservoir from which tank may be filled.
      5.   Vent pipes from two (2) or more tanks of the same class of liquid
may be connected to one upright or main header. Area of header shall equal the
combined area of the pipes connected to it. Connection to the header shall be
not less than one foot (1') above the level of the top of the highest reservoir
from which tanks may be filled. However, separate vent pipes are recommended.
   C.   Fill Pipes:
      1.   Fill pipes shall be carried to a location outside of any building as
remote as possible from any doorway or other opening into any building and in
no case closer than five feet (5') from any such opening.
      2.   Location shall be in a place where there is minimum danger of
breakage from trucks or other vehicles.
      3.   Each fill pipe shall be closed by a screw cap or other tight fitting
cap, preferably of a type which can be locked. Cap shall be locked at all times
when filling or gauging process is not going on. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5C-9: PUMPS:
   A.   Pumps for Class I and II Flammable Liquids: Class I and Class II
flammable liquids shall be transferred from underground tanks by means of fixed
pumps so designed and equipped as to allow control of the flow and to prevent
leakage or accidental discharge. Supplemental means shall be provided outside
of the dispensing device whereby the source of power may be readily
disconnected in the event of fire or other accident. Dispensing devices for
Class I and Class II flammable liquids shall be withdrawn from tanks by means
of approved pumps equipped with metallic lined hose and nonferrous discharge
nozzle.
   B.   Dispensing Areas: No pump shall be located within a building. However,
approved pumps within garages will be permitted provided the dispensing area is
not below grade, is separated from motor vehicle repair areas, pits and
basements and the dispensing unit and its piping are protected against physical
damage from vehicles by mounting on a concrete island or by equivalent means
and is located in a position where it cannot be struck by a vehicle descending
a ramp or other slope out of control. The dispensing area also shall be
provided with an approved mechanical or gravity ventilation system. A clearly
identified switch, readily accessible in case of fire or physical damage to any
dispensing units shall be provided to shut off the power to dispensing units.
Existing dispensing units located below grade must have independent mechanical
ventilation systems and the entire dispensing area shall be protected by an
approved automatic sprinkler system. The ventilation systems shall be
electrically interlocked with the gasoline dispensing units so that the
dispensing units cannot be operated unless the ventilating fan motors are
energized.
   C.   Electrical Regulations: Wiring of electric pumps and all electrical
equipment in connection therewith shall conform to Article 500 of the 1962
Edition of the National Electrical Code, N.F.P.A. Pamphlet No. 70, published by
the National Fire Protection Association.
   D.   Gravity Discharges: Devices which discharge by gravity shall be so
designed that it is impossible to retain in the gauging compartment materially
more than ten (10) gallons of liquid, and so that it is not possible to lock
the device without draining the liquid.
   E.   Setback Requirements: Setback of pump islands from street lines and
drive-in arrangements are subject to approval of the authorities having
jurisdiction over the street, highway or road.
   F.   Prohibitions:
      1.   Curb pumps or pumps located in any portion of a public street are
prohibited.
      2.   Systems which employ continuous air pressure on storage tank in
connection with gauging or vending devices are prohibited.
      3.   The use of aboveground storage tanks in connection with gauging or
vending devices is prohibited.
      4.   Apparatus for dispensing flammable liquids into fuel tanks of
vehicles shall not be connected to bulk storage tanks. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5C-10: LABELING CONTAINERS AND PUMPS:
All visible containers of gasoline and kerosene and all devices used for
drawing such products from underground storage containers at filling stations,
garages or other places where such products are sold or offered for sale shall
be marked or labeled in a conspicuous place with the name of such product.
(Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5C-11: UNLOADING OPERATIONS:
   A.   Unloading hose from tank truck into underground tank shall be metallic
lined or its equivalent and shall be equipped with a nonferrous nozzle or tight
connection metal nipple.
   B.   During unloading operations, a competent person shall be present and in
charge at all times.
   C.   If underground tank is supplied through permanent pipe connection to an
aboveground general storage tank, filling process may be by power driven pump
or gravity. In addition to valves at aboveground tanks, a valve shall be
installed within control of service station personnel. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5C-12: BUILDING REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Construction Regulations:
      1.   Floor level shall be above grade so as to prevent flow of liquids or
vapors into building and shall preferably be of concrete.
      2.   No basement or excavation shall hereafter be constructed under any
service station building. Existing basements under service stations shall be
provided with mechanical ventilation or eliminated and only nonsparking,
explosionproof motors and compressors shall be permitted in existing basements.
   B.   Heating Systems:
      1.   No furnaces or heaters shall be located in existing service station
basements.
      2.   Heating systems in service stations that have rooms or stalls for
greasing or servicing motor vehicles shall be of a type that will preclude the
likelihood of gasoline gas reaching the heaters. The following types are
acceptable:
         a.   Steam, hot water or warm air furnaces, cut off from the balance
of the building by eight inch (8") masonry walls. The ceiling shall be of two
(2) coats of cement plaster over metal lath or equivalent fire-resistive
construction. The door to heater room shall open from the outside of the
building. No openings shall be permitted on the inside walls except those
necessary for passage of air ducts. If warm air heat is used, no cold air
return shall be taken closer than thirty inches (30") from the level of grease
room floor.
In some instances, it is possible to have heater room door open from the office
room, where heater room door is sufficiently distant from grease room door to
make the travel of gasoline gas to the heater room a remote possibility. Added
safety provided if the floor of the office is higher than the floor of the
grease room, or if a six inch (6") concrete ledge is placed across the door
opening at the floor in the grease room door or furnace room door, or both, as
gasoline gas is heavier than air and these features tend to block its flow.
         b.   The following types of heat are acceptable without enclosure:
            (1)   Suspended, approved type, oil or gas fired, warm air
furnaces. These shall be suspended from the ceiling joists and shall be
approximately eight feet (8') above the level of the grease room floor. Cold
air returns shall be not less than thirty inches (30") from the level of the
grease room floor.
            (2)   Gas or oil fired unit heaters shall be mounted eight feet
(8') above the level of the grease room floor.
            (3)   Electric heating units and equipment located within the
possible path of vapor travel shall be designed and installed so as not to
create an ignition hazard and shall conform with the 1962 Edition of the
National Electrical Code, N.F.P.A. Pamphlet No. 70, as published by the
National Fire Protection Association.
            (4)   In single stall stations, a stove may be used if mounted
eighteen inches (18") above the floor. Oil heat is recommended.
            (5)   Stoves may be used in the office section if they are cut off
by partitions from the grease room and the stoves are mounted above the floor
level.
   C.   Greasing Pits:
      1.   Every greasing pit installed within a building or enclosed by three
(3) or more walls shall be ventilated by a vent duct not less than six inches
(6") in diameter (or equivalent cross-sectional area if a noncircular duct is
used.) Duct shall start within four inches (4") of the floor and shall be
extended on an upward diagonal or by an easy bend over to sidewall, thence
straight up through roof to a height sufficient to draw off gasoline vapors
which may accumulate in bottom of pit. Abrupt bends must be avoided and all
joints must be tight. Floor of pit shall pitch slightly toward corner where
duct is located to facilitate flow of gases to duct.
      2.   Gasoline or naphtha shall never be used to clean out any pit,
whether pit is located within a building or enclosure, or outside in the open.
      3.   No sewer connection shall be permitted from any greasing pit unless
protected with an approved grease trap which will effectively intercept greases
and oils and prevent their entry into the sewer. Trap shall be kept cleaned
out.
      4.   If electrically lighted, globes shall be of vaporproof construction
and wiring in conduit.
      5.   If sewer connection is permitted by the Village, an adequate grease
trap shall be provided to intercept greases and oils. Trap shall be cleaned out
at least every thirty (30) days. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5C-13: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Flammable Liquids Within Building:
      1.   No gasoline, naphtha or other liquids of Class I shall be kept
inside of service station.
      2.   No alcohol or other flammable antifreeze solutions shall be kept
inside of service station except in original sealed containers. No transfer of
such liquids from these receptacles to other receptacles shall be made inside
the service station.
   B.   Ignition to be Shut Off: The fuel tank of no motor vehicle shall be
serviced until motor and ignition have been shut off.
   C.   No Smoking: No smoking shall be permitted on premises at any time.
   D.   Open Flames: No open lights or flames shall be permitted about premises
except in stove within station building.
   E.   Refuse Removed: Premises shall be kept neat and clean, and free from
rubbish and trash.
   F.   Cleaning with Flammable Liquids Prohibited: Cleaning with gasoline,
naphtha, or other highly inflammable liquids of Classes I and II shall not be
permitted in or around the service station.
   G.   Leaking Underground Tanks: Underground tanks which develop leaks or
which are permanently discontinued in service shall be removed promptly or
shall be filled with sand. The sand is to be flushed in with water until a
complete sand fill is secured.
   H.   Fire Extinguishers: Each service station shall be equipped with at
least one approved chemical fire extinguisher suitable for oil or gasoline
fires.
   I.   Fireworks: The sale, use, explosion or handling of fireworks, including
sparklers, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns and toy pistol paper caps is
prohibited on any service station premises. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5C-14: BULK SALES PROHIBITED:
No motor fuels shall be dispensed at any service station except directly into
the fuel tanks of motor vehicles, when such tanks are connected with the
carburation systems of such vehicles; provided, however, that individual sales
up to six (6) gallons may be made in metal or approved receptacles when painted
or colored red and labeled in full conformity with the Illinois Red Can
Gasoline Law, 1  such individual sales to be limited to six (6) gallons to any
one person. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 127/2, ¶151.
4-5C-15: SELF-SERVICE REGULATIONS:
4-5C-15-1: SELF-SERVICE RESTRICTED:
Except at service stations which hold current and valid self- service station
permits issued pursuant to this Article by the Village President, no person
other than an owner of a service station, or an employee of such owner, shall
use or operate any motor fuel dispensing equipment at any service station. No
owner of a service station shall permit any person to violate the provisions of
this Article. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5C-15-2: SELF-SERVICE STATION PERMITS:
   A.   Application for Permit; Plans: Application of self-service permits
shall be filed in the office of the Village President. Self-service station
permits may be issued by the Village President upon written application in form
to be established by said Village President, accompanied by complete, detailed
plans, in triplicate, for each service station sought to be used for self-
service. Such plans shall be drawn to scale, and shall include the following:
      1.   Lot lines and dimensions.
      2.   Building lines and dimensions.
      3.   Location and size of tanks and pump islands.
      4.   Location of control station.
      5.   Type, make, model and location of dispensing devices or equipment.
      6.   Fire extinguisher locations.
      7.   Clearances.
      8.   Such other relevant information as may be requested by the Village
President.
No construction of self-service station or modification of an existing service
station to conduct self-service business shall be commenced until such
application and plans are given written approval by the Village President; no
such station shall open for business until inspected and approved by the
Village President, and until the village President issues a self-service
station permit, which must be displayed prominently, at all times, at such
self-service station.
   B.   Term of Permit: Self-service permits shall be initially issued for a
period of not less than six (6) months nor greater than eighteen (18) months,
at the discretion of the Village President.
   C.   Renewal Permits: Renewal permits shall be issued for a period of twelve
(12) months. (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5C-15-3: SELF-SERVICE STATION RULES:
The following rules shall be followed at all self-service stations, and
violation of any said rules shall constitute good and just cause for suspension
or revocation of a self- service station permit by the Village President:
   A.   Public Self-Service Stations; Attendant Required:
      1.   The installation or use of unattended self-service dispensing
devices for motor fuel of any kind is hereby prohibited.
      2.   At all times when a self-service station is open for public use, not
less than one attendant shall be on duty, and no motor fuel shall be dispensed
at any time when such attendant is not at or near the control station or pump
island. The attendant's primary duty shall be to supervise the dispensing of
motor fuels, motor oils and services normally related to such dispensing. Such
attendant shall refuse service to any person who is smoking or who appears for
any reason to be unable to dispense fuel safely, and shall shut off the
dispensing unit if a patron fails to follow instructions in compliance with the
rules. All attendants and other employees of the service station shall be
thoroughly instructed in the operation and use of the communications system,
the control station, the fire extinguishing equipment, the operation of the
dispensing units and safety regulations for the dispensing of motor fuels.
      3.   Approved self-service dispensing devices are permitted at service
stations available and open to the public; provided, that all dispensing of
Class I, II or III liquids by a person other than the service station attendant
is under the supervision and control of a qualified attendant and the
dispensing nozzle is a listed automatic closing type without a hold open latch,
and must be approved by the Village President.
      4.   It shall be the responsibility of the attendant to (i) dispense
Class I, II or III liquids into approved portable containers, (ii) control
sources of ignition and (iii) immediately handle accidental spills and fire
extinguishers if needed.
      5.   The attendant on duty shall be mentally and physically capable of
performing the functions and assuming the responsibility prescribed in this
Section.
   B.   Nonpublic Locations: Dispensing of Class I, II or III liquids at
locations not open to the public does not require an attendant or supervisor.
Such locations may be used by commercial, industrial, governmental or
manufacturing establishments for fueling vehicles used in connection with their
business. However, this shall not include private fraternal clubs or
associations.
   C.   Special Dispensing Devices: Special dispensing devices for motor fuel
are not to be installed or used without prior written approval of the Village
President.
   D.   Dwelling and Sleeping Facilities Prohibited: No dwelling unit or
sleeping facilities of any kind for the owner, attendant or any person shall be
permitted at a self-service station.
   E.   Fire Extinguisher: One type of ABC fire extinguisher with a capacity of
ten (10) pounds shall be provided for each pump island containing four (4) or
less dispensing pumps; on pump island containing more than four (4) dispensing
pumps, an additional extinguisher shall be provided for each additional
dispensing pump or fraction thereof. Such extinguishers shall be located at
points approved by the Village President, away from the dispensing area but
close enough to the dispensing area to be readily available. Such extinguishers
shall be plainly marked, shall be protected from the weather and shall be
maintained in operable condition and available at all times when the self-
service station is open to the public. All employees of the self-service
station shall be thoroughly instructed as to the location and proper use of
such extinguishers, and shall, upon request, demonstrate their ability in such
use to the approval of representatives of the Village President.
   F.   Signs:
      1.   Signs giving instructions for the operation of gasoline dispensing
equipment must be conspicuously posted at each self-service station offering
self-service.
      2.   Signs bearing the following words must be conspicuously posted on
each gasoline pump island where self-service is offered: (i) "Self-Service
Island"; (ii) "Warning"; (iii) "Stop Engine"; (iv) "No Smoking"; (v) "It is
unlawful and dangerous for anyone other than the attendant to dispense gasoline
into approved containers"; (vi) 'It is unlawful and dangerous to dispense
gasoline without an attendant on duty".
      3.   The signs shall be made of all-weather rigid material and the
wording, lettering, size, design, material, mounting and location of said sign
shall be subject to the approval of the Village President.
   G.   Collision Protection: All fuel dispensing units shall be mounted or
protected against collision damage by suitable means in a manner approved by
the Village President.
   H.   Control Station:
      1.   Every self-service station shall maintain a control station in a
location approved by the Village President, equipped in such manner that the
flow of liquid fuel from any or all fuel dispensing units may be stopped from
such control station.
      2.   A master electric switch shall be maintained at such control station
so that electric power and pump lighting to all pumps may be disconnected at
one time and said switch shall be plainly marked and easily accessible.
      3.   The control station shall be located at ground level not more than
one hundred feet (100') from the farthest pump. The control station shall be so
located that the attendant of such control station shall have a clear and
unobstructed view of all pumps.
      4.   The attendant shall at all times be able to communicate with persons
in the dispensing area. The Village President may in his discretion require a
communication system between the control station and each pump island. (Ord. 0-
80-151, 3-13-80)
4-5C-15-4: PERMIT ISSUANCE REFUSAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
The Village President may, for failure to comply with these rules, for
violation thereof, or for other good and just cause, refuse to issue or renew
or suspend or revoke a self- service station permit. The Village President
shall serve notice of such refusal, suspension or revocation on the applicant
for or holder of such permit by personal service or by certified or registered
mail. If the applicant for or holder of such permit, within ten (10) days after
notice of such refusal, suspension or revocation is served, shall file in the
office of the Village President written request for a hearing, the Village
President shall grant a hearing. Any order or decision made by the Village
President upon such hearing shall be an "administrative decision" within the
meaning of the "Administrative Review Act" 1 . (Ord. 0-80-151, 3-13-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
ARTICLE D. FLAMMABLE GASES
SECTION:
4-5D-1: Prohibition Of Tanks Used To Store Flammable Gases
4-5D-2: Exceptions
4-5D-3: Permits
4-5D-4: Enforcement
4-5D-5: Penalties
4-5D-1: PROHIBITION OF TANKS USED TO STORE FLAMMABLE GASES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, maintain, store or house any
tank used to store flammable gases except as set forth in Section
4-5D-2 of this Article. (Ord. 0-99-571, 5-13-1999)
4-5D-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The restriction set forth in Section
4-5D-1 of this Article shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Tanks with a capacity of less than ten (10) cubic feet of flammable
gas, provided that no more than two (2) tanks are possessed, maintained, stored
or housed on the same property.
   B.   Tank(s) possessed, maintained, stored or housed by any unit of
government.
   C.   Tank(s) utilized by any not-for-profit organization on the premises for
no longer than one week.
   D.   Tank(s) utilized for the construction of any improvement, provided the
capacity of said tank(s) does not exceed five hundred (500) cubic feet and said
tank(s) is permitted in accordance with Section
4-5D-3 of this Article.
   E.   A tank utilized for the operation of an electrical generator, provided
that no more than one tank with a capacity of not greater than five hundred
(500) cubic feet is possessed, maintained, stored or housed on the property for
not greater than one hundred twenty (120) days and said tank is permitted in
accordance with Section
4-5D-3 of this Article. (Ord. 0-99-571, 5-13-1999)
4-5D-3: PERMITS:
Any person desiring to possess, maintain, store or house a tank to be utilized
for the construction of any improvement or operation of an electrical generator
shall obtain a permit from the Village. Prior to the issuance of any permit,
the person shall provide the Village with a completed tank permit application
and accompanying permit fee. The permit fee shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each tank with a capacity of up to five hundred (500) cubic feet.
A permit issued in conjunction with subsection 4-5D-2D of this Article shall
expire on the earlier of completion of construction or one hundred twenty (120)
days from the date of issuance. A permit issued in conjunction with subsection
4-5D-2E of this Article shall expire one hundred twenty (120) days from the
date of issuance. (Ord. 0-99-571, 5-13-1999)
4-5D-4: ENFORCEMENT:
A representative of the Village shall be allowed to inspect any tank permitted
under Section
4-5D-3 of this Article during normal business hours. Any permit issued pursuant
to Section
4-5D-3 of this Article may be revoked by the Village if a Village
representative determines that the tank poses a threat to the health, safety or
welfare of the residents of the Village or any individual in the immediate area
of said tank. (Ord. 0-99-571, 5-13-1999)
4-5D-5: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-99-571, 5-13-1999)
CHAPTER 6
TREES, PLANTS AND WEEDS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Findings
4-6-2: Height Limits
4-6-3: Notice To Abate
4-6-4: Abatement By Village
4-6-5: Weed Cutting, Brush, And Tree Debris Removal Lien
4-6-6: Recovery Of Abatement Costs
4-6-7: Diseased And Dead Trees
4-6-8: Commercial Lawn Maintenance Activity Time And Place Limitations
4-6-9: Tree Preservation
4-6-9-1: Statement Of Purpose
4-6-9-2: Definitions
4-6-9-3: Preservation
4-6-9-4: Planting
4-6-9-5: Tree Care
4-6-9-6: Tree Protection
4-6-9-7: Legacy Tree Protection
4-6-9-8: Tree Removal
4-6-9-9: Tree Replacement
4-6-9-10: Special Rules For Open Space Or Preservation Areas
4-6-9-11: Tree Preservation And/Or Removal Plan For Significant Removals,
Construction And/Or Development
4-6-9-12: Nuisance Trees
4-6-9-13: Invasive Species Control
4-6-9-14: Tree Board
4-6-9-15: Tree Permit Procedure
4-6-9-16: Permit Issuance
4-6-9-17: Cash Bonds
4-6-9-18: Final Inspection
4-6-9-19: Compliance
4-6-9-20: Penalty
4-6-9-21: Enforcement
4-6-9-22: Exceptions
4-6-9-23: Appeals For Variance
4-6-9-24
: Civil remedies
4-6-9-25
: Saving Clause
 
Appendix A: Wood Invasice Species List
Appendix B: Tree Permit Form
4-6-1: FINDINGS:
The growth of weeds, the presence of brush piles and dead trees, within the
village harbors pests and nuisance wildlife and poses safety risks which
interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property and tends to
depreciate the value of the property of residents of the village. (Ord. 2016-
1122, 6-9-2016)
4-6-2: HEIGHT LIMITS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other
than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, to grow to a height
exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in the village which is zoned A-2 or A-
3 under the village zoning ordinance excepting those areas authorized by the
village to exist in natural form; any such plants or weeds exceeding such
heights are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 2016-1122, 6-9-2016)
4-6-3: NOTICE TO ABATE:
The building officer shall have the authority to serve or cause to be served a
notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants have
been permitted to grow over eight inches (8") high or on which dead trees or
piles of brush have been determined to be a safety hazard or nuisance by the
building officer or are found to be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter. The notice shall demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10)
days.
If a second notice is needed, the chief of police shall have the responsibility
to serve or cause to be served the notice upon the owner or occupant of any
premises found in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-1122,
6-9-2016)
4-6-4: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within ten (10) days after
such notice, the building officer shall proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping
an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged
and paid by such owner or occupant. (Ord. 2016-1122, 6-9-2016)
4-6-5: WEED CUTTING, BRUSH, AND TREE DEBRIS REMOVAL LIEN:
Charges for such weed, brush and tree removal shall be a lien upon the
premises. Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for sixty (60) days
after it has been rendered, the village clerk may file with the Cook County
recorder of deeds, a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain a
legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, the
date or dates when such bill was incurred, and a notice that the village claims
a lien for this amount. Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner
of the premises if his address is known; provided, however, that failure of the
village clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such notice, or the failure
of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the
lien for such charges. (Ord. 2016-1122, 6-9-2016)
4-6-6: RECOVERY OF ABATEMENT COSTS:
   A.   Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting, brush and/or tree
removal charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same and the proceeds of
such sale shall be applied to pay for charges after deducting costs, as is the
case in the foreclosing of statutory liens.
   B.   The attorney for the village is hereby authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings, in the name of the village, in any court having
jurisdiction over such matter, against any property for which a bill for weed
cutting, brush and/or tree removal has remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it
has been rendered. (Ord. 2016-1122, 6-9-2016)
4-6-7: DISEASED AND DEAD TREES:
   A.   Right To Inspect: The officers, employees, and agents of the village
are hereby authorized and directed to enter upon private property where any
dead, diseased or substantially dead trees are located to ascertain whether or
not a public health, or safety hazard, or public nuisance exists.
   B.   Infected And Diseased Trees Declared A Nuisance: Any tree of any
species determined to be infected and/or diseased, by an agent of the village
or by laboratory analysis by the section of applied botany and plant pathology,
Illinois natural history survey or any laboratory approved by same, are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
   C.   Dead Trees And Brush Piles Declared A Nuisance: Trees determined by an
agent of the village to be dead or substantially dead, and any piles of brush
determined to be a public health or safety risk by the building officer are
hereby declared to be public nuisances.
   D.   Duty Of Owner/Occupant/Agent To Abate: The owner, occupant, or agent of
a parcel of land on which any dead, diseased, or infected trees exist shall
treat the infected trees with an approved treatment system administered by a
qualified, licensed professional or remove and destroy said tree(s), or cause
the same to occur within ten (10) days of notification to such owner, occupant,
or agent that the tree has been determined to be dead, diseased, or infected.
No chips or other particles resulting from such removal operation shall exceed
one inch (1") in any dimension. All stumps of such dead, diseased, or infected
trees shall be removed to a depth of not less than eight inches (8") below the
ground surface and then covered with soil of the same depth. No ash material or
other diseased or infected tree material shall be removed from any quarantine
zone unless such removal is done consistent with the provisions of the state or
federal quarantine. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter to the
contrary, all removal operations for dead, diseased, or infected trees shall
fully comply with all applicable state and federal statutes and/or regulations.
   E.   Notice To Abate: Should the building officer identify a dead, diseased,
or infected tree or brush pile, and determine that a public health or safety
risk exists or that a public nuisance exists, notice must be provided to the
owner, occupant or agent as follows:
      1.   Notice shall be sent by certified mail or personally served upon the
person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for
the taxable year immediately preceding the removal activities; and
      2.   Such notice shall state that there is a dead, diseased, or infected
tree or brush pile on the premises, shall describe the premises by legal
description or by street address, and shall state that unless the dead,
diseased, or infected tree or brush pile is professionally treated or removed
on or before the date stated in the notice, the dead, diseased, or infected
tree or brush pile shall be removed at the property owner's expense. The date
stated in the notice shall be not less than ten (10) days after the date of the
delivery or mailing of the notice; and
      3.   The notice shall contain a reference to the ordinance codified
herein.
   F.   Failure To Remove Or Treat Dead, Diseased, Or Infected Trees Or Brush
Piles Prohibited: It is unlawful for the owner, occupant or agent to permit any
dead, diseased, or infected trees not being treated, or portions thereof, or
piles of brush which have been declared to be a hazard or nuisance by the
building officer to remain on such premises or to fail to remove same from such
premises.
   G.   Abatement By Village; Lien For Removal Costs: In cases where the owner,
occupant, or agent of the parcel of land on which a dead, diseased, or infected
tree or brush pile is located cannot be found, or if the owner, occupant, or
agent is found and notified in accordance with procedures above and fails to
abate such nuisance, the village may abate the same by removing and destroying
said dead, diseased, or infected trees or brush pile. In such cases, the owner,
occupant, or agent shall be billed for any expenses which may be incurred by
the village in the removal or abatement of the dead, diseased, or infected tree
or piles of brush. If not paid, the expenses may be collected via legal action
along with the fines and penalties provided for below. Such expenses may also
constitute a lien upon the real estate affected in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-12 and 5/11-20-15. Such a lien shall not be imposed
unless notice is personally served upon, or sent by certified mail to, the
person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for
the taxable year immediately preceding the removal activities. The notice must
be delivered or sent after the removal activities have been performed, and
must: 1) state the substance of the statutory language permitting the lien and
the substance of this section; 2) identify the underlying parcel, by common
description; and 3) describe the removal activity.
   H.   Permit Required: No person or entity shall treat or remove any infected
tree located on village property without first obtaining a permit from the
village.
   I.   Penalties: Any person or entity violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which the
violation occurs or continues.
   J.   Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 2016-1122, 6-9-2016)
4-6-8: COMMERCIAL LAWN MAINTENANCE ACTIVITY TIME AND PLACE LIMITATIONS:
Noise emanating from lawn maintenance activities shall be limited in time and
location as hereafter provided.
   A.   Definition: For the purposes of this section, "commercial lawn
maintenance activity" shall mean any work upon any land or appurtenance
thereto, by a commercial contractor, which shall be undertaken with or without
the assistance of machinery or equipment, including, but not limited to, lawn
mowing, lawn trimming, bush and tree trimming, and underground infrastructure
installation and maintenance. Nothing in this section is intended to restrict a
village resident from performing normal lawn, tree, or bush maintenance
activities on their own residential lot.
   B.   Time: No commercial or noncommercial lawn maintenance activities shall
be permitted except:
      1.   Monday through Friday from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M.
      2.   Saturday from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
      3.   Sunday, homeowner performed maintenance only, from ten o'clock (10:
00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Commercial activity prohibited on
Sundays.
      4.   Commercial activity prohibited on the following legal holidays:
Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and New
Year's Day.
      5.   Exceptions: Bona fide emergency maintenance and repairs.
   C.   Place: The restrictions in subsections A and B of this section shall
apply only to residential zones and those properties located within one
thousand feet (1,000') of any residential unit.
   D.   Penalties: Any property owner, lessee, or any occupant of any property
in the village of South Barrington who allows such noise emanating from lawn
maintenance activities on the property owned or occupied by him or her in
violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
upon which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2016-1122, 6-9-2016)
4-6-9: TREE PRESERVATION:
4-6-9-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
This Section of the Code is structured to preserve, protect and enhance
critical infrastructure - the urban forest that is located on public land. The
complete urban forest is comprised of trees across all land uses and ownership.
This Section will regulate public property trees but recognizes that trees on
private property are part of the collective community resource.
The purpose of this Section is to recognize the services and function that
trees provide as a collective asset to the entire community and to state the
goals of the Village with respect to the protection, preservation, care and
planting of trees on public lands.
Specific goals of this section are to:
   A.   Protect, preserve and enhance the quality of life and general welfare
of the Village, its residents, and property owners; and conserve and enhance
the Village’s natural, physical and aesthetic environment.
   B.   Preserve, protect and enhance the urban forest to ensure that trees are
properly planted and maintained within the Village so that trees can protect,
enhance and preserve the quality of life for people within the Village.
   C.   Recognize that trees are an integral part of the infrastructure of the
Village and as such should be preserved, protected and cared for as other
critical Village infrastructure.
      1.   Trees absorb pollution from the air;
      2.   Trees absorb and sequester carbon dioxide;
      3.   Trees absorb and filter pollution from stormwater run-off;
      4.   Trees produce oxygen;
      5.   Trees reduce flooding;
      6.   Trees stabilize soils and reduce erosion;
      7.   Trees cool the surrounding area helping to reduce impacts due to
heat islands;
      8.   Trees reduce energy consumption by shielding structures from harsh
winds and sun;
      9.   Trees provide a buffer and screen against noise, light and
pollution;
      10.   Trees improve property values;
      11.   Trees improve commercial district buyer traffic;
      12.   Areas with trees have lower crime rates;
      13.   Areas with trees have higher levels of community interaction;
      14.   Trees provide important habitat for birds and other wildlife; and
      15.   Trees protect and enhance our quality of life.
   D.   Trees provide the Village collective benefits that extend beyond
property boundaries throughout the entire Village.
   E.   Recognize that larger trees provide larger benefits. When a large tree
is removed and replaced with a smaller tree the benefits and services are
reduced.
   F.   Recognize that some trees may have a condition that constitutes a
threat, danger or nuisance to the public or property within the Village or may
be dangerous to the health of other trees and vegetation in the Village. (Ord.
2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
                An owner of a lot, parcel or tract of land for which an application has been filed
APPLICANT:      for a permit, subdivision, or any activity requiring the issuance of a permit. A
                contractor is an agent, acting on behalf of the Applicant - the landowner.
                Any individual experienced in the profession of forestry or a related field and is
ARBORIST:       licensed or certified in forestry by an accredited forestry industry body, e.g.
                International Society of Arboriculture.
                An undesirable exotic invasive ornamental shrub introduced to North America. This
                species inhabits woodlands and savannas where it dominates the landscape prohibiting
BUCKTHORN:      the development of native trees and plants. There are six species of buckthorn
                listed in the Illinois Exotic Weed Act, which prohibits the sale, distribution or
                planting of this species, Rhamnus cathartica, davurica, frangula, argula, utilis,
                and japonica.
BUILDING        The portion of a property within which development activity, including grading,
ACTIVITY AREA:  excavation, storage of materials, construction access and construction of both main
                buildings and unattached structures.
CANOPY:         The upper portion of a tree sometimes called the crown. This section of the tree
                usually contains branches and leaves.
CRITICAL ROOT   An area on the ground extending out from the trunk of the tree in all directions a
ZONE:           distance of at least one foot for every inch DBH.
                1.   Felling or removal of a tree, or any procedure that results in the death or
CUTTING:        substantial destruction of a tree.
                2.   Cutting does not include normal pruning or trimming of trees consistent with
                good forestry practices.
                Impact or loss of function to any tree including but not limited to: removal, root
DAMAGE:         compaction, root removal, girdling, soil contamination, topping, pruning more than
                20% of the trees, canopy removal, bark removal, poisoning and or/ actions resulting
                in the decline or death of a tree.
DECIDUOUS TREE: A deciduous tree is one that loses most or all of its leaves for part of the year.
                Any proposed change in the use or character of land, including, but not limited to
                the replacement of any structure or site improvements, e.g. irrigation installation,
DEVELOPMENT:    driveway replacement, installation of a retaining wall among others. When
                appropriate to the context, development may refer to the receipt or necessity of any
                building, tree or site work permit. (See the Landscape Ordinance for more
                information.)
DIAMETER AT     The diameter of the trunk of the tree measured in inches at a point 4.5 feet above
BREAST HEIGHT   ground line. This forestry standard measurement is used for established and mature
(DBH):          trees and is referred to as “DBH”. All reference to diameter size shall be to the
                DBH.
ENVIRONMENTAL   A degreed environmental scientist, biologist, botanist, forester, other similarly
PROFESSIONAL:   degreed and/or licensed plant professional with at least five years’ experience in
                planting and maintaining native plants and their associated natural ecosystems.
EVERGREEN TREE: A tree that retains most of its leaves for most of the year.
FOREST          a detailed plan developed and approved by the Village under the direction of a
MANAGEMENT      certified arborist or forester which protects this valuable infrastructure and
PLAN:           outlines thoughtful strategies for tree planting, selection, care and preservation
                for the Village and complies with recognized national standards.
FORESTER:       An individual trained and experienced in the profession of forestry who has a
                forestry degree from an institution of advanced education.
INFRASTRUCTURE: The basic underlying framework or features that provide collective services,
                including but not limited to roads, waterlines, stormsewers, bioswales, and trees.
INVASIVE        An introduced or exotic species that significantly modifies or disrupts the
SPECIES:        ecosystem in which it colonizes (e.g. buckthorn).
LANDSCAPE       A company or individual contracted to perform landscape services.
CONTRACTOR:
LANDSCAPE PLAN: A plan approved by the Village defining the location and species of plants and
                associated hardscape including grading.
LANDSCAPE       A plan approved by the Village outlining the strategies for care and management of a
MANAGEMENT      specific type of landscape.
PLAN:
LANDSCAPING     A registered landscape architect, horticulturalist or other similarly degreed,
PROFESSIONAL:   experienced and/or licensed plant professional.
                A Legacy Tree is a tree identified on the Legacy Tree list and which has been
LEGACY TREE:    recorded as such by the Village. Legacy Trees are provided special protection as
                outlined in the Legacy Tree Program.
NATURAL AMENITY A landscape and preservation plan intended as a substitute for the replacement
EXCEPTION:      requirements of this Section.
                Nuisance trees are trees that may provide potential impacts to other trees, people
NUISANCE TREES: or structures. This would include, but not be limited to, diseased, infested,
                structurally unsound trees or known invasive species.
                An area under legal restriction within which the following requirements are
                enforced:
                   1.   All existing vegetation shall be preserved for the purpose of retaining the
                natural character or special environmental state or control;
                   2.   Any area with a special designation providing screening from adjacent uses
OPEN SPACE OR   or a public or private street;
PRESERVATION       3.   No plant material shall be removed from or planted in an Open Space or
AREA            Preservation Area without a permit from the Village authorizing removal or planting;
(EASEMENT):        4.   Open Space or Preservation Areas may be established as part of the
                subdivision process or through the issuance of a special use permit;
                   5.   No undesignated structures, shall be located in an Open Space or
                Preservation Area;
                   6.   Other restrictions as defined on the plat; and
                   7.   In all instances the approved language on the plat shall prevail.
PARCEL:         A single parcel shall mean any lot of record, zoning lot or any grouping of adjacent
                lots under single ownership, serving a principal structure or use.
PREFERRED TREE  A listing of tree species, located in the Village Code.
LIST:
PROPERTY OWNER: An individual or organization who owns property located within the corporate limits
                of the Village.
REAR YARD:      Rear yard as used in this Section, shall have the same meaning as ascribed to in the
                Zoning Code.
                Any insects at any living stage of development, any quarantined materials such as
REGULATED       wood products including, but not limited to chips, limbs, lumber, firewood,
ARTICLES:       contaminated soils, or any other product or means of conveyance which may be
                determined by Federal or State departments of agriculture to pose a risk of spread
                of any infestation or infection.
SIGNIFICANT     Removal of a Legacy Tree or grouping/stand of trees.
TREE REMOVAL:
SIMPLE TREE     Removal of a tree without other associated site impacts or other site improvements.
REMOVAL:
SITE:           That parcel of land for which a permit for landscaping or tree removal is sought.
STREET TREE:    Any tree located on or within the public right-of-way easement.
TRANSPLANTING:  The removal of any tree for replanting elsewhere.
                Any self-supporting woody plant, together with its root system, trunk and canopy;
TREE:           growing upon the earth usually with one trunk, or a multi-stemmed trunk system,
                supporting a definitely formed crown.
                A fund established to receive and hold deposits for trees which were damaged and/or
TREE FUND:      removed. These funds, if not returned to the Applicant, may be used to purchase and
                care for trees throughout the Village jurisdiction.
TREE PERMIT:    A written authorization from the Village authorizing the applicant to conduct work
                which may or may not impact a tree.
                A document required by a permit which identifies, by common name and/or scientific
                name, certain species of trees of a specified DBH within a particular area. The plan
                shall list all existing and proposed trees and shall specifically state how each
TREE            tree is proposed to be destroyed, relocated, replaced, preserved at its present
PRESERVATION    location, introduced into the site from an off-site source, and whether the tree is
PLAN:           to receive remediated actions due to construction impacts, e.g. root pruning. The
                Village may provide that the tree preservation plan excludes those portions of the
                site which it determines will not be affected by the activity. Any tree preservation
                plan required by this Section must be dated within thirty-six months of the start
                date of the proposed activity.
TREE REMOVAL:   The cutting down, destruction, removal or relocation of any tree, including damaging
                by poison or other direct or indirect action.
                A tree, which in the judgment of the Village, is capable of sustaining its own life
VIABLE:         processes, unaided by man, for a reasonable period of time. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-
                2023)
 
4-6-9-3: PRESERVATION:
   A.   The Village Administrator and/or their designee, shall have full
authority and responsibility to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees and
woody plants growing in or upon all municipal streets, rights-of ways, village
parks, and other public property. This shall include the removal of trees that
may threaten electrical, telephone, gas, or any municipal water or sewer line,
or any tree that is affected by fungus, insect, or other pest disease.
   B.   All village personnel will coordinate as necessary with the Village
Administrator and will provide services as required to ensure compliance with
this Ordinance as it relates to streets, rights-of-way, drainage, easements,
and other public properties not under direct jurisdiction of the Village
Administrator.
   C.   The Village shall consult with a certified arborist to provide
direction and oversight of urban forestry practices within the Village for the
proper care and management of the urban forest.
   D.   The Village shall set a goal and timeline for the completion of an
urban forest inventory. Once an initial urban forest inventory has been
conducted, a follow-up inventory will be planned for in a five to seven-year
timeframe.
   E.   The Village shall set a goal and timeline to develop and implement an
urban forest management plan based on an urban forest inventory. This plan
shall include clear direction for the protection, preservation and planting of
the urban forest and shall be based on the U.S. Forest Service Sustainable
Urban Forest Guide, (https://urbanforestrysouth.org/resources/library/
ttresources/the- sustainable-urban-forest-guide-a-step-by-step-approach).
   F.   The Village shall require that any Contractor, working for the Village
who may interact or have impact on the Village public property urban forest
utilize a certified arborist for all work pertaining to trees, including but
not limited to removal, pruning and planting activities.
   Contractor shall also maintain during the entire term of the Contract, the
following insurance coverages:
      1.   Commercial General Liability Insurance. Comprehensive or Commercial
general liability insurance, including, but not limited to, coverage for bodily
injury, personal injury, and property damage, and endorsements for failure to
supply and pollution, shall be maintained at the sum(s) of one million dollars
($1,000,000) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate;
      2.   Business Automobile Liability. Comprehensive automobile liability
including, but not limited to, non-owner ship and hired car coverage as well as
owned vehicles with coverage for bodily injury and property damage, shall be
maintained at the sum(s) of one million dollars ($1,000,000) per accident;
      3.   Excess/Umbrella Liability. Comprehensive excess/umbrella liability
in the amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000) per occurrence and two
million dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate;
      4.   Workers Compensation Insurance. Workers Compensation coverage with
statutory limits as may be required by the State of Illinois and Employers
Liability coverage of:
         a.   Each Accident $500,000
         b.   Disease-policy limit $500,000
         c.   Disease-each employee $500,000
   G.   Legacy Trees are provided special protection by the Village. These
trees are 18" DBH or larger and located on public property.
   H.   All tree planting, selection and management shall be in compliance with
the Village Urban Forest Management Plan.
   I.   It is recognized that diverse species structure of urban trees
throughout the Village is critical to the health of the forest structure and
protects the Village from catastrophic loss. All tree planting shall comply
with diversity requirements of not more than 5% of any one species, 10% of any
one genus or 15% of any one family and shall be conducted in accordance with
the most recent edition of American National Standards Institute.
      (https://www.tcia.org/TCIA/TCIA/Build_Your_Business/A300_Standards/A300_
Standards.aspx)
   J.   It is recognized that diverse age structure of trees throughout the
Village is critical to the health of the forest structure and protects the
Village from catastrophic loss. Proper care and management of the urban forest
is critical for increased longevity of urban trees and shall be in compliance
with the most recent edition of American National Standards Institute. (ANSI
A300).
      (https://www.tcia.org/TCIA/TCIA/Build_Your_Business/A300_Standards/A300_
Standards.aspx)
   K.   No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the Village
Administrator or their agents while engaged in carrying out the execution or
enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-4: PLANTING:
   A.   The Village shall plant and maintain a healthy diverse urban forest to
improve the natural resources and quality of life for the residents living
within the Village.
   B.   The Village shall plant diverse species with the ratio of not more than
15% of any one family, 10% of any one genus or 5% of any one species. Diverse
species composition protects the Village from catastrophic loss.
   C.   All trees planted by the Village or their agent shall be planted
consistent with the most current edition of American National Standards
Institute (ANSI A300).
      (https://www.tcia.org/TCIA/TCIA/Build_Your_Business/A300_Standards/A300_
Standards.aspx)
   D.   Trees purchased by the Village shall be of a quality consistent with
the most current American Standards for Nursery Stock as approved by the most
current American National Standards Institute (ANSI Z60.1).
      (https://www.tcia.org/TCIA/TCIA/Build_Your_Business/A300_Standards/A300_
Standards.aspx)
   E.   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or shrub in the public right-of-
way, or on other publicly owned property or Conservation or Preservation Area,
without prior written approval from the Village and, in the instance of the
Conservation or Preservation Area, the language on the recorded plat shall
prevail.
   F.   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree under utility wires that is
anticipated to grow to a height that will interfere with the wires.
   G.   The Village shall consider implementation of a contract growing
program. This contract will allow for stable pricing and broader species
diversity to improve the overall diversity of the urban forest. This contract
may be for a period of five (5) -ten (10) years.
   H.   The Village should provide education and outreach to private landowners
on the need for species and age diversity, proper selection and planting
practices, and how to select species for particular sites. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-
10-2023)
4-6-9-5: TREE CARE:
An urban forestry management plan is a critical document for the care and
preservation of one of the community’s most valuable assets. This plan will
define the needs and provide recommendations for the care and planting of trees
throughout the community, including outreach to private property owners to help
them care for their trees. This plan will also outline the budgetary and
staffing needs for management and planting of trees on public property. It is
recommended that the Sustainable Urban Forest Guide, produced by the U.S.
Forest Service, serve as a guide for development of the Village urban forestry
management plan. (See U.S. Forest Service Sustainable Urban Forest Guide)
(ttps://urbanforestrysouth.org/resources/library/ttresources/the-sustainable-
urban-f orest-guide-a-step-by- step-approach)
   A.   The Village shall develop an urban forest management plan that supports
this Section. This urban forest management plan shall cover, at a minimum, a
five year (preferably ten year) period, including budget projections. This plan
shall be reviewed annually by the Village staff and members of the Tree Board
and shall be updated as needed to support the needs of the Village.
   B.   Until an urban forestry management plan is in place, the Village shall
provide a standard of care, in compliance with International Society of
Arboriculture practices, where possible, for all publically owned trees to
enable these trees to live to maturity and provide maximum benefits. This would
include but not be limited to:
      1.   At a minimum, have an established watering program for newly planted
trees. (Newly planted trees are any trees planted within five years of
inadequate rainfall.)
      2.   Have an established pruning program that places all publically owned
trees on a 5 year pruning cycle. Pruning is to be accomplished under the
direction of a certified arborist and in compliance with American National
Standards Institute. Care should be taken to follow best management practices
including but not limited to good sanitation practices to reduce the spread of
infectious conditions and restriction of pruning based on species needs, e.g.
oaks should only be pruned when dormant.
      3.   It is recommended that during the pruning cycle, trees to be pruned
be identified by species, size and location and be rated for health and hazard
potential. A record of this report should be used as a guide for Village staff
to address problems and provide care as needed. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-6: TREE PROTECTION:
This Section applies to any work being conducted which may impact public
property trees.
   A.   Unless otherwise authorized by this Section, it shall be unlawful for
any person to remove, injure or undertake any procedure which will cause death,
substantial damage, or create a hazard, to any public property tree without
first obtaining a Tree Permit from the Village. In the case of tree management
practices, these practices shall comply with the most recent edition of the
American National Standards Institute.
   B.   In the event of any site improvement which may impact public property
trees, a Tree Preservation Plan is required, must be approved, and implemented
prior to the start of any work or delivery of any materials to the Building
Activity Area. The approved Tree Preservation Plan shall be available on the
site throughout the entire construction period until final approvals for all
site work has been received in writing.
   C.   In instances where construction or site work that requires heavy
equipment and that may impact trees on public or private property, all
appropriate tree protection measures must be taken and identified in the Tree
Preservation Plan.
      1.   Protective fencing is required for protection of any tree to be
preserved in place. Fencing shall be installed at a minimum distance of one-
foot, for every inch DBH of the tree, from the trunk of the tree. In the
instances of tree pits, fencing shall be located at the edge of pavement.
      2.   All protective fencing shall be in place before any construction or
material delivery is to take place. All protective fencing shall remain in
place until final approval of all site conditions is given in writing.
      3.   No equipment or materials shall be parked, driven or stored within
the protective fencing area or on the root zone of any tree.
      4.   For projects requiring the use of heavy equipment, such as anything
on which a person would ride with the exception of a riding mower, protective
tree fencing shall be required. This fencing shall be orange snow type fencing,
a minimum of 4 feet in height and held in place by metal posts driven into the
ground no more than 10 feet apart. In the instance of a project that will take
place for more than one year, chain link fencing will be required. Chain link
fencing shall be six feet in height and held in place by metal posts driven
into the ground no more than 10 feet apart. Fencing shall not be removed or
relocated unless authorized in writing by the Village.
      5.   No tree shall be impacted within the protective fencing area,
including the tree canopy.
      6.   All measures shall be taken to maintain the health of trees which
are transported to the replacement site and shall meet or exceed the
requirements of the most current American National Standards Institute. (Ord.
2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-7: LEGACY TREE PRESERVATION:
   A.   A Legacy Tree is a tree provided special designation by the Village.
The Village shall develop a Legacy Tree Program that supports this Section.
   B.   Removal of a Legacy Tree requires a Tree Removal Permit and may require
a special hearing with the Tree Board and Village Board.
   C.   Construction, development and/or any grading adjacent to a Legacy Tree
requires a Tree Preservation Plan. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-8: TREE REMOVAL:
Tree removals are considered an impact to the entire Village, whether on public
or private land. It is clearly documented that larger trees provide larger
benefits and as such, the tree removal fee of $100 will be assessed with an
approved Village permit and violation fines will be assessed based on the list
of preferred species and tree size determined by diameter (maximum fine by
Village Code is $750 per incident and will be applied on trees removed over 6"
DBH). It is recognized that the planting of smaller trees to replace the value
of larger trees that are lost will take tens of years and for this reason
efforts should be made to preserve and protect trees where they are growing.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any individual to remove or cause damage to
any tree located on public property without first receiving a Tree Permit from
the Village.
   B.   No live, dead or dying tree, or grouping of trees, equal to 6" DBH or
greater on public property may be removed without first obtaining a permit from
the Village.
   C.   A nuisance tree is a tree that has already died, is in a state of
irrevocable decline, has the capacity to damage a person or thing or is an
invasive species. In the event of an emergency, and access to the Village is
not possible, a nuisance tree may be removed without a permit, however, the
individual removing the tree shall take photographs and memorialize the
nuisance situation prior to removal and shall follow up with a request for a
tree permit from the Village on the next business day.
   D.   Any tree removed from a parcel or transplanted offsite must be replaced
according to the regulations outlined in this Section.
   E.   All stump removals shall require underground utility locations prior to
any action.
   F.   If a tree is removed or damaged which is not on the Tree Permit it must
be replaced or bonded as set forth in this Section.
   G.   Removal of invasive woody plants such as buckthorn do not require a
permit and in fact, are encouraged. These invasive plants can quickly colonize
an area reducing the health and vitality of non-invasive plants. (A list of
invasive woody plants is provided in the Appendix.) (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-9: TREE REPLACEMENT:
   A.   It is required that tree replacement species come from the Preferred
Species List. (See list attached to this Section.)
   B.   Any tree which is required to be removed or which has been damaged
shall require a bond to be posted until adequate replacements or remediation
can be made. The bond amount is identified in the Fee Section of the Code.
Determination of extent of damage is at the sole discretion of the Village.
   C.   Any tree species removed, 6" DBH or 6" group of trees, which is not
identified on the invasive species list, but is identified on the Preferred
Species List, is required for replacement by this Section. Any Preferred Tree
Species removed shall be replaced with two (2) trees identified on the
Preferred Species List. All replacements shall be located appropriately as
confirmed by a certified arborist and as approved by the Village.
   D.   When a tree removal is required as a result of any project, tree
replacement shall occur within the landscape season. In the event of weather
conditions or species specific needs, which prohibit proper replacement of a
tree, the Village may issue written notice of an extension of up to 180 days
upon written request by the Applicant. If an extension is awarded to the
Applicant, the Applicant shall notify the Village when replacement is complete.
If, after the 30 day or awarded 180-day extension, the tree is not replaced or
the Applicant has not notified the Village that installation is complete, all
bonds shall be forfeited and the bond money shall be placed in the Tree Fund.
Tree removal requirements, associated with a development project, can be found
in the Development Section of the Code.
   E.   All tree replacement plantings shall require an underground utility
location prior to planting.
   F.   If the property where a removal has taken place does not have adequate
space to plant a replacement tree, then the Applicant shall be required to pay
the Village a dollar amount equal to the average cost of a tree on the
preferred species list. Funds shall be placed in the Tree Fund for tree
replacement or tree care in another area of the Village.
   G.   Is shall be encouraged that any species identified on the invasive
species list be removed. There is no replacement requirement for these
removals.
   H.   Preferred Species List:
Blackgum
 Nyssa sylvatica                
Elm
 Ulmus x accolade              Accolade elm
 Ulmus x frontier              Frontier elm
 Ulmus x morton varieties      Morton, morton stalwart, triumph
Ginkgo (male, nonfruiting)
 Ginkgo biloba varieties       Magyar, princeton sentry, autumn gold
Hackberry
 Celtis occidentalis           Common hackberry
Honeylocust (thornless)
 Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Shademaster, skyline
  varieties
Japanese Tree Lilac
 Syringa reticulate             
Kentucky coffeetree
 Gymnocladus dioicus            
Linden
 Tilia americana varieties     Redmond, wandell
 Tilia cordata varieties       Greenspire, baileyei, glenleven
Maples
 Acer miyabi “Morton”      State Street maple
 Acer platanoides varieties    Deborah, crimson king, emerald lustre,
                                emerald queen, superform
 Acer rubrum varieties         Autumn flame, bowhall, October glory,
                                brandywine, red sunset, northwood
 Acer saccharum varieties      Crescendo, green mountain
 Acer x freeman varieties      Autumn blaze maple, autumn fantasy
                                maple, manno maple, sienna glen
Oak
 Quercus bicolor               Swamp white oak
 Quercus macrocarpa            Burr oak
 Quercus rubra                 Red oak
 Quercus muehlenbergii         Chinkapin oak
Shagbark Hickory
 Carya ovata                    
Note: Other species of trees will be considered, but must be approved
by the Village.
 
(Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-10: SPECIAL RULES FOR OPEN SPACE OR PRESERVATION AREAS:
If an Open Space or Preservation Area is impacted in any way, the following
restitution shall be required:
   A.   A cash bond (in addition to the Tree Permit Bond) is required for every
one thousand square feet of Open Space or Preservation Area as defined.
   B.   The purpose of this deposit is to pay for restoration of the Open Space
or Preservation Area damaged directly or indirectly as a result of the impact.
   C.   Any maintenance made necessary as a result of impact, including but not
limited to the removal of dead trees or preventative measures such as root
pruning or crown reduction of existing trees.
   D.   Any expenses incurred by the Village, as a result of the impact in
administering or enforcing the provisions of this Code.
   E.   The Cash Bond will be refunded one year after the repairs have been
made and all maintenance is completed and approved. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-11: TREE PRESERVATION AND/OR REMOVAL PLAN FOR SIGNIFICANT REMOVALS,
CONSTRUCTION AND/OR DEVELOPMENT:
An applicant seeking a permit for significant tree removals or tree removal
and/or planting related to construction and/or development shall comply with
all requirements of this Section. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-12: NUISANCE TREES:
A tree which is determined to be a nuisance tree is one which is dead or
declining and has the potential to damage other trees, people or structures.
These trees may be located on public or private property.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the property owner on any parcel to promptly
remove any trees which pose a risk.
   B.   Should the Village notify the property owner, in writing, of a tree
which is a potential risk, the property owner shall have thirty days to remove
the tree. If after thirty days the property owner has not removed the tree then
the Village shall take action to have the tree removed and shall provide to the
property owner a written invoice outlining all costs associated with the
removal, including but not limited to staff time, materials and oversight of
said removal. Should the property owner not reimburse the Village within thirty
days of issuance of a written invoice, the Village shall place a lien on the
property until all expenses related to the removal and subsequent hen are paid.
   C.   Infected, Infested Trees Due to a Pest or Pathogen Are Defined as a
Nuisance:
      1.   Any tree which is in a state of irreparable or untreatable decline
due to heavy infestation or disease is included in the definition of a
nuisance. Infested or infected trees, which are identified by Federal or State
Departments of Agriculture to be in quarantine or can potentially infect or
infest other trees are defined as a nuisance. This would include but not be
limited to Ash (Fraxinus) trees infested with emerald ash borer which are not
being treated or whose treatment is ineffectual, or Elm trees (Ulmus) infected
with Dutch elm disease.
         a.   The Village shall enforce State and Federal regulations governing
quarantine zone boundaries, and regulated articles.
         b.   For the purposes of this Section, “Regulated Articles” are hereby
defined as any insects at any living state of development, any quarantines
materials such as wood products including, but not limited to chips, limbs,
lumber, firewood or any other product or means of conveyance which may be
determined by Federal or State departments of agriculture to pose a risk of
spread of any infestation or infection.
         c.   It shall be illegal to move out of established quarantine zone(s)
regulated articles unless those articles have met all requirements of the
local, Federal and State regulatory agencies.
         d.   It shall be illegal for any person or entity to transfer from a
quarantine zone into a non-quarantine zone including the Village any regulated
articles.
         e.   Any person or entity found to be in violation of any local, State
or Federal regulations related to tree infestations or infections shall be
prosecuted to the full extent of the law.
         f.   All contractors working within and near any quarantine zone(s)
are required to comply with the quarantine regulations and supply records that
may be required for inspection to the Village, County, State or Federal
agencies upon request.
      2.   Trees in Decline or Dead Are Defined as a Nuisance:
         a.   Any tree or part of a tree which is dead which could potentially
fall on a person or structure is defined as a nuisance.
         b.   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot or land in the
Village to permit or maintain on any such lot or land, any tree which is dead,
or declining to the state where it may create a potential risk for structures
or people. It shall be the duty of any such owner to promptly cause the removal
of any such tree. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-13: INVASIVE SPECIES CONTROL:
   A.   Invasive Woody Plants: Invasive plants cause ecological disruption to
natural ecosystems. The type of impact varies based on the species and the
traits of that species. The Woody Invasive Species List, attached to this
Section identifies species which shall not be planted and which should be
removed and controlled to reduce impacts to other vegetation.
      1.   Typical impacts include:
         a.   Chemical disturbance to the soil limiting development of other
species;
         b.   Dense plant growth limiting light to soil surface resulting in
exposed soil allowing erosion;
      2.   Displacement of naturally occurring species resulting in a
monoculture of invasive species and aggressive tendencies.
      3.   Private Property Owner Outreach: The Village shall develop and
implement an outreach plan to educate property owners of the potential impacts
and remediation strategies, including a suggested planting list of alternative
species to assist property owners in dealing with the problem.
   B.   Invasive Diseases And Insects:
      1.   Impacts to Trees: Invasive diseases and insects can create
significant stress to trees and in some instances kill trees. Attached to this
section, the Village has developed a list of Invasive Diseases and Insects that
pose significant threats to trees from information identified by State and
Federal Departments of Agriculture.
      2.   Invasive Species Management Plan: The Village shall develop an
action strategy to deal with any of these diseases or insects and take action
to remove the pest, forestall impacts to the trees through treatments or other
means or develop a removal and replacement strategy for remediation of the
problem.
      3.   Private Property Owner Outreach: The Village shall develop and
implement an outreach plan to educate property owners of the potential impacts
and remediation strategies to help property tree owners in dealing with pests
or pathogens. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-14: TREE BOARD:
   A.   Establishment: The Village hereby establishes a Tree Board which shall
be a recommending body to provide assistance, direction and expertise to the
Village regarding the preservation, planting, management and protection of
trees. The Tree Board shall develop and recommend implementation of an urban
forest management plan for guidance on urban forestry issues.
   B.   Membership:
      1.   The Tree Board shall consist of seven members and one alternate
member who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Village
Board. It is recommended that individuals within the community who have
expertise in horticulture, forestry, planning or related fields be sought as
members of the Tree Board. At least one member of the Tree Board shall be a
certified arborist. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to act as
chairman of the Tree Board, subject to the approval of the Village Board. A
member of the Village Board shall be assigned to be an ex officio member of
said Tree Board without the power to vote. The one alternate member shall
attend and participate in all meetings of the Tree Board, but shall only vote
in the event one or more of the full members is absent. All members of the Tree
Board shall be property owners of the Village, unless no certified arborist is
a property owner within the Village.
      2.   The appointed members shall serve for a period of three years. An
alternate member shall be appointed for a term of one year. If a vacancy shall
occur in the full membership, the alternate member shall be appointed to fill
such vacancy. Vacancies in full and alternate membership shall be filled in the
same manner as original appointments. The Tree Board members shall serve
without compensation.
   C.   Procedures:
      1.   The Tree Board shall meet and adopt, change or alter, rules and
regulations of organization and procedure consistent with Village ordinances
and Illinois State laws. The Tree Board shall keep written records of its
proceedings which shall be open at all times to public inspection. The Tree
Board shall file an annual report to the Village Board setting forth its past-
year activities and recommendations for future action by the Village.
   D.   Powers and Duties: The Tree Board shall have the following powers and
duties subject to the approval of the Village Board:
      1.   To provide guidance on the preservation, care, management and
protection of trees within the Village in accordance with Urban Forestry
Management Plan, regional and local best management practices.
      2.   To prepare and recommend to the Village Board from time to time
recommendations for specific improvements of the preservation, care, management
and protection of trees within the Village.
      3.   To recommend rules and regulations to the Village Board for budget,
plans, projects and schedules regarding the preservation, care, management and
protection of trees within the Village.
      4.   To review the Village Urban Forest Management Plan and provide
recommendations for improvements to the Village Board.
      5.   To work collaboratively with Village staff to support the Village
ordinances and the Urban Forest Management Plan.
      6.   Manage and administer all plans, programs, projects and tasks
delegated to it by the Village Board as authorized and directed by the Village
Board.
      7.   The Tree Board shall hear any requests for appeal to this Code and
make recommendations to be forwarded to the Village Board for a final decision.
(Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-15: TREE PERMIT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Applicant Submission: An applicant for a simple tree removal or
planting on public property shall fill out a Tree Removal or Tree Planting
Request, and the Village arborist shall make an inspection and render a
determination.
      If a removal or planting is significant or in conjunction with any type
of development, then a full tree preservation plan and inventory for the area
to be impacted may be required. The Village shall review the application. This
review shall include an inspection of the site and referral of the application
for recommendation to other appropriate administrative departments or agencies.
The Village shall render a decision on the application within ten working days
of its receipt of a properly completed application. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-16: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
   A.   Issuance: The Village shall issue a permit upon approval of an
application and payment of a required fee and bond.
   B.   Time Limitation:
      1.   A permit shall expire and become null and void if work authorized is
not commenced within one year from the date of the permit or if such work when
commenced is suspended or abandoned at any time for a period of one year.
      2.   If work has commenced and the permit becomes null and void or
expires because of a lack of progress or abandonment, a new permit for the
proposed tree removal, planting activity shall be obtained before proceeding
with further work. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-17: CASH BONDS:
   A.   If tree replacement is required by this Section, then as a condition of
the Tree Permit, the Applicant shall submit a cash bond in the amount of $500.
The bond shall be held for the purpose of assuring that the replacement tree(s)
are purchased and planted.
   B.   If it is determined that practices which violate any portion of the
Village Code have resulted in tree damage, then the Village may require that a
cash bond of $500 be submitted at the time the violation occurs. The bond shall
be held for the purpose of assuring that all remedial actions to minimize tree
damage are taken, and/or for the purpose of assuring tree replacement should
any damaged tree die or show noticeable signs of decline as determined by a
certified arborist. If it is determined that residual damage may not be
apparent, then the bond may be held for a period of 60 months or five years. At
the end of which time, if the tree survives and is in good health, as
determined by a certified arborist the bond shall be returned. If the tree does
not survive, and was not further impacted by an act of God, or is in poor
health then replacement shall be required as identified above.
   C.   If the bond is posted for a tree and the property owner wishes to
transfer the property, then the bond shall be required to be paid before
transfer of the property or shall be refunded to the original property owner
once the bond requirements have been met. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-18: FINAL INSPECTION:
Final approval shall be issued when all relocation, replacement or remediation
of trees is completed and a final inspection has been conducted by the Village.
Should the Village determine that the season is inappropriate for planting then
relocation or replacement shall be deferred until the next planting season. All
bonds and fees will remain in the custody of the Village until final inspection
and approval has been provided in writing. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-19: COMPLIANCE:
The Village shall retain jurisdiction to ensure compliance with this Section
and shall have the right to issue a stop work order for non-compliance. No stop
work order issued pursuant to this Section shall be removed by the Village
unless the applicant has paid a reinspection fee of $100. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-
10-2023)
4-6-9-20: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Section shall be
assessed a fine not to exceed $750 per incident per Village Code. Each tree cut
down, destroyed, damaged, removed or moved shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition to these penalties, if a tree is removed in violation of this
Section, all replacement requirements of this Section shall be applied. (Ord.
2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-21: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement Right of Entry of Village Officers: To carry out the
purposes of this Section and to implement its enforcement, the Village is
authorized and empowered, upon 24 hours’ notice, to enter upon any lot or
parcel of land in the Village at all reasonable hours to inspect any tree or
wood and to remove specimens from any such tree to determine their condition.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a Village Officer
carrying out the duties authorized in this Section.
   B.   Duty of Property Owner to Abate Nuisance or Potential Risk: If it is
determined that there exists a public nuisance or risk as declared in this
Section, the Village shall serve or cause to be served upon the owner of the
lot or parcel of land on which such nuisance or risk is located, a written
notice identifying the nuisance or risk and requiring the owner to comply with
the provisions of this Section. If the person upon whom such notice is served
fails, neglects or refuses to remove and dispose of the tree or dead wood
within thirty days after service of such notice, the Village may proceed to
remove and dispose of such tree or dead wood and the costs shall be paid by the
owner to the Village.
   C.   Service of Notice to Property Owner: Service of notice provided for in
this Section shall be effected by personal service or by certified mail
addressed to the occupant or to the person to whom, and at the address, to
which the tax bill was sent for the general taxes for the last preceding year
on the lot or parcel on which the nuisance is located.
   D.   Village Abatement and Assessment of Costs: Any costs incurred by the
Village in the abatement of a public nuisance or hazard as declared in this
Section shall be assessed against the record owner of the land involved and the
Village shall place a lien upon such property for those costs in the manner
provided by law. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-22: EXCEPTIONS:
If because of emergency weather or other casualty conditions a tree is
endangering health, safety or property and requires immediate removal, verbal
authorization may be given by the Village for the tree removal without
obtaining a written permit. Such verbal authorization shall later be confirmed
in writing by the Village. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-23: APPEALS FOR VARIANCE:
   A.   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Village in the enforcement
of any terms or provisions of this Section may, within ten working days after
the date of the decision, appeal to the Tree Board by filing a written notice
of appeal with the Village Clerk. The notice of appeal shall set forth
concisely the decision and the reasons or grounds for the appeal. The Tree
Board may make a recommendation to the Village Board to affirm, modify, or
reverse the decision. The decision of the Village Board shall be final and no
petition for rehearing or reconsideration shall be available. Reasonable notice
of the hearing by the Tree Board shall be provided by the Village Clerk to all
affected parties.
   B.   No variances in the strict application of the provisions of this
Section shall be recommended for approval by the Board unless it finds:
      1.   That there are special circumstances or conditions, fully described
in the written notice of appeal which are peculiar to the property (properties)
and do not apply generally to properties within the Village, and that said
circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the Code
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the subject property
(properties).
      2.   That for reasons fully set forth in the written notice of appeal,
the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the
property (properties) and that the variance, as recommended for approval by the
Board, is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose.
      3.   That the result of granting of the variance will be in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of standards set forth within this Code and in
harmony with this Section, and will not be injurious to adjacent property or
otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-24: CIVIL REMEDIES:
In addition to any other remedies provided by this Section the Village shall
have the following judicial remedies available for violations of this Section
or any permit condition promulgated under this Section.
   A.   The Village may institute a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to establish liability and to recover damages for any injury
caused by the removal or damage of trees in contravention of the terms of this
Section.
   B.   Village may institute a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to seek injunctive relief to enforce compliance with this Section
to enjoin any violation, and to seek injunctive relief to prevent irreparable
injury to the trees or properties encompassed by the terms of this Section.
(Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
4-6-9-25: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If the provisions of any paragraph, section or article are declared
unconstitutional or invalid by the final decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, the provisions of the remaining paragraph, sections or articles
shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 2023-1365, 5-10-2023)
Appendix A
Appendix “A” - Woody Invasive Species List
Appendix “A” - Woody Invasive Species List
Japanese honeysuckle, Lonicera japonica
Exotic bush honeysuckle, Lonicera spp.
Common buckthorn, Rhamnus cathartica
Glossy buckthorn, Rhamnus frangula
Russian olive, Elaeagnus angustifolia
Tree-of-Heaven, Ailanthus altissima
White mulberry, Moms alba
 
Appendix B
   Appendix “B” - Tree Permit Form (Refer to Village Website)
 
CHAPTER 7
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Adoption Of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act And Code
4-7-2: Amendments To Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code
4-7-3: Minimum Performance Standards For Private Sewage Disposal Contractors
4-7-4: Septic Field Filling Procedures
4-7-5: Protection Of Septic Field Areas During The Course Of Building
Construction
4-7-6: Permits Required
4-7-7: Deviations From Septic Design Drawing
4-7-8: Maintenance Of Private Systems
4-7-9: Repairs And Alterations To Existing Septic Fields
4-7-10: Enforcement
4-7-1: ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL LICENSING ACT AND CODE:
The state of Illinois private sewage disposal licensing act (the "act") and the
private sewage disposal code (the "private sewage code"), as promulgated by the
state of Illinois department of public health in August 2013, and as it may
hereafter be amended from time to time are hereby adopted by the village and
incorporated herein by reference. To the extent the provisions of this chapter
are inconsistent with the provisions of the act or private sewage code, the
more restrictive requirements shall govern. (Ord. 0-2015-1044, 2-12-2015)
4-7-2: AMENDMENTS TO ILLINOIS PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL CODE:
The State of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code, set forth in Part 905 (of
Subchapter, of Chapter I of Title 77) of the Illinois Administrative Code,
sometimes referred to herein as the “code”, is hereby amended and supplemented
by the following provisions which correspond to the articles and rules as
numbered in said code:
Section 905.10
Definitions
In addition to the definitions contained in the private sewage licensing act
and the private sewage code, the following definitions shall also apply:
Enforcement Officer: Those officers, consultants or employees of the village
duly authorized to enforce this ordinance and shall be synonymous with the term
"building officer".
Permit: A written permit issued by the enforcement officer, permitting the
construction or repair of an individual on- site sewage disposal system under
this ordinance.
Section 905.15
Incorporated Materials
   a)   See code.
   b)   See code.
   c)   See code.
   d)   See code.
Section 905.20
General Requirements
   a)   Rate Of Flow For Domestic Sewage. See code.
   b)   Types Of Waste. See code.
   c)   Individual Service. See code.
   d)   Water And Sewer Line Separation. See code.
   e)   Sanitary Sewer. See code. See also village code title 4, chapter 8A,
section
4-8A-2-210.
   f)   Acceptable Pipe Materials. All piping located more than five (5) feet
from the building foundation, used to convey wastewater to a private disposal
system, shall be considered a part of the private sewage disposal system and
shall be water tight. All piping located from the building foundation to a
point six (6) feet beyond the septic tanks shall be schedule 40 PVC and shall
be defined as the building sewer.
Refer to appendix A, illustration C of the code for approved plastic pipe for
septic uses other than those noted above.
   g)   Pipe Size And Slope. All four (4") inch pipe shall have a minimum of
one-quarter (1/4") inch per foot slope, and six (6") inch pipe shall have a
minimum of one-eighth (1/8") inch per foot slope. All solid pipes carrying
gravity flow shall have an inside diameter of at least four (4") inches.
   h)   Prohibited Discharges: There shall be no surface discharges of any kind
from a private sewage disposal system.
   i)   Pipe Length. See code.
   j)   Private Sewage Disposal System Development. The following factors shall
govern the location and design of a private sewage disposal system:
      1)   Drainage. A private sewage system shall not be located in areas
where surface water will accumulate. Provisions shall be made to minimize the
flow of ground and surface water over the system. The seepage field area shall
be graded to insure that surface water runs off as quickly as possible without
ponding.
Roof Water, Sump Pump, And Water Softener Discharges Prohibited. All roofs of
all types of structures, sump pump discharge, and water softener discharge,
where the flow of water would cross a septic field area, shall have gutters,
downspouts and discharge lines connected to a pipe of a minimum size of four
(4) inches in diameter running directly to a drainage ditch or drainage sewer
in the roadway in order to prevent such water from flowing across the septic
field.
Sprinkler Systems Prohibited. Below ground sprinkler systems shall not be
installed within twenty-five (25) feet of any designated septic treatment area
or within the village right-of-way.
      2)   Distances. The location of the various components of the septic
system shall comply with the following chart: (appendix A, illustration D, of
the code shall be superseded by the following chart):
   MINIMUM DISTANCES ALLOWABLE
 
            Well,        Lake, Stream
Part Of     Suction Line Or Pond      Pool (Water           Property Easement
System      From Pump To Normal Water Line)       Building  Line     Line
            Well         Elevation *
                         + **
Septic tank 50 ft.       50 ft.       25 ft.      10 ft.    10 ft.   10 ft.
(s)
Drop boxes  75 ft.       50 ft.       25 ft.      20 ft.    10 ft.   10 ft.
Seepage     75 ft.       50 ft.       25 ft.      20 ft.    10 ft.   10 ft.
trench
Building    50 ft.       50 ft.       25 ft.      -         10 ft.   10 ft.
sewer
                                      Maintain    Maintain
Well        -            10 ft.       access to   access to 65 ft.   -
                                      well        well***
 
* Distances shown may be superseded by more restrictive requirements stated in
the covenants and restrictions of individual subdivisions within the village.
** Distance to high water line or one hundred (100) year base flood elevation
to be a minimum of twenty-five (25') feet.
*** Minimum ten (10') feet from footing drains and two (2') feet from roof
overhang.
      3)   Area Reserved For Sewage Disposal. See code.
      4)   Creviced Limestone Formations. See code.
      5)   Curtain Drains. A curtain drain is a drainage system designed and
constructed to intercept and accept surface and/or ground water which, were it
not for such a system, would travel onto or into the subsurface seepage system.
Curtain drains shall be located at least fifteen (15') feet from seepage lines.
The curtain drain trench shall be installed at a minimum depth of thirty (30")
inches, be at least twelve (12") inches wide, be provided with at least a four
(4") inch diameter perforated pipe installed at the bottom of the trench, be
backfilled with stone to within six (6") inches of the final grade surface, and
have a positive flow to an approved discharge point.
   k)   Electrical Devices. See code.
   l)   Variances. The person seeking a variance must give a written request to
the enforcement officer stating the code section from which the variance is
being requested as well as the reason for the request. The enforcement officer
will review the request and then give a written recommendation to the village
president. The village president, after consultation with the engineering
consultant of the village’s choice and with the concurrence of the village
board of trustees, will then make a determination for approval or denial of the
request.
   m)   Experimental Use Permits. See code.
Note: Experimental systems will only be considered when a code compliant system
cannot meet code requirements due to soil conditions. Architectural plans need
to be developed to provide adequate area for a code compliant system if the
soils are found to be suitable for such systems.
   n)   Experimental Use Evaluations. See code.
   o)   Garbage Grinders. See code.
   p)   Whenever an existing private sewage disposal system is repaired or
replaced, that portion of the system being repaired or replaced shall comply
with all of the requirements set forth in this chapter.
   q)   Maintenance Of Private Sewage Disposal Systems. See code.
   r)   Installation Contractor On Site. See code.
   s)   Construction And Excavation. See code.
   t)   Alternative Technology. See code. Note: The village reserves the right
to deny use of such technology.
Section 905.30
Approved Private Sewage Disposal Systems
   a)   General
The following systems are approved for individual on-site sewage disposal when
designed, constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the village
of South Barrington septic system ordinances:
      1)   Septic Tanks & Field: Two tanks discharging into:
         a.   Subsurface seepage field with gravel-filled trenches
         b.   Chamber system
         c.   At-grade mound with class 1 aerator
         d.   Wisconsin mound with class 1 aerator
         e.   Illinois raised filter bed preceded by a batch treatment aeration
system
Note: No reduction in size of treatment area allowed when using an aerator.
      2)   State approved alternative type systems or technology will be
considered only for Planned Unit Developments, when the systems identified in
subparagraph a)1) above have failed and for lots that do not have suitable
soils for a conventional system. Soil investigation borings shall be done in
all areas that could potentially support a septic treatment system. This
investigation and subsequent design may limit the bedroom count and future
consideration of any construction activity such as, but not limited to, pools,
patios, and driveways. Such alternative type systems or technology will require
specific approval by the Village Board of Trustees and must be based upon
extraordinary circumstances or extraordinary site conditions and the
recommendation of the Village Engineer certifying that such conditions exist
and that no other alternative system or technology is suitable. Any alternative
type system or technology approved by the Village Board of Trustees must also
be compliant with all design, installation and submittal requirements set forth
by the State of Illinois and the Village Engineer. The specific approval shall
be evidenced by an affirmative vote of a majority of the Village Board of
Trustees. The Village Board of Trustees will not provide the required specific
approval for a self-inflicted difficulty or inconvenience such as a home
designed with an amenity or amenities (e.g., an enlarged pool) that requires
State approved alternative type systems or technology in lieu of the
conventional system.
   b)   See code.
The village enforcement officer shall review and approve all septic system
designs pursuant to this code. Every effort shall be made to approve and
install the best possible system which complies with this code and is
compatible with the site conditions.
Based on soil suitability tests, the proposed treatment system must meet the
hierarchy of systems listed in section 905.30 a-1 above, with either a or b
being the required first option and e being the last option if soils are
unsuitable for the other type of systems.
   c)   See code.
Section 905.40
Septic Tanks
   a)   Septic Tank Approval. See code.
   b)   Septic Tank Construction. See code.
   c)   Septic Tank Capacity.
      1)   Septic tanks for individual residences shall be sized according to
the following chart (appendix A, illustration F of the code, shall be
superseded by the following chart):
SEPTIC TANK CAPACITY
 
Number Of Bedrooms Minimum Liquid Capacity Of Tank Gallons
2                  2,000 gal.
3                  2,000 gal.
4                  2,000 gal.
5                  2,500 gal.
6                  3,000 gal.
7                  3,500 gal.
 
Five hundred (500) gallons shall be added for each bedroom in excess of seven
(7) bedrooms.
Septic tanks for any establishment other than residential units shall be sized
in accordance with the estimated flow provided in appendix A, illustration A of
the code and according to section 2 below but in all cases shall have a minimal
nominal liquid capacity of one thousand (1,000) gallons.
      2)   See code.
   d)   Multiple Tanks Or Compartments. See code.
   e)   Septic Tank Installation. See code.
   f)   Abandoned Septic Tanks. See code.
Section 905.50
Distribution Boxes
   a)   General. See code.
   b)   Connecting Pipe. See code.
   c)   Construction. See code.
   d)   Access. See code.
   e)   There shall be no connection such as joints, splices or fittings within
the area of the overdig around the distribution box.
Section 905.55
Subsurface Seepage System Design Requirements
After January 1, 2014, when designing a subsurface seepage system, the
absorption capacity of the soil shall be determined by subsection (a) after
January 1, 2014; subsection (b) shall not be used to determine design
requirements for a subsurface system.
   a)   Soil Investigation
   a)   1) A) See code.
   a)   1) B) There shall be a minimum of four (4) borings per soil absorption
system site. The soil borings shall be approximately fifty (50') feet apart,
and the proposed subsurface seepage system shall be located within the area
where the soil borings were located. More intermittent borings may be necessary
for accurate and appropriate evaluation of a site where there is some concern
about the consistency of the soil materials. One of the borings shall be made
at the lowest elevation of the proposed absorption field area and within the
required set-backs. Borings shall extend a minimum of sixty (60") inches below
the natural ground surface. An observation pit shall be used in gravelly
materials.
   a)   1) C) See code.
   a)   1) D) See code.
   a)   2) See code.
   b)   Percolation Tests. See code.
Section 905.60
Subsurface Seepage System Construction Requirements
   a)   Seepage Field Requirements. See code.
   b)   Gravel Seepage Field Requirements. See code.
   c)   Gravelless Seepage Field Requirements. Gravelless systems not
permitted.
   d)   Serial Distribution. See code.
   e)   Seepage Beds. Seepage beds not permitted.
   f)   Chamber Systems. See code.
   g)   Subsurface Drip Irrigation Systems. Drip Irrigation systems not
permitted.
   h)   Number Of Bedrooms. In case of single family dwellings, the village
enforcement officer may determine that any room, whatever named, whether
finished or unfinished, may have the potential for use or conversion to a
bedroom. For example, dens, sitting rooms, libraries, bonus rooms etc. whether
finished or unfinished, may be considered as "bedrooms" for septic field sizing
purposes. One factor which is used to determine if a room will be considered a
"bedroom" is whether it has access to a full bathroom, regardless if the
bathroom is finished, unfinished, or just roughed-in. Any and all rough-in
plumbing installed in a basement for future bathrooms accommodating a tub or
shower shall be considered at least one bedroom for purposes of designing and
installing a septic field.
   i)   Reserve Septic Treatment Area. An undisturbed area of sufficient size
is required to accommodate a reserve septic treatment area for future expansion
or replacement equal to fifty (50%) percent of the original size of the primary
field for systems without an aerator and twenty (20%) percent of the original
size of the primary field for systems with an aerator.
Section 905.70
Buried Sand Filters
Deleted.
Section 905.80
Re-Circulating Sand Filter
Deleted.
Section 905.90
Waste Stabilization Ponds
   a)   General. Waste ponds are not permitted.
Section 905.95
Illinois Raised Filter Beds
See code with the following addition:
         m.   Raised filter beds are only to be proposed if subsurface
trenches, at-grade or mound systems cannot meet the soil criteria.
         n.   A future reserve mantle area equal in size of the original design
must be provided on the plan.
Section 905.96
Peat Filter Systems
Peat filter systems are not permitted.
Section 905.97
At-Grade Systems
   a)   General. At-grade systems are only to be proposed when subsurface
systems cannot meet the soil criteria for purposes.
   b)   Design Criteria:
      1.   The square footage of the soil treatment area shall be equal to the
projected daily flow in gallons per day divided by the lowest wastewater
loading rate in the upper twenty- four (24") inches.
      2.   Pretreatment must include a class 1 aerator.
      3.   Unless otherwise noted, design parameters for design of the piping
system shall comply with the provisions of the Wisconsin At-Grade Soil
Absorption System Siting, Design, And Construction Manual. Typical cross
sections are found in section 905, appendix A illustration Y exhibits
1-4. Recommended worksheet is attached in section 905, appendix A illustration
Y exhibit 5.
      4.   Preparation of the soil treatment can be done when the soil is dry
and under the supervision of a licensed installer.
      5.   Before plowing, the site is to be mowed as close as possible to the
ground surface, the mowed material is to be removed without the use of
machinery.
      6.   Trees to be removed by cutting the trunk of the tree as close as
possible to the ground surface. Stumps are to be removed by either grinding or
cutting but are not to be uprooted.
      7.   The area must now be plowed using a chisel plow or any other tool
designed for use with a skid-loader or backhoe that performs similarly to an
agricultural plow. The use of a frost plow is not allowed.
      8.   Plowing must be done parallel to the contour grades and at a minimum
depth of 8 inches. Depending on the depth of the compacted soil as described in
the soil report.
      9.   The required fill must be placed immediately following the
preparation of the site. Fill must be placed from the upslope or sides of the
proposed treatment area with a backhoe reaching into the treatment area or
pushing the fill material into the treatment area with low compression
machinery.
      10.   The invert of the distribution lines shall be a minimum of 6 inches
above original ground surface.
      11.   The minimum length is determined by the maximum linear loading
rate. The linear loading rate is equal to the projected daily flow in gallons
per day divided by the total length of the soil. Treatment area in feet and
shall be limited as follows:
A) Systems in design groups II through VI shall be designed with a maximum
loading rate of twelve (12) gallons per day per foot with a maximum of three
basal areas perpendicular to the slope.
B) Systems in design groups VII through XII shall be designed with a maximum
loading rate of six (6) gallons per day per foot with a maximum of two (2)
basil areas perpendicular to the slope.
      12.   When laterals are at different elevations, a flow control valve
shall be used to control the inline pressure of the laterals.
      13.   The minimum depth of the gravel shall be 10 inches with 6 inches of
gravel below the pipe and two (2") inches above the pipe. The gravel shall then
be covered with a minimum of twelve (12") inches of topsoil and then seeded and
mulched or sodded. Prior to placement of the topsoil, the gravel shall be
covered with geotextile fabric.
   APPENDIX A, ILLUSTRATION Y, EXHIBITS 1 THROUGH 5
Section 905.98
Mound Systems
   a)   General. Mound systems are only to be proposed when subsurface and at-
grade systems cannot meet the soil criteria for design purposes.
   b)   Design Criteria:
      1.   The square footage of the application bed shall be equal to the
projected daily flow in gallons per day divided by the loading rate of the
coarse sand fill of one (1.0) gallons per day per square foot. The square
footage of the basal area shall be equal to the projected daily flow divided by
the assigned soil wastewater loading rate in gallons per day per square foot.
The minimum length of the basal area shall be equal to the minimum length of
the application bed.
      2.   Pretreatment must include a class 1 aerator.
      3.   Unless otherwise noted, design parameters for design of the piping
system shall comply with the provisions of the Wisconsin Mound Soil Absorption
System Siting, Design, And Construction Manual. Typical cross sections are
found in section 905, appendix A, illustration Z exhibit
1-4. Recommended worksheet is attached in section 905, appendix A illustration
Z exhibit 5.
      4.   Preparation of the soil treatment can be done when the soil is dry
and under the supervision of a licensed installer.
      5.   Before plowing, the site is to be mowed as close as possible to the
ground surface, the mowed material is to be removed without the use of
machinery.
      6.   Trees to be removed by cutting the trunk of the tree as close as
possible to the ground surface. Stumps are to be removed by either grinding or
cutting but are not to be uprooted.
      7.   The area must now be plowed using a chisel plow or any other tool
designed for use with a skid-loader or backhoe that performs similarly to an
agricultural plow. The use of a frost plow is not allowed.
      8.   Plowing must be done parallel to the contour grades and at a minimum
depth of eight (8") inches depending on the depth of the compacted soil as
described in the soil report.
      9.   The required fill must be placed immediately following the
preparation of the site. Fill must be placed from the upslope or sides of the
proposed treatment area with a backhoe reaching into the treatment area or
pushing the fill material into the treatment area with low compression
machinery.
      10.   The invert of the distribution lines shall be a minimum of six (6")
inches above the fill material.
      11.   The minimum length of the application bed is determined by the
maximum linear loading rate. The linear loading rate is equal to the projected
daily flow in gallons per day divided by the total length of the application
bed in feet and shall be limited as follows:
         A)   Systems in design groups II through VI shall be designed with a
maximum loading rate of eight (8) gallons per day per foot with a maximum of
three (3) basal areas perpendicular to the slope.
         B)   Systems in design groups VII through XII shall be designed with a
maximum loading rate of four (4) gallons per day per foot with a maximum of two
basil areas perpendicular to the slope.
      12.   When laterals are at different elevations, a flow control valve
shall be used to control the inline pressure of the laterals.
      13.   The minimum depth of the gravel in the application bed shall be ten
(10") inches with six (6") inches of gravel below the pipe and two (2") inches
above the pipe. The minimum depth of the coarse sand fill material covering the
basal area shall be twelve (12") inches. There shall be a minimum of twelve
(12") inches of topsoil cover over the application bed and a minimum of six
(6") inches of topsoil cover over the remaining part of the mound. The
application bed shall be covered with geotextile fabric prior to placement of
the topsoil.
   APPENDIX A, ILLUSTRATION Z, EXHIBITS 1 THROUGH 5
Section 905.100
Aerobic Treatment Plants And NSF International/ANSI Standard 40 Wastewater
Treatment Systems
   a)   General. See code.
   b)   Class II Effluent Standards. Class II aerators are not permitted.
   c)   Class I Effluent.
      1)   No reduction in primary field size is allowed for the use of a
proposed or required class I aerator. The subsurface system shall be installed
as shallow as possible while maintaining a minimum of six (6") inches of cover.
There shall be at least 12 inches between the bottom of the treatment area and
the shallowest limiting layer.
      2)   Surface discharges are not allowed.
   d)   Sizing. See code.
   e)   Installation. See code.
   f)   Accessibility For Inspection And Maintenance. See code.
   g)   Service. See code with the following exception: Normal repair methods
are considered to be attempts to correct a failing seepage system per the
recommendations of a professional engineer based on his inspections and testing
and shall include, but not limited to the following: correcting any improper
water connections to the septic system (downspouts, footing sumps, water
softener discharge, condensate water, etc.), correcting any improper surface
drainage patterns or depressions, removal of any lawn sprinkler system (if any)
in the septic area, repairing or replacing damaged or defective components of
the system, adjusting distribution box elevations, and the installation of all
reserve (future expansion) seepage trenches as the site permits. The
professional engineer shall submit his findings in a report to the village
enforcement officer prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation of
an aerobic treatment plant or any repair procedure.
   h)   See code.
   i)   See code.
   j)   See code.
   k)   See code.
   l)   See code.
Section 905.110
Effluent Discharges
Effluent discharges are not permitted.
Section 905.115
NPDES Permit Compliance
Deleted.
Section 905.120
Disinfection
Deleted.
Section 905.125
Pumps, Pumping/Dosing Chambers, And Ancillary Equipment
See code.
Section 905.130
Human Waste Disposal
   a)   General. Privies, chemical toilets, recirculation toilets, incinerator
toilets, and compost toilets are not approved for private sewage disposal of
human wastes. Chemical toilets may be used on construction sites, provided they
are maintained by an operator licensed to provide such services.
   b)   Privy Construction. Privies are not permitted.
   c)   Vault Privy. Vault privies are not permitted.
   d)   Septic Privy. Septic privies are not permitted.
   e)   Recirculating Toilets. Recirculating toilets are not permitted.
   f)   Incinerator Toilets. Incinerator toilets are not permitted.
   g)   Compost Toilets. Compost toilets are not permitted.
Section 905.135
Portable Sanitation
See code.
Section 905.140
Holding Tanks
   a)   General. Holding tanks are not permitted. Temporary occupancy permits
or conditional occupancy permits shall not be issued for any home which does
not have a complete and functioning septic system. The presence of holding
tanks in lieu of the septic field shall not be sufficient for the issuance of
any type of occupancy permit. Septic tanks shall not be installed before the
installation of the subsurface seepage field.
Section 905.150
Sanitary Dump Stations
   a)   General. Sanitary dump stations are not permitted.
Section 905.160
Swimming Pool Wastewater
   a)   General. See code.
   b)   Approved Treatment And Disposal. Waste water from swimming pools may
not be discharged into or across a private sewage disposal system receiving
domestic sewage. It shall be discharged in a manner approved by the village
enforcement officer. Such drainage shall not result in nuisance conditions.
Section 905.170
Servicing, Cleaning, Transporting And Disposing Of Wastes From Private Sewage
Disposal Systems
   a)   General. See code.
   b)   Truck Identification. See code.
   c)   Equipment Inspection. See code.
   d)   Vehicle Construction And Equipment. See code.
   e)   Notification Of Disposal Site. See code.
All septic cleaning contractors doing business in the village shall be licensed
with the Illinois department of public health.
   f)   Disposal Methods.
No sewage disposal shall be permitted within the village.
   g)   Methods For The Disposal Of Waste From Portable Toilets.
No disposal of waste from portable toilets shall be permitted in the village.
   h)   Other Wastes. See code.
Section 905.180
Examinations For Licensure
   a)   See code.
   b)   See code.
   c)   Deleted.
Section 905.190
Installation Approval
   a)   1. See code.
   a)   2. Any addition to the absorption field.
   b)   Applications For Village Approval: All applications for village
approval and permit for private sewage disposal systems must contain the
following information:
      1)   All soil analysis data, application forms and septic design drawings
shall be performed, prepared and bear the seal and signature of the same
registered professional engineer in the state of Illinois.
      2)   Five (5) copies of the septic design drawings, soil analysis data,
and application forms must be submitted. Septic design drawings shall conform
to the following requirements:
Septic Design/Site Development Drawings. The septic design drawing shall also
serve as the site development/grading plan. All information outlined below, as
well as any additional information requested by the village engineer or
enforcement officer shall be indicated and conform to the following:
      1)   Scale shall be 1 inch = 20 feet or 30 feet.
      2)   Topographic information shall be shown at one foot contour intervals
related to the United States geological survey (USGS) datum with a minimum of a
fifty foot (50') overlap onto adjoining properties.
      3)   All proposed foundation and invert elevations shall be related to a
fixed bench mark that cannot be disturbed or destroyed during construction.
      4)   Elevations shall be indicated at the following points:
         a.   Top of foundation
         b.   Top of basement floor slab
         c.   Top of garage slab at overhead door(s)
         d.   Invert of house sewer at foundation
         e.   Invert of inlet and outlet sewer at septic tank(s)
         f.   Invert of each seepage line tile
         g.   Invert of curtain drains
         h.   Overflow header outlet invert of each drop box
         i.   High water level of lakes, ponds or streams (if any)
         j.   Normal water level of lakes, ponds or streams (if any)
         k.   Finished grade of driveway at several locations
         l.   Center of street adjacent to the culvert pipe locations
         m.   Inverts of all driveway culvert pipes
         n.   Bottom of front ditch/swale at several points and the center
street adjacent to those points
         o.   Invert and rim of any storm sewer manholes or catch basins
      5)   The following information shall be indicated to fully delineate the
proposed septic system design and all site development/grading work:
         a.   House footprint (must match architectural plans)
         b.   Number of bedrooms (subject to village interpretation)
         c.   Well site
         d.   Driveway configuration (pitch away from septic)
         e.   Culvert pipe(s) and size
         f.   Percolation test hole and/or soil boring locations and assigned
number
         g.   Easements (drainage, utility, pond, landscape, etc.)
         h.   Property dimensions
         i.   Required setbacks (front, rear and sides)
         j.   Dimensions to locate house on property
         k.   All components of the sewage disposal system
         l.   Dimensions to locate all components (minimum & actual)
         m.   New grading and contour information (must match architectural)
         n.   All necessary grading work to handle water flow on site
         o.   Proposed grading
         p.   Existing trees and vegetation (must be cleared by hand)
         q.   Swimming pools, tennis courts, patios, decks, etc.
         r.   Erosion control provisions necessary
      6)   The following details, notes and schedules shall be indicated:
         a.   Trench detail
         b.   Design criteria
         c.   Curtain drain detail if proposed
         d.   Lift station detail (if any)
         e.   Legend with complete description of all components including
lengths, sizes, quantities, etc.
         f.   Disturbed area in square feet and acres
         g.   Proposed impervious area in square feet and acres
         h.   Note any other special scheduling or work which must occur
      7)   If the septic area requires any fill to be imported, the following
information shall be provided:
         a.   Location of fill (indicate by shading)
         b.   Quantity of fill
         c.   Maximum depth of fill
         d.   Spot elevations of fill
         e.   Description of reason/purpose of the fill
         f.   Type of soil to be imported
         g.   Description of filling process and equipment to be used
      8)   The following note shall appear on all design drawings:
Village Of South Barrington Notes:
      1.   Prior to the start of any building construction operation, a
protective barrier shall be installed around all sides of the proposed septic
field area and be located a minimum of ten feet (10') from the septic field.
Septic roping must remain in place during entire course of construction.
Absolutely no construction traffic, stockpiling of dirt or materials is allowed
on any portion of the proposed septic area. Failure to comply may be cause for
the issuance of a "stop work order" and the need for a new set of percolation
tests.
      2.   All downspouts and sump pump discharge pipes shall discharge away
from the septic area by means of a six (6") inch diameter (minimum) pipe
running directly to a drainage ditch or drainage sewer.
      3.   All clearing of trees and brush shall be done by hand. No vehicular
traffic is allowed.
      4.   The site shall be protected at all times during and after
construction so that all soil will be retained on the property. Sod, seeding,
straw bales, filter fabrics, etc., shall be used as necessary to prevent
erosion into ditches, swales, structures or adjacent properties.
      5.   Underground sprinkler systems shall not be installed within twenty-
five (25') feet of any designated septic field area and ten (10') feet from
septic tanks. A separate permit is required for the installation of underground
sprinkler systems.
      6.   Septic Fill Requirements: Where allowed, all filling operations must
follow the procedures set forth by the village.
   a)   A site development permit must be applied for and issued before the
septic filling operation can begin.
   b)   The design engineer shall be responsible to approve site preparation
prior to placement of fill, all fill material, set grade stakes prior to
initiating any fill operation and approve all finish grades for compliance with
the design drawing after the fill has been placed. Letters of approval shall be
submitted to the village indicating that the site was properly prepared prior
to fill placement and that the soil used for the fill was acceptable for the
intended use. A record drawing is then to be submitted showing that the fill
placement meets design criteria.
   c)   If the depth of fill is greater than the depth of the required trench
bottom, or if the fill is to be placed in order to create a septic area which
previously failed its percolation test or soil test, then a new set of tests is
required to be performed after fill has been placed and allowed to consolidate
for a period of twelve (12) months.
   d)   The village building department shall be notified twenty-four (24)
hours in advance of any fill operation or field construction.
   e)   No installation of the septic field to take place on wet or frozen
ground.
   f)   All wells must be a minimum of sixty-five (65') feet from any property
line, seventy-five (75') feet from any designated septic treatment area and
fifty (50') feet from any septic tank systems.
   g)   The septic system area must be seeded and mulched or sodded prior to
receiving an occupancy permit.
   h)   Any type of anticipated future construction activity including, but not
limited to decks, swimming pools, regrading, walkways, and sewers is prohibited
in any designated septic treatment area and must meet the minimum setback
requirements stated in the village code.
   i)   The village building department must be notified at least twenty-four
(24) hours before beginning construction of any portion of the septic system.
(847-381-7510)
   c)   See code.
   d)   Deleted.
   e)   See code.
   f)   See code.
   g)   See code.
Section 905.200
Licenses And Fees
   a)   See code.
Section 905.205
Civil Penalties And Time Allowances For Corrective Action
Deleted.
Section 905.210
Repealed.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user/owner.
(Ord. 0-2015-1044, 2-12-2015; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1073, 5-21-2015; Ord. 2015-1083,
8-3-2015; Ord. 2020-1241, 6-11-2020; Ord. 2021-1271, 4-8-2021; Ord. 2022-1319,
5-12-2022)
4-7-3: MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL CONTRACTORS:
   A.   General: All private sewage disposal contractors working in the village
shall be licensed by the Illinois department of public health.
   B.   Installers Of Private Sewage Disposal Systems: Contractors who install
or repair private sewage disposal systems within the village shall:
      1.   Install the system according to the village approved septic design
drawing and in accordance with the rules and practices of the village. Any
deviations from the approved drawing must be approved by the enforcement
officer.
      2.   Notify the village building department at least twenty four (24)
hours before start of construction in order that they may inspect the system
before any portion of the system has been backfilled.
      3.   Not begin installation when the soil is wet or frozen.
      4.   Notify the village enforcement officer if septic area has been
filled and not indicated as such on the approved septic design drawing.
      5.   Minimize the compaction of the soil during installation. Gravel
truck traffic shall not cross the septic area. All equipment (backhoes, front
end loaders, etc.) shall be of low pressure design and shall minimize the
amount of travel on the septic area.
      6.   Upon completion of the installation a sign shall be placed near the
driveway indicating that the system has been installed and that no traffic is
allowed in the septic area.
      7.   Upon completion of the septic field installation, the septic
installer must furnish to the village a detailed as built drawing which shall
contain the following information:
         a.   Installing contractor's name, address, phone number;
         b.   State of Illinois license number;
         c.   Date of installation;
         d.   Location (lot number, subdivision, street number, permit number);
         e.   Weather conditions at time of installation;
         f.   Name of enforcement officer making inspection;
         g.   A general description of the field area (i.e., wet or dry,
excessive traffic and compaction, filled or virgin soil, etc.);
         h.   The as built drawing shall be to scale;
         i.   The location of all components of the system shall be shown in
such a way as to make locating easy and positive at a later date. Dimensions
shown must be referenced from fixed items such as building walls and property
corner stakes. Two (2) dimensions are to be used for each key item;
         j.   Length of each seepage trench line;
         k.   Typical seepage trench detail;
         l.   Location, size and length of curtain drains, downspout drains,
etc.;
         m.   Total linear footage of seepage trench or square footage of
treatment area installed;
         n.   Indicate any deviations that were made from the approved septic
design drawing and reasons for such deviations;
         o.   Description and limits of fill which was placed on the septic
area. (Ord. 0-2015-1044, 2-12-2015)
4-7-4: SEPTIC FIELD FILLING PROCEDURES:
Whenever tests, high ground water, or other site conditions indicate that the
importation of fill will be required, see state code section 905.60 for sizing
criteria, soil criteria, and site preparation. Village requirements are as
follows:
   A.   In any situation where there are failing test results and a septic
design drawing indicating that fill is required on any portion of the septic
area, no building permit will be issued until the fill has been placed and a
new set of tests are performed at the required trench depth.
   B.   If fill is discovered to have been placed without the benefit of a site
development permit and/or proper approval procedures, the following
requirements shall apply before a new set of percolation tests may be performed
and approved by the village:
      1.   If little to no natural vegetation is present in the filled area
then the fill shall consolidate for the full twelve (12) month time period
beginning on the date of discovery by the village.
      2.   If substantial vegetation is present in the filled area then the
fill shall consolidate for a nine (9) month time period beginning on the date
of discovery by the village.
      3.   The village enforcement officer shall determine the status of
vegetation growth for the determination of the required waiting period.
      4.   The property owner may submit other evidence to the enforcement
officer that indicates when the filling work was actually performed. The
enforcement officer may use this information to determine the required waiting
period.
      5.   The property owner shall be responsible to apply for and receive all
proper permits, pay all required fees and penalties and receive all proper
approvals from the design engineer for the work that has been completed.
      6.   In any unique situation that does not fall into one of the above
categories, the enforcement officer shall determine what procedures must be
followed.
   C.   The design engineer shall be responsible to approve the fill material,
set grade stakes prior to initiating the fill operation and approve all finish
grades for compliance with the design drawing after the fill is in place.
Letters of approval shall be submitted to the village enforcement officer.
   D.   The septic field filling procedures are as follows:
      1.   Complete the septic system design or filling drawing.
      2.   Apply for and receive a site development permit.
      3.   Engineer shall stake the fill boundaries for the field.
      4.   Install culvert pipe and driveway across swale (if any).
      5.   Submit sample of fill material to engineer for analysis and
approval.
      6.   Engineer shall submit letter to village stating whether the fill
material is satisfactory for septic purposes.
      7.   Provide twenty four (24) hours' notice to the village prior to start
of importing fill.
      8.   Place fill material at edge of septic area and spread onto the area
with a low pressure machine to the depth specified on the engineer's plan and
as staked by the design engineer. Absolutely no traffic from dump trucks is
allowed on any portion of the septic area.
      9.   Engineer shall submit letter to village stating that the site was
properly prepared prior to fill placement and whether the final grading of the
fill is consistent with the plan and grade stakes.
      10.   If a new set of percolation tests is required due to the
importation of fill, the fill material must be allowed to consolidate as
indicated in the state code.
      11.   A building permit can be issued only when the above listed
procedures and percolation test (if required) have been complete and approved
by the village.
   E.   Removal of existing soil structure in the proposed seepage field area
and its replacement with fill shall not be permitted. (Ord. 0-2015-1044, 2-12-
2015)
4-7-5: PROTECTION OF SEPTIC FIELD AREAS DURING THE COURSE OF BUILDING
CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any building within
the village without first having installed a protective barrier around all
sides of the proposed septic field area which is to be a minimum of ten (10')
feet from the septic field prior to the start of excavation operations.
   B.   Such protective barrier shall consist of a brightly colored rope,
supported by metal fence posts driven into the ground at intervals not to
exceed fifty feet (50'). The use of wooden snow fencing, supported by metal
fence posts at a similar spacing shall also be permitted. The village
enforcement officer may require the installation of wooden snow fencing,
chainlink fencing or other more substantial protective barriers when site
conditions indicate that the likelihood of disturbance to the septic area is
evident.
   C.   Materials expressly not allowed for use are:
         Posts fashioned from construction lumber
         Posts fashioned from electrical conduit
         Plastic tape (whether fluorescent colored or not)
         String
   D.   The protection around the septic field area must remain in place, in a
complete and effective manner, for the duration of the construction process, up
to and including the date of the final occupancy inspection.
   E.   Should traffic or disturbance of the septic field area, whether when
protected or unprotected, be in evidence to the building department, the job
shall be stopped and a new set of soil tests shall be made which shall be used
in lieu of any previous tests. Based on the results of the new soil tests and
site observation, the village enforcement officer will make an assessment of
the entire situation and determine what remedial actions shall be taken.
   F.   Should the proposed septic area, in its natural state of existence, be
of a wooded nature, all clearing operations shall be done by hand, with
absolutely no vehicular traffic being allowed over the field. Immediately after
the clearing operations are completed, the protection required by this chapter
shall be installed.
   G.   If any person fails to install and/or maintain said protection around
the septic field area as provided in subsections A through F of this section, a
stop work order may be issued by the building department and/or the police
department until such time as the necessary protection has been installed in
accordance with this chapter. Violators shall also be subject to a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense; and a separate offense be deemed committed on each day during
which a violation occurs or continues to exist. (Ord. 0-2015-1044, 2-12-2015)
4-7-6: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, fill or make any alterations
or repairs to private sewage disposal systems within the village unless he
holds a valid permit issued by the enforcement officer as indicated below:
   A.   New Construction: The permit is issued as part of the building permit
for the building construction. A separate septic permit is not required.
   B.   Additions/Remodeling: The septic permit issued is in addition to the
required building permit. The septic permit work must be completed before the
permit for the building construction will be issued.
   C.   Septic Repairs: The permit is issued for the septic repairs only.
   D.   Septic Field Filling: A site development permit is required prior to
the importation of any fill in excess of fifty (50) cubic yards.
For repair or modification of individual private sewage disposal systems,
complete application form for permit as provided by the village. (Ord. 0-2015-
1044, 2-12-2015)
4-7-7: DEVIATIONS FROM SEPTIC DESIGN DRAWING:
   A.   Any deviations from the design conditions such as, but not limited to:
      1.   Changing the number of bedrooms,
      2.   Reducing the percolation capacity of the soil due to traffic or
stockpiling building materials or excavated soil on the seepage field area,
      3.   Reducing the effective seepage field area by changing house
location, adding pavement, pools, tennis courts, etc.,
      4.   Diverting groundwater into or over the seepage field,
      5.   Failure to install system as per the design drawing will void all
previously approved design drawings.
   B.   The enforcement officer shall determine what corrective measures shall
be taken such as, but not limited to:
      1.   Requiring a new soil test if the field has been disturbed,
      2.   Requiring the design engineer to field locate all deviations and/or
disturbed areas,
      3.   Requiring that revisions be made to the design drawing to indicate
all changes necessary because of deviations or a disturbed field,
      4.   Issue a stop work order. (Ord. 0-2015-1044, 2-12-2015)
4-7-8: MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE SYSTEMS:
   A.   Acknowledgment To Village: Immediately prior to the issuance of any
building permit for construction of any principal residence, business or
industrial building which is not an accessory building, and immediately prior
to the issuance of any occupancy permit for any such building, the owner or
contract purchaser, if any, shall acknowledge to the village its obligation to
maintain and keep in proper operating condition any private sewage system
serving the premises which include said building and shall agree to the same.
   B.   Landscaping Requirements:
      1.   Extreme care shall be observed during the final grading and
landscaping to prevent compaction and disturbance to the drop box and
distribution system.
      2.   The seepage area shall be graded to ensure that surface water runs
off as quickly as possible without ponding. Provisions shall be made to
eliminate erosion during and after completion. The methods used shall be
approved by the village engineer.
      3.   Landscaping shall be installed when the ground is dry. Only
lightweight landscaping tractors are allowed on the septic field. Landscaping
over tanks, drop boxes and header lines is to be completed by hand.
      4.   Grades shall be established over the seepage field area prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit by the village enforcement officer.
      5.   Trees or shrubs shall not be installed in the seepage field area.
      6.   Automatic sprinkling systems shall not be installed over any portion
of the seepage field area or within the village right of way. (Ord. 0-2015-
1044, 2-12-2015)
4-7-9: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING SEPTIC FIELDS:
   A.   Repairs: When conditions exist that the subsurface seepage field is
failing, the property owner shall take immediate steps to repair the system.
      1.   Evaluation By Professional Engineer: Property owner shall contract
with a professional engineer to evaluate the situation and make recommendations
as to a solution to repair the failing condition.
      2.   Pumping Of Septic Tanks: Upon discovery of a failing condition, the
village enforcement officer may require that the property owner secure a
contract with a licensed septic pumping contractor to pump the septic tanks as
required until the corrective measures have been taken so as to prevent further
effluent from reaching the surface. A copy of said contract shall be filed with
the village.
      3.   Septic System Repair Permit Required: A septic system repair permit
shall be obtained prior to the repair of any portion of the septic system.
      4.   Soil Tests Required: A new soil test will be required if the repair
procedures include the addition to, or replacement of the subsurface seepage
field to another area on the property which falls outside of the original
approved septic area.
      5.   Engineered Design Drawing Required: A septic design drawing must be
prepared for village approval.
   B.   Alterations: Whenever a subsurface seepage system must be altered or
extended in any way due to the construction of a building addition, swimming
pool, tennis court, etc., or due to a change in the bedroom count, the
following shall apply:
      1.   Evaluation By Professional Engineer: Property owner shall contract
with a professional engineer to evaluate the existing conditions.
      2.   Septic System Alteration Permit Required: A septic system alteration
permit shall be obtained prior to the alteration of any portion of the septic
system.
      3.   Soil Tests Required: A new soil test will be required if the
alteration procedures include the addition to, or replacement of the subsurface
seepage field to another area on the property which falls outside of the
original approved septic area.
      4.   Engineered Design Drawing Required: A septic design drawing must be
prepared for village approval.
      5.   Relocation: If the alteration procedures include the relocation of
the septic tank(s) or building sewer, the contractor shall review and
coordinate the procedure with the village enforcement officer to ensure that
the building is not without a proper operating septic system for an extended
period of time.
      6.   Alteration Work: All septic alteration work must be completed before
a building permit will be issued for the construction which necessitated the
alteration to the septic system. (Ord. 0-2015-1044, 2-12-2015)
4-7-10: ENFORCEMENT:
The enforcement officer shall be that person designated by the village
president to enforce this chapter and to that end said enforcement officer
shall make such orders, requirements, decisions and determinations as are
necessary with respect to the enforcement hereof.
   A.   Changes To Private Sewage Disposal System: When any private sewage
disposal system constructed prior to the effective date of this chapter is
reconstructed, altered, extended or subject to any change in any condition
affecting its operation or functioning, it shall be made to comply with this
chapter.
   B.   Inspection: Any individual sewage disposal system shall not be covered
or placed into operation until the said installation shall have been inspected
and approval of the said system have been issued by the enforcement officer.
   C.   Soil Quality: If, in the opinion of the enforcement officer, soils
encountered during the installation of the seepage system are of questionable
quality, he may require the contractor to choose one of the following courses
of action:
      1.   Install additional linear feet of seepage trenches or square footage
of the treatment area in an amount determined by the enforcement officer; or
      2.   Have the design engineer make a site visit to review the soils
encountered and make a professional opinion concerning the adequacy of the soil
for the proposed seepage system and recommend solutions if the soils are found
to be not adequate.
   D.   Notice: Whenever the enforcement officer determines that a violation of
any provision of this chapter has occurred, he shall give notice to the person
or persons responsible for such violation. The notice shall:
      1.   Be in writing.
      2.   Include a statement of the reasons for the notice.
      3.   Allow reasonable time as determined by the enforcement officer for
performance of any act it required.
      4.   Be served upon the person responsible for the violation(s); provided
that such notice shall have been properly served upon the person responsible
for the violations either by mail or in person.
      5.   Contain a brief outline of remedial action which is required to
effect compliance with this chapter.
   E.   Legal Action And Fines: The enforcement officer may institute any legal
action in the circuit court or administrative adjudications to enforce any
provision or condition under this chapter; including, but not limited to, fines
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for
each and every day during which a violation continues or exists. (Ord. 0-2015-
1044, 2-12-2015)
CHAPTER 8
SANITARY SEWER AND WASTEWATER LAND TREATMENT SYSTEMS
SECTION:
4-8-1: Purpose And Intent
4-8-2: Definitions
4-8-2a: Applicability And Prohibitions
4-8-2b: Installation And Maintenance Requirements
4-8-3: Grease Interceptors
4-8-4: Prohibited Discharges
4-8-5: Approval Discharges
4-8-6: Aquifer Protection
4-8-7: Variances
4-8-8: Conflict With Village Ordinances
4-8-9: Operations
4-8-10: Permit Required
4-8-11: Penalty
4-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the limitations and requirements
concerning the quality of sewage or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer
system and the quality of treated effluent discharged to the ground surface for
recycling of any subdivision or commercial development in the village served by
a wastewater land treatment system. These limitations and requirements are
needed for the protection of the sanitary sewer systems, the wastewater land
treatment systems and the water bearing aquifer in order to ensure the
satisfactory performance of the sanitary sewer system, the wastewater land
treatment system and the water quality of private wells serving the residents
of the village. (Ord. 0-88-312, 10-13-1988)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter the following words and phrases will have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT: Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq.
BOD: The value of the five (5)-day test for Biochemical Oxygen Demand, as
described in the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater.”
COD: The value of the test for Chemical Oxygen Demand, as described in the
latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.”
DOMESTIC SEWAGE: Water and water carried wastes normally discharged into the
sanitary sewers or septic systems from residential housing. For the purpose of
this chapter, used water generated from commercial office usage, commercial
food processing and commercial restaurant operations shall be classified as
domestic sewage.
EPA: The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FATS, OILS, AND GREASES (FOG): Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/
or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules.
These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures
established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are
sometimes referred to herein as “grease” or “greases.”
FOG DISPOSAL SYSTEM: A grease interceptor that reduces nonpetroleum fats, oils,
and grease (FOG) in effluent by separation, and mass and volume reduction.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes and residue from preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage, processing and sale of food products and
produce.
GENERATOR: Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/grease interceptor, or
whose act or process produces a grease trap waste.
GREASE: Fats, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium, and magnesium soaps, mineral
oils and certain nonfatty material from animal or vegetative sources or from
hydrocarbons of petroleum origins whether liquid or solid; used interchangeable
with the term "FOG" (fats, oils and greases).
GREASE INTERCEPTOR OR GREASE TRAP: An appurtenance or appliance that is
installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept non- petroleum fats, oils
and grease (FOG) from wastewater. The device is identified by volume, retention
time, and baffle(s). For purposes of this ordinance, the terms “grease
interceptor” and “grease trap” may be used interchangeably.
GREASE WASTE: Material collected in and from a grease interceptor in the
sanitary sewer service line of a commercial, institutional, or industrial food
service or processing establishment, including the solids resulting from de-
watering processes.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into a VSS from
any non-domestic source.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the VSS, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or is a cause
of a violation of Village, State of Illinois or Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Greater Chicago (MWRD) regulations.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: This term shall be abbreviated "mg/l", and shall mean a
weight to volume ratio. The figure appearing before the symbol "mg/l" shall be
the number of milligrams to be found in one liter of the substance being
tested. This figure can be transposed to pounds per million (1,000,000) gallons
of water by multiplying the figure appearing before the symbol "mg/l" by 8.34.
pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed in moles per liter. pH shall be determined by "standard methods" as
defined in this section.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: Wastes from preparation and cooking and disposing of
food, exclusive of eggshells and bones, which waste has been shredded so that
the particles are no greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension, and
the particles can be carried freely through the normal conditions in sanitary
sewers.
RECLAIMED WATER: Wastewater which has been treated in aerated lagoons followed
by filtration and disinfection and is judged to be suitable for recycling.
RECYCLING: Slow rate irrigation of reclaimed water on golf courses,
landscaping, agricultural areas, and other appropriate land uses.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sewage or wastewater.
SEWER SYSTEM: All of the sewers and pumping facilities that convey sewage to
the wastewater land treatment facilities.
STANDARD METHODS: Methods approved by the engineering profession of examination
of waste and wastewater. Evidence of standard methods may be submitted by
showing standard methods approved by the American Water Works Association, the
American Public Health Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float in sewage or are in suspension in
sewage, which are removable by a laboratory filtration device.
TRANSPORTER: A person who is registered with and authorized by the State of
Illinois to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic sewage,
chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with
current regulations.
TSS: The value of the test for Total Suspended Solids, as described in the
latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.”
USER: Any person or business, including those located outside the
jurisdictional limits of the Village, who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution or discharge of wastewater into the VSS, including persons who
contribute such wastewater from mobile sources.
VSS OR VILLAGE SEWER SYSTEM: The Village owned municipality as defined by
section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act. This definition includes any devices and
systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal
sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers,
pipes and other conveyances that convey wastewater to a VSS Treatment Plant.
The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act,
which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from
such a treatment works. For purposes of this ordinance, the terms “sanitary
sewer system” and “VSS” may be used interchangeably.
WASTEWATER: Sewage.
WASTEWATER LAND TREATMENT SYSTEM: The aerated lagoon, storage lagoon,
intermittent sand filters, chlorination facilities, and landscape irrigation
system. (Ord. 0-88-312, 10-13-1988; amd. Ord. 2016-1119, 5-12-2016; Ord. 2020-
1245, 8-13-2020)
4-8-2a: APPLICABILITY AND PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall apply to all users of the Village Sewer System
(VSS), as defined in 4-8-2a of this chapter.
   B.   Grease traps/interceptors shall not be required for residential users.
   C.   The chapter shall apply to both new existing facilities generating
fats, oils, or greases (FOG) as a result of food manufacturing, processing,
preparation, or food service shall install, use, and maintain appropriate
grease interceptors as required in 4-8-2b of this chapter. These facilities
include but are not limited to restaurants, food manufacturers, food
processors, hospitals, hotels, nursing homes, and any other facility preparing,
serving, or otherwise making any food available for consumption.
   D.   No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or
indirect discharge of any fats, oils, or greases (FOG) of animal or vegetable
origin into the VSS system in such amounts as to cause interference with the
collection and treatment system, or as to cause pollutants to pass through the
treatment works into the environment. (Ord. 2020-1245, 8-13-2020)
4-8-2b: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Installations:
      1.   New Facilities. Food processing or food service facilities which are
newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or
renovated to include a food service facility, where such facility did not
previously exist, shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a
grease interceptor in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes or other
applicable ordinances. Grease interceptors shall be installed and inspected
prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
      2.   Existing Facilities. Existing grease interceptors must be operated
and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and in
accordance with this chapter, unless specified in writing and approved by the
VSS. Existing facilities that are not in compliance with the terms of this
chapter will have one hundred and twenty (120) days from the date of ordinance
adoption to comply.
      3.   All grease interceptor waste shall be properly disposed of at a
facility in accordance with federal, state, or local regulation.
   B.   Cleaning and Maintenance:
      1.   Grease interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient operating
condition at all times.
      2.   Each grease interceptor when cleaned shall be fully evacuated.
   C.   Cleaning Schedules:
      1.   Grease interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure
that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency
of the grease interceptor; to ensure the discharge is in compliance with local
discharge limits; and to ensure no visible grease is observed in discharge.
      2.   Grease interceptors shall be completely evacuated a minimum of every
thirty (30) days, or more frequently when:
         a.   Twenty-five (25) percent or more of the wetted height of the
grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to
the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or
greases;
         b.   The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other pollutant
levels established by the VSS; or
         c.   If there is a history of non-compliance.
      3.   Any person who owns or operates a grease interceptor may submit to
the VSS a request in writing for an exception to the thirty (30) day cleaning
frequency of their grease interceptor. The VSS may grant an extension for
required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when:
         a.   The grease interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated the
specific interceptor will produce an effluent, based on defensible analytical
results, in consistent compliance with established local discharge limits such
as BOD, TSS, FOG, or other parameters as determined by the VSS; or
         b.   Less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the wetted height of the
grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of
the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases.
      4.   In any event, a grease interceptor shall be fully evacuated,
cleaned, and inspected at least once every ninety (90) days
   D.   Manifest Requirements:
      1.   Each pump-out of a grease interceptor must be accompanied by a
manifest to be used for record keeping purposes.
      2.   Persons who generate, collect and transport grease waste shall
maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records shall
be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall include:
         a.   Name, address, telephone, and commission registration number of
transporter;
         b.   Name, signature, address, and phone number of the person who
generated the waste and the date collected;
         c.   Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported;
         d.   Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting,
transporting, and depositing the waste;
         e.   Date and place where the waste was deposited;
         f.   Identification (permit or site registration number, location, and
operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited;
         g.   Name and signature of facility on-site representative
acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste received;
         h.   The volume of the grease waste received; and
         i.   A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters,
waste generators, and regulating authorities in tracking the volume of grease
transported.
      3.   Manifests shall be divided into five parts and records shall be
maintained as follows:
         a.   One part of the manifest shall have the generator and transporter
information completed and be given to the generator at the time of waste
pickup.
         b.   The remaining four parts of the manifest shall have all required
information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before
distribution of the manifest.
         c.   One part of the manifest shall go to the receiving facility.
         d.   One part shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of
all manifests showing the collection and disposition of waste.
         e.   One copy of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter to
the person who generated the wastes within 15 days after the waste is received
at the disposal or processing facility.
         f.   One part of the manifest shall go to the local authority.
         g.   Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator shall be
retained for five (5) years and be readily available for review by the VSS.
         h.   Alternative treatment.
   E.   Compliance and Penalties: All testing designed to satisfy the criteria
set forth in 4-8-2b shall be scientifically sound and statistically valid. All
tests to determine oil and grease, TSS, BOD, COD, pH, and other pollutant
levels shall use appropriate tests which have been approved by the
Environmental Protection Agency which are defined in Title 40, Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 136. Testing shall be open to inspection by the VSS, and
shall meet the VSS’s approval.
   F.   Prohibited Practices: No person shall introduce, or cause, permit, or
suffer the introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier into a grease
interceptor. Surfactants, solvents, and emulsifiers are materials which allow
the grease to pass from the grease interceptor into the collection system, and
include but are not limited to enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene, and
other solvents.
   G.   Compliance Monitoring:
      1.   Right of Entry. The VSS shall have the right to enter the premises
of any user or potential user to determine whether the user is complying with
all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder. Users shall allow the VSS ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
         a.   The VSS shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/
or metering of the user's operations.
         b.   The VSS may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary such as FOG sensing and alarm devices complying with Plumbing and
Draining Institute Standard (PDI) G-102. The facility's monitoring equipment
shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by
the user at its own expense.
         c.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the VSS and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
         d.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the VSS access to the user's
premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-1245, 8-13-2020)
4-8-3: GREASE INTERCEPTORS:
   A.   Sizing And Installation Requirements: All grease interceptors shall be
designed and installed in accordance with section 890.510, 520 and 530 of the
Illinois plumbing code, latest edition.
   B.   Location: All grease interceptors must be located in a manner that
provides ready and easy access for cleaning and inspection.
   C.   Maintenance Requirements:
      1.   All interceptors shall be serviced at intervals determined by use
but at a minimum of every three (3) months unless manifest records indicate
intervals more appropriate for the use. All generators with an underground
interceptor must have a maintenance service contract with an authorized hauler.
      2.   Any waste removed from the interceptor shall not be emptied into any
drain, sewer or body of water.
      3.   Maintenance reports and logs must be kept on site for at least a
time period of three (3) years.
      4.   Copies of the manifests to be submitted to the village each time
they are generated.
   D.   Disposal Requirements:
      1.   Disposal and transportation of grease waste must be in accordance
with section 22.30 of the Illinois environmental protection act.
      2.   Grease waste for the smaller, under the sink units, can be disposed
of in the on site dumpster if it is in a solid form, in a sealed container and
does not exceed five (5) pounds in weight. The chain of custody stated in
section 22.30 of the Illinois environmental protection act would still apply in
this case.
   E.   Inspections: The village shall have the right to enter the premises to
inspect the grease interceptors and the manifest reports to determine
compliance with state and village regulations. The inspector shall be given
full access to the facilities and be allowed to review any monitoring, disposal
manifests and transportation records.
   F.   Fees:
      1.   A yearly fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be assessed on
each generator.
      2.   Additional fees may be imposed if follow up inspections are needed
due to issues with the grease interceptors.
   G.   Enforcement And Violation Action:
      1.   If the inspector finds violations or if the manifests indicate
problems with the grease interceptors, the generator will be given a written
notice to eliminate the deficiency within ten (10) calendar days.
      2.   If the deficiency or violation is not corrected in that time period,
a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be assessed for each time the
violation or deficiency continues to occur when inspected by the village
representative.
      3.   If after three (3) consecutive inspections the violations or
deficiencies are not corrected, the establishment of the generator will be shut
down until corrective action has taken place.
      4.   Fines may also be assessed to cover any costs associated with
cleaning the public sewer of grease buildup due to the generator not taking
corrective action. (Ord. 2016-1119, 5-12-2016)
4-8-4: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
The following substances shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewer
system:
   A.   Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding an average of one hundred
milligrams per liter (100 mg/l).
   B.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) or sixty five degrees centigrade (65°C).
   C.   Any water or waste which contains wax, grease, oil, plastic or other
substances that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures
below thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) or zero degrees centigrade (0°C).
   D.   Liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity
may cause fire or explosion; or be injurious in any other way to sewers,
treatment facilities structures or to the operation of the treatment
facilities; cause a safety hazard to the personnel operating the treatment
facilities.
   E.   Solid or viscous substances in quantity capable of causing obstruction
to the flow of sanitary sewers or of interfering with the operation of the
wastewater treatment works.
   F.   Any garbage except properly shredded garbage.
   G.   Any noxious or malodorous substance which can form a gas, which, singly
or by interaction with other wastes in the sewage system, is capable of causing
objectionable odors or hazards to health, life or property or which can be
itself or in combination with other substances in the sewage system form solids
and concentrations exceeding the limits established in this chapter or any
substance which creates any other condition harmful to the structure or
treatment processes of the wastewater treatment system.
   H.   Acids or alkalis having a pH value lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0.
   I.   Any substance or element which will damage the sewer system or
wastewater treatment facilities, is toxic to biological treatment processes, or
is detrimental to the recycling of the reclaimed water.
   J.   All water carried industrial wastes.
   K.   All water carried chemical, either organic or inorganic, wastes. (Ord.
0-88-312, 10-13-1988)
4-8-5: APPROVAL DISCHARGES:
Only domestic type sewage can be discharged into the sanitary sewer system.
Written approval from the village must be obtained before wastewater used in
laboratory operations can be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. (Ord.
0-88-312, 10-13-1988)
4-8-6: AQUIFER PROTECTION:
   A.   A minimum of four (4) test wells located on the perimeter of the
wastewater land treatment system shall be drilled by the owner into the aquifer
commonly used by the residents of the village for their water wells. Water
obtained from these wells should receive comprehensive chemical, mineral and
bacteriological analyses and these analyses should be used as a baseline guide.
Water from these test wells should be subjected to the same type of analyses on
a yearly basis so that it can be determined if any degradation to the aquifer
is occurring.
   B.   The recycled water entering the aquifer should be in conformance with
the United States environmental protection agency quality standards for
drinking water. (Ord. 0-88-312, 10-13-1988)
4-8-7: VARIANCES:
If discharges into the sanitary sewer system are proposed which are at variance
to the provisions of section
4-8-4 of this chapter, the engineer for the wastewater land treatment system
and the facilities operator shall review the proposed variance. The engineer
and operator after obtaining specific written approval from the village shall
have the authority to determine the acceptability of the proposed variances and
to determine the pretreatment requirements that may be necessary to meet the
provisions of section
4-8-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-88-312, 10-13-1988)
4-8-8: CONFLICT WITH VILLAGE ORDINANCES:
If the provisions of this chapter conflict with any of the building,
subdivision, zoning or other applicable village ordinances, the provisions of
those other ordinances shall control. (Ord. 0-88-312, 10-13-1988)
4-8-9: OPERATIONS:
The owners of the subdivision or commercial development, as the case may be,
will obtain all required permits and approvals before constructing and
operating the wastewater land treatment system and will cause the land
treatment system to be properly operated and maintained. If there is any
evidence of odors, or evidence of overspray or other collateral consequences
which indicate that corrective action is needed, that are brought to the
attention of the village, the village will notify such owners or their
designated representative of the problem and request correction within seven
(7) days. If the problem is not corrected, the village, through the exercise of
its police powers may move on to the site, cause the problem to be corrected
and assess such owners three hundred percent (300%) of the incurred costs.
Copies of all correspondence between the owners and operators of the wastewater
land treatment system and the Illinois environmental protection agency and all
other regulatory agencies must be sent to the village. (Ord. 0-88-312, 10-13-
1988)
4-8-10: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall install or replace a wastewater land treatment system or any
part thereof in the village without first having obtained a permit therefor
from the village and paid such fees for such permit as provided by the
ordinances and resolutions of the village applicable thereto. (Ord. 0-88-312,
10-13-1988)
4-8-11: PENALTY:
   A.   If the VSS determines that a user is responsible for a blockage of a
collection system line the user shall owe a civil penalty of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for the first violation, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
a second violation, and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for the
third violation within a two-year period. Continuous violations shall result in
an increase in penalty by five hundred dollars ($500.00) and may also result in
termination of services. Additionally, the user will be responsible to pay for
all repairs related to the blockage.
   B.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a written warning for the first violation, a five hundred dollars
($500.00) civil penalty for the second violation, a one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) civil penalty for the third violation, and a one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) civil penalty for the fourth violation within a two
(2)-year period. Consistent violations will result in a five hundred dollars
($500.00) increase in civil penalty and may result in termination of service.
(Ord. 0-88-312, 10-13-1988; Ord. 2020-1245, 8-13-2020)
CHAPTER 8A
WASTEWATER SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
4-8A-1: General Provisions
4-8A-1-100: Purpose And Policy
4-8A-1-110: Administration
4-8A-1-120: Abbreviations
4-8A-1-130: Definitions
4-8A-2: General Use Requirements
4-8A-2-200: Sewer Engineering And Installation
4-8A-2-201: No Service Outside Village Limits
4-8A-2-210: Connection Permit Requirements; Application And Issuance
4-8A-2-220: Discharge Of Storm Water And Other Unpolluted Drainage To Sanitary
Sewer Prohibited
4-8A-2-230: Unlawful Use Or Construction Of Private Sewer Disposal Systems
4-8A-2-240: Connection Of Certain Sewers To Public Sanitary Sewer Prohibited
4-8A-2-250: Construction Of Combined Sewers Prohibited
4-8A-2-255: Installation Of Toilet Facilities Required By Owner
4-8A-2-260: Unauthorized Destruction Or Defacement Of Sewage Equipment
Prohibited
4-8A-2-265: Private Sewage Disposal Systems Requirements; Generally
4-8A-2-270: Building Sewers; Requirements; Generally
4-8A-2-275: Building Sewers; Owner And Occupant Responsibility For Cost Of
Installation And Connection
4-8A-2-280: Owner And Occupant Responsibility For Maintenance
4-8A-2-285: Inspections Of Buildings To Be Connected To Sewer System
4-8A-3: Wastewater Treatment Rates
4-8A-3-300: Pretreatment Charges And Fees
4-8A-3-310: Surcharge To Industrial Users For Discharge Of Compatible
Pollutants
4-8A-3-320: Connection Fees
4-8A-3-340: User Charges
4-8A-3-341: Refund For Water Used For Lawn Irrigation
4-8A-3-350: Bills; When Due And Payable And Charge For Late Payment
4-8A-4: General Sanitary Sewer Discharge Standards
4-8A-4-400: Prohibited Discharge Standards
4-8A-4-420: State Pretreatment Standards
4-8A-4-430: Local Limits
4-8A-4-440: Village's Right Of Revision
4-8A-4-450: Dilution
4-8A-4-460: Pretreatment Facilities
4-8A-4-470: Additional Pretreatment Measures
4-8A-4-480: Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans
4-8A-5: Permits
4-8A-5-500: Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement
4-8A-5-505: Wastewater Analysis
4-8A-5-510: Industrial User Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
4-8A-5-530: Wastewater Discharge Permit; New Source
4-8A-5-540: Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents
4-8A-5-550: Application Signatories And Certification
4-8A-5-560: Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
4-8A-5-565: Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
4-8A-5-575: Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals
4-8A-5-580: Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification
4-8A-5-585: Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
4-8A-5-586: Procedures For Revocation
4-8A-5-587: Transfer Of Permits
4-8A-5-590: Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
4-8A-6: Compliance
4-8A-6-600: Baseline Monitoring Reports
4-8A-6-605: Compliance Schedule Progress Reports
4-8A-6-610: Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard
Deadline
4-8A-6-615: Periodic Compliance Reports
4-8A-6-620: Reports Of Changed Conditions
4-8A-6-625: Reports Of Potential Problems
4-8A-6-630: Reports From Unpermitted Users
4-8A-6-635: Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting
4-8A-6-645: Analytical Requirements
4-8A-6-650: Sample Collection
4-8A-6-655: Timing
4-8A-6-660: Record Keeping
4-8A-6-690: Confidential Information
4-8A-7: Enforcement
4-8A-7-700: Public Notification Of Significant Noncompliance
4-8A-7-705: Notice Of Violation
4-8A-7-710: Consent Orders
4-8A-7-715: Show Cause Hearing
4-8A-7-720: Compliance Orders
4-8A-7-725: Cease And Desist Orders
4-8A-7-730: Administrative Settlement In Lieu Of Civil Penalty
4-8A-7-735: Emergency Suspensions
4-8A-7-740: Termination Of Discharge
4-8A-7-745: Injunctive Relief
4-8A-7-750: Civil Penalties/Penalties And Costs
4-8A-7-755: Criminal Prosecution
4-8A-7-760: Remedies Nonexclusive
4-8A-7-770: Performance Bonds
4-8A-7-775: Liability Insurance
4-8A-7-777: Water Supply Severance
4-8A-7-780: Public Nuisances
4-8A-7-785: Right To Cut Off Service; Reconnection Procedure For Nonpayment
4-8A-7-788: Lien Rights
4-8A-7-790: Affirmative Defense; Upset
4-8A-7-795: Affirmative Defense To Prohibited Discharge Standards
4-8A-7-799: Bypass
4-8A-8: Monitoring
4-8A-8-800: Monitoring Program By Village
4-8A-8-810: Right Of Entry; Inspection And Sampling
4-8A-8-820: Search Warrants
4-8A-8-840: Control Manhole Device And Sampling Requirements; Location,
Construction, Maintenance And Facility Monitoring
4-8A-8-850: Severability
4-8A-8-860: Administration
4-8A-9: Penalty
4-8A-9-900: Violation; Penalty
4-8A-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
4-8A-1-100: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater sewer
system for the purpose of enabling the village to comply with applicable state
and federal laws and regulations, including the clean water act (33 United
States Code section 1251 et seq.), the general pretreatment regulations (40
code of federal regulations part 403) and the rules, regulations and ordinances
of the metropolitan water reclamation district of greater Chicago. The
objectives of this chapter are to:
   A.   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater sewer system
that will interfere with its operation;
   B.   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater sewer system
that will pass through the wastewater sewer system, inadequately treated, into
a wastewater treatment facility or otherwise be incompatible with the
wastewater sewer system;
   C.   Protect both wastewater sewer system village personnel or agents who
may be affected by wastewater in the course of their employment and the general
public;
   D.   Provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the wastewater sewer system;
   E.   Enable the village to comply with metropolitan water reclamation
district of greater Chicago ordinances, rules and regulations, and any other
federal or state laws, rules and regulations to which the wastewater sewer
system is subject.
This chapter shall apply to all users of the wastewater sewer system. This
chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for
monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative
review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of
fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-1-110: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the board of trustees of the village shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the board of trustees may be delegated by the
board of trustees. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-1-120: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
CFR   - Code of federal regulations
EPA   - U.S. environmental protection agency
FOG   - Fats, oil and grease
gpd   - Gallons per day
IEPA  - Illinois environmental protection agency
mg/l  - Milligrams per liter
MWRD  - Metropolitan water reclamation district of greater Chicago
NPDES - National pollutant discharge elimination system
RCRA  - Resource conservation and recovery act
SIC   - Standard industrial classification
TSS   - Total suspended solids
USC   - United States code
 
(Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-1-130: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES: Unplanned release of substances either directly or
indirectly in such magnitude to cause substantial effects on receiving systems
and treatment processes. Release is the result of accident, act or nature of
operational malfunctions.
ACT OR THE ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC section 1251 et seq.
ADMINISTRATOR: The Administrator of the EPA.
APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, the prohibitive
discharge standards, specific limitations on discharge, the State of Illinois
pretreatment standards or the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards (when
effective), whichever standard is most stringent.
APPLICANT: The party applying to the Village for a permit to connect to the
wastewater sewer system.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: EPA.
APPROVED: An item or procedure which satisfies the conditions of and has been
accepted by the Village of South Barrington.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE: A. If the user is a corporation: the president,
secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a
principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or
decision- making functions for the corporation.
   B.   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner
or proprietor, respectively.
   C.   If the user is a Federal, State or local government facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
   D.   If the user is a limited liability partnership, limited liability
company, or any other entity not previously described: 1) a person in charge of
principal business functions or any other person who performs similar policy or
decision-making functions for the entity; or 2) any person having written
authorization satisfying the requirements of subsection E of this definition
from such entity.
   E.   The individuals described in subsections A through D of this definition
may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for
the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and
the written authorization is submitted to the Village.
   F.   If an authorization under subsection E of this definition is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for the
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the
requirements of subsection D of this definition must be submitted to the
Village prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.
BUILDING SANITARY SEWER: A sewer lateral which carries only sewage and
industrial wastes from the building plumbing to the wastewater sewer system.
BUILDING STORM WATER SEWER: A sewer which carries only storm water drainage,
surface water, foundation drainage and roof drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes from the building plumbing to a public storm sewer system or
natural outlet.
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's
treatment facility.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with
sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC section 1317) which apply to a
specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N,
parts 405–471.
COMMERCIAL USER: A nonindustrial user; also any user of the treatment works not
classified as an industrial user or excluded as an industrial user by this
chapter.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Suspended solids, FOG, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: Sample of wastewater based on a flow proportional or time
proportional method.
CONCENTRATION LIMITATIONS: The limits imposing the amount of a given substance
in a discrete unit volume of a solution or applied to a unit weight of solid.
CONTROL AUTHORITY: The village of South Barrington, Cook County, Illinois.
COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DISCHARGE: The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater to the wastewater
sewer system.
DISCHARGER: Any person, firm, establishment, or institution which discharges
wastewater, excluding inflow and infiltration, to a sanitary sewer which
eventually leads into the wastewater sewer system. Each single connection is a
separate discharge by a discharger. The term "user" is used interchangeably
with the term "discharger".
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA: The United States environmental
protection agency or other duly authorized official of said agency.
FOG: Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other
similar or related materials.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and
from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
GENERAL PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS: The general pretreatment regulations for
existing and new sources, 40 CFR part 403, as amended.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream with no regard to the
flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15)
minutes.
ILLINOIS ACT: The environmental protection act 1 , as amended.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Any pollutant which is not a "compatible pollutant" as
defined in this Section.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the wastewater sewer
system from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d)
of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge, including, but not limited to,
a manufacturing, commercial or process facility, or other facility engaged in
the purchase or sale of goods, transaction of business or which otherwise
renders services to the public.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial users as opposed to
sanitary sewage.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT: The maximum concentration of a
pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of
any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow
rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the wastewater sewer system
and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of any permit of the Village issued
by the MWRD or any State or Federal agency.
MASS LIMITATION: Limits imposed upon a discharger based upon volumes or
concentrations that are converted to weight.
MEDICAL WASTE: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes
or other related wastes.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 grams of the constituent in one thousand milliliters
(1,000 ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly commonly used, part per
million, to which it is approximately equivalent in reporting the results of
water and wastewater analysis.
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge
limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the
Act, which applies to industrial users. The term includes prohibitive discharge
limits established pursuant to 40 CFR section 403.5.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface water or ground water.
NEW SOURCE: A. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication in the Code of Federal Regulations of proposed
pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with
that section 307(c), provided that:
      1.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located; or
      2.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source; or
      3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
   B.   A site at which an existing source is located and where construction
results in a modification rather than a source as defined in subsection A of
this definition, provided the construction does not create a new building,
structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection A2 or
A3 of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing
process or production equipment.
   C.   A site where construction has commenced, including where the owner or
operator has:
      1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
         a.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
         b.   Site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal
of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which are necessary for the
placement, assembly, or installation of a new source facilities or equipment;
or
      2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
subsection C.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust estate, limited liability company,
limited liability partnership, governmental entity, or other legal entity; or
their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all
Federal, State, and local governmental entities.
pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard
units.
POLLUTANT: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the
wastewater sewer system. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other
means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by
an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: Prohibited discharge standards, categorical standards,
and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARD: Any regulation developed under the authority of
section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR part 403.5 as published in the Code of
Federal Regulations, revised as of July 1, 1994, published by the Office of the
Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances.
REQUIRED: The tasks stated shall be done.
SWDA: The Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC section 6901 et seq.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, etc.).
SHALL AND MAY: Shall is required; may is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER:
   A.   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
   B.   A user that:
      1.   Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or more
of process wastewater to the wastewater sewer system (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); or
      2.   Is designated as such by the Village on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the wastewater sewer system's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   C.   Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection B of this
definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the wastewater
sewer system's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Village may at any time, on its own initiative or in response
to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with the procedures in 40
CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a
significant industrial user.
SLUG LOAD OR SLUG: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
potentially would cause interference with the wastewater sewer system and/or a
violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section
4-8A-4 of this Chapter. Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste,
which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow,
exceeds, for any period or duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than
five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during
normal operation of flows during normal operation and in no event more than
five (5) times the allowable concentration of constituents set forth in this
Chapter or the user's permit or any pollutant released in a discharge at a flow
rate and/or pollutant concentration which potentially will cause interference
with the wastewater sewer system and/or violate prohibited discharge standards
in Section
4-8A-4 of this Chapter.
SOLID WASTES: Any trash, ashes, rags, bottles, tin cans, tree limbs, manure of
domestic animals, offal, dead animals or portions thereof, foodstuffs, and
wastes thereof other than normally contained in sanitary sewage and any and all
other solid objects, materials, refuse or debris. The term "ashes" shall
include the residuum resulting from the combustion of coal, coke, wood, or any
other material or substance and shall include soot, cinders, slag and charcoal.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE: A classification pursuant to the
"Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued by the United States office
of management and budget.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or
is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by
laboratory filtering. Nonfilterable solids expressed in milligrams per liter,
contained in wastewater and measured by the methods set forth in "Standard
Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater" or such other method as
approved by the EPA.
TSS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in,
water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory
filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANTS: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed in
regulations promulgated by the administrator under provision of the act.
USER: A source of direct or indirect discharge to the wastewater sewer system.
VILLAGE: The village of South Barrington, Cook County, Illinois.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The village engineer of the village of South Barrington who
is designated by the village to oversee the operation and maintenance of the
wastewater sewer system, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this chapter.
WASTEWATER: Liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the wastewater sewer system.
WASTEWATER SEWER SYSTEM: The wastewater sewer system and all appurtenances
thereto of the village, but not including building sewers or any portion owned
by the MWRD. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
4-8A-2: GENERAL USE REQUIREMENTS:
4-8A-2-200: SEWER ENGINEERING AND INSTALLATION:
All sanitary sewer systems shall be engineered and installed in accordance with
this code and other ordinances of the village. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-2-201: NO SERVICE OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS:
   A.   All sanitary sewer connections within the corporate limits of the
village shall be at the option of the village.
   B.   Any owner(s) of property located outside the village limits that
desires to connect his or her property to the village's sanitary sewer system
must apply to the board of trustees for annexation to the village. The board of
trustees shall not grant permission to make any such connection(s) to any owner
(s) unless and until the owner(s) files an unconditional petition to annex his
or her property to the village. The village shall not be required to permit
such annexation and may include conditions of annexation in any annexation
agreement.
   C.   The village shall not allow any property outside the corporate limits
to connect to the village's sewer system except in accordance with an
intergovernmental agreement with another unit of government. (Ord. 2006-769, 4-
13-2006)
4-8A-2-210: CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE:
   A.   It is unlawful to make any connection with the building sewer and
wastewater sewer system without first having obtained a permit from the
village.
   B.   Applications for connection permits shall be made on the building
application forms provided by the village. Prior to final approval of the
connection, the applicant must submit four (4) original signed copies of the
MWRD permit application with all appropriate schedules. The village will sign
the permits and then return the permits to the applicant to mail to the MWRD
for its review and for approval.
   C.   No permit for a building sewer and connection to the wastewater sewer
system shall be issued by the village unless it is determined that the
applicant has complied with all applicable ordinances of the village.
   D.   No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into,
use, alter, or disturb any part of the wastewater sewer system or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the village and paying
all applicable fees to the village.
   E.   The permit application fee is established by resolution of the village
board.
   F.   No connection to the village owned and/or maintained sewer will be
permitted unless the village approves the connection. The village of South
Barrington may approve or deny the connection in its sole discretion. (Ord. 0-
2015-1072, 5-21-2015)
4-8A-2-220: DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER AND OTHER UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE TO SANITARY
SEWER PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person owning, or in possession of, real estate shall discharge or
cause or permit to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
waters into the wastewater sewer system.
   B.   All downspouts, outside stairwells and roof drains shall discharge onto
the ground or be connected to storm sewers, drainage ditches or storm drainage
systems. Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps and discharge shall be
made into storm sewers, sewer lines connected to storm sewers, drainage ditches
or storm drainage systems. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge ground
waters or surface waters shall be connected to a storm sewer or into a drainage
ditch or storm drainage system. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge
building floor drain flow, laundry tubs or other wastewater shall be connected
to the sanitary sewers pursuant to this Code. Each individual sump pump shall
be used for one function only, either the discharge of uncontaminated storm-
related ground waters or the discharge of wastewater. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-2-230: UNLAWFUL USE OR CONSTRUCTION OF PRIVATE SEWER DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
It is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except
as provided in Section
4-8A-2-265 of this Chapter. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-2-240: CONNECTION OF CERTAIN SEWERS TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person owning or in possession of real estate to
connect, permit to be connected or permit to remain connected to the wastewater
sewer system any building sewer which receives roof drainage, foundation
drainage, surface water or ground water. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-2-250: CONSTRUCTION OF COMBINED SEWERS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to construct combined sewers or other facilities intended to
receive both runoff and sewage. Separate sanitary sewers and separate storm
sewers shall be provided for all buildings within the Village which are served
by the wastewater sewer system. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-2-255: INSTALLATION OF TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED BY OWNER:
The owners of all buildings or properties used for public occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose, situated in the Village and abutting
on any street, right of way, or easement in which there is located any part of
the wastewater sewer system, are required at their expense to provide a
building sanitary sewer service line connecting the subject property to the
wastewater sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. Said
connection shall occur within ninety (90) days after date of Village notice to
do so, provided the wastewater sewer system is within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the property line. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-2-260: UNAUTHORIZED DESTRUCTION OR DEFACEMENT OF SEWAGE EQUIPMENT
PROHIBITED:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the wastewater sewer system. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-
1999)
4-8A-2-265: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS REQUIREMENTS; GENERALLY:
   A.   System Unavailable: Where the wastewater sewer system is not available
under the provisions of this Chapter, as defined in Section
4-8A-2-255 of this Chapter, the building sanitary sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this Section.
   B.   Permit And Fee: No construction shall be permitted for any private
sewage disposal system or for any building to be served by a private sewage
disposal system, within the Village, unless a permit for a private sewage
disposal system has first been obtained from the Village. In addition, no
permit will be issued unless the construction is to be done by an Illinois
Department of Public Health licensed private sewage disposal system contractor.
All percolation tests and private sewage disposal system plans shall be
completed in conformance with all County and State regulations, based on
location of property. No criteria shall be less stringent than the criteria of
the Illinois State Plumbing Code, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/1 and the
Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 225/1.
Percolation tests shall be conducted and evaluated under the supervision of a
registered professional engineer licensed to practice in Illinois.
   C.   Adoption Of Code: There is adopted by the Village those certain codes,
which are known as the Illinois State Plumbing Code and the Private Sewage
Disposal Licensing Act, the same being hereby adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out at length herein.
   D.   Inspections And Cleaning: All private sewage disposal systems installed
and operated within the Village limits may be subject to inspection by the
Village, to determine if the system is functioning properly and which
determination shall include, but not be limited to, a finding concerning the
following:
      1.   Contaminated surface or ground water;
      2.   Odorant production;
      3.   Depth of sludge in the septic tank;
      4.   Clogged seepage field;
      5.   Improper draining of the plumbing fixtures as a result of clogged
septic tank and/or seepage field;
      6.   Contaminated footing drain sump water.
If, after inspection, it is determined that the private sewage system is not
functioning properly, the owner and/or occupant shall be notified in writing to
have the necessary work performed to correct the malfunction. If modifications
to the system are required and are allowable, pursuant to the Illinois State
Plumbing Code and the Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code, both as
modified herein, said modifications shall be done by a licensed private sewage
disposal contractor. The owner and/or occupant shall be given a reasonable
amount of time. It is the responsibility of the property owner and occupant to
have the septic tank cleaned no less than once every five (5) years. The
Village may require the property owner to submit a copy of the paid bill for
such cleaning and services rendered by a licensed private sewage disposal
contractor. The Village may maintain a file system to inform property owners
and occupants of the necessity for cleaning the septic tank.
   E.   Connection To Wastewater Sewer System: In the event the malfunction
cannot be corrected by cleaning and repair and the property is within one
hundred feet (100') of the wastewater sewer system, the private system shall be
disconnected and connection made to the wastewater sewer system. (Ord. 99-586,
9-9-1999)
4-8A-2-270: BUILDING SEWERS; REQUIREMENTS; GENERALLY:
   A.   A separate and independent building sanitary sewer shall be provided
for every building. The sanitary sewer service shall be installed in a location
as approved by the Village. A building having one common wall with another
building is considered a separate building and shall have a separate building
sanitary sewer.
   B.   Existing building sanitary sewers and/or storm sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test
by the Village to meet all requirements of this Code.
   C.   New building sanitary sewers shall be installed in accordance with the
standards and procedures set forth in this Code, the ordinances, regulations
and rules of the MWRD, and State requirements. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-2-275: BUILDING SEWERS; OWNER AND OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITY FOR COST OF
INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION:
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sanitary sewer to the wastewater sewer system shall be borne by the
owner and occupant jointly and severally. The owner shall indemnify and hold
the Village harmless from any liability or loss including reasonable attorney
fees arising out of or in connection with the installation of the sewer for a
building, except to the extent prohibited by law. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-2-280: OWNER AND OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE:
The owner and occupant of the premises served by the wastewater sewer system
shall jointly and severally properly maintain and operate a building sewer or
sanitary sewer line to the point of connection to the wastewater sewer system.
Said point of connection shall be the sanitary sewer main. "Maintenance" means
keeping the sanitary sewer connection, sewer lines and other sewer facilities
in satisfactory working condition and in a good state of repair (including, but
not limited to, preventing any obstruction of extraneous material or flows from
entering said facilities, protecting said facilities from any damage and
keeping same free from defects and malfunctions), and making necessary
provisions and taking necessary precautions to assure that said sewer
facilities are at all times capable of satisfactorily performing the services
adequately discharging the facilities are intended to perform, discharge or
produce. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-2-285: INSPECTIONS OF BUILDINGS TO BE CONNECTED TO SEWER SYSTEM:
   A.   Upon payment of the permit fee, the Village, or its designee, shall
make the following inspections of each building to be connected to the
wastewater sewer system:
      1.   An inspection shall be made at the time the sewer ditch is opened
and the connection is made to the wastewater sewer system to determine that
there is proper grade and connection.
      2.   An inspection shall be made before the fill is put around the
foundation and while the tile is still exposed around the foundation to see
that there has been no connection of such drain tile with the wastewater sewer
system.
      3.   A third and final inspection shall be made after the eaves troughs,
downspouts and sump pumps have been installed to see that there is no
connection of the aforesaid with the wastewater sewer system.
   B.   The provisions of applicable statutes, ordinances and rules and
regulations relating to excavations in streets shall be complied with in making
excavations in streets and other public places for sewer connections. (Ord. 99-
586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-3: WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES:
4-8A-3-300: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The Village may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up
and operating the Village's pretreatment program which may include:
   A.   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of
processing such applications;
   B.   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports submitted by users;
   C.   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   D.   Fees for filing appeals;
   E.   Other fees as the Village may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this Chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties
collectable by the Village; and
   F.   Fees for all sampling and testing shall be the cost and expense
incurred by the Village plus twenty percent (20%).
Bills for monitoring services shall be sent out monthly for all customers and
shall be due and payable thirty (30) days from the billing date. An additional
charge of the greater of ten percent (10%) of the amount due the Village or
twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be made on all bills which have not been paid
when due. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-3-310: SURCHARGE TO INDUSTRIAL USERS FOR DISCHARGE OF COMPATIBLE
POLLUTANTS:
   A.   All users shall comply with limits imposed by this Chapter upon the
discharge of compatible pollutants. Upon written request by a user, the Village
may, in its sole discretion, approve the discharge of such pollutants in excess
of the stated limits, provided that such user shall pay a surcharge calculated
in accordance with this Section. Approval of such discharge and the surcharge
requirement shall be set forth in the user's wastewater discharge permit.
   B.   Charges shall be based on the average of the parameters, singly or in
combination, for the population equivalent; for example, one hundred (100)
gallons per day, or two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) of CBOD, or two
hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) of TSS, or one hundred milligrams
per liter (100 mg/l) of FOG, or fifty milligrams per liter (50 mg/l) of ammonia
as N. Since billing is most conveniently based on the volume measured where
either CBOD or TSS or FOG or ammonia concentrations exceed the population
equivalent levels during the billing period, the volume actually measured
shall, for billing purposes, be increased by the ratio of the excess of actual
BOD*, TSS, FOG, and/or ammonia concentrations over the respective population
concentration levels. As an example, if the average concentration for the
billing period for the following constituents are:
 
CBOD = 250 mg/l
TSS  = 275 mg/l
For this example the surcharge shall be:
 
1 + 250(CBOD) - 200 + 275 (TSS) - 250 = a multiplier of 1.35
  200                250
times the volume actually measured. All measurements, tests and analyses of the
characteristics of water and waste to determine the industrial user surcharge
factors shall be conducted as under sections
4-8A-6-645 and
4-8A-6-650 of this chapter.
A COD measurement shall be made in place of CBOD whenever a sample contains
pollutants which interfere with the accuracy of the CBOD test. In such case the
upper limit for COD shall be five hundred (500) and used in the surcharge
formula in lieu of the CBOD portion.
 
Example: (mg/l) COD - 500
         500
   C.   Residential charges shall be considered as those normal to the ordinary
domestic activity or permanent residence of the village, whether discharged at
the actual residence or directly or indirectly within the village.
   D.   Nonresidential discharges shall be discharges which do not meet the
criteria for residential discharges.
   E.   All industrial users shall be charged for sample collection and
laboratory analysis by the village at the rate established by the village.
   F.   Environmental remediation fee:
 
               Unit Of Measure Amount
ERW volume fee Gallon          $1.00
(Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-3-320: CONNECTION FEES:
Prior to the issuance of a permit allowing connections with the wastewater
sewer system, the applicant shall pay to the village a connection fee
calculated as follows:
   A.   All Users: All users shall pay a connection fee based upon the number
of gallons per day discharged as estimated by the village. The connection
charge per gallon of daily discharge shall be determined by the village from
time to time. Written agreements approved and executed by the village prior to
the effective date shall supersede this section for purposes of determining the
connection fee for the property which is the subject of said agreement.
   B.   Fees: The connection fee is established by resolution of the village
board at a rate per gallon of estimated daily discharge as estimated by the
village.
Such fee is due in full prior to connection to the sewer, subject to adjustment
as provided below.
   C.   Nonresidential Connection Fees:
      1.   If, after the "measurement period", defined herein, of actual
discharge into the system, it is determined that the original estimated daily
discharge is not consistent with actual usage, an adjustment may be made to the
original connection fee by the village.
         a.   If the actual daily usage during the measurement period is less
than ninety percent (90%) of the amount of estimated daily discharge determined
for calculation of the connection fee, the user, within sixty (60) days
following the end of the measurement period, may apply for an adjustment in the
connection fee. If approved by the village, such adjustment will be made by
refunding the excess connection fee.
         b.   If the actual daily usage during the measurement period is more
than one hundred five percent (105%) of the amount of estimated daily discharge
determined for calculation of the connection fee, the village may assess an
increase in the connection fee to reflect such higher usage. Such increase will
be made by adding a surcharge to the regular monthly billing to be collected
over a period of time determined by the village.
         c.   If the user facility is of the type that has significant seasonal
adjustments, such as an outdoor swimming pool or recreation facility, the
"average daily discharge" shall be the average of the highest consecutive four
(4) months during the "measurement period" defined below.
      2.   Calculations of daily discharge shall be made by an individual
designated by the village and such calculations shall be rounded up to the next
thousand gallons. Adjustments will be subject to the approval of the finance
committee of the village board. The term "measurement period" means twenty four
(24) months; except that for users whose business operations predated the date
the sewer was commissioned (August 1999), the measurement period means twelve
(12) months.
   D.   Single-Family Residential Connection Fees: The estimated number of
gallons per day discharged for single-family residential units shall be
determined by the estimated population of the residence based upon the number
of bedrooms as shown in the following chart:
 
Bedrooms  Population Daily Gallons Of Discharge
2         2.017      201
3         2.899      290
4         3.764      376
5 or more 3.770      377
 
The daily gallons of discharge shown herein and the fee amount established
above shall determine the connection fee. Residential connection fees shall be
paid at the time of building permit issuance. (Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-3-340: USER CHARGES:
   A.   User charges shall be determined by the village from time to time. Each
user constructing a facility subsequent to the effective date of this chapter
shall, at its sole cost and expense, install a water meter, as approved by the
village engineer or his designee, on the potable water source serving the
subject property. Maintenance and repair of said water meter shall be the
obligation of the user. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any facility in
existence prior to the effective date of this chapter may utilize a flow meter,
as approved by the village engineer or his designee, for the purposes of
determining discharge at the discretion of the village engineer. The
construction, installation, maintenance and repair of said flow meter shall be
the obligation of the user.
   B.   The use charge is established by resolution of the village board at a
rate per one thousand (1,000) gallons of daily wastewater discharge. In
addition to the use charge, surcharges may be established for the following:
      1.   Restaurants, breweries or food processing facilities.
      2.   Users located outside the municipal limits of South Barrington.
(Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-3-341: REFUND FOR WATER USED FOR LAWN IRRIGATION:
   A.   The village will refund the user charges paid for wastewater that is
used for lawn irrigation between June 15 and September 15 of each year, in
accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   The water used for lawn irrigation was measured through the user's
primary water meter and the water customer paid a sewer user charge for such
water.
      2.   The user has installed a secondary water meter in accordance with
village standards that measures water used for lawn irrigation.
   B.   The refund will be made on the following basis:
      1.   The customer listed on the account has applied to the village for
participation in the refund program and agrees to comply with the provisions of
the program.
      2.   The village will read the secondary water meters on or about June 15
and September 15 to determine the amount of water used for lawn irrigation that
has been billed a sewer use charge.
      3.   The village staff will calculate the amount of the refund and
present the payment request to the village board for approval at their October
meeting. The refund will be made, less any administration fee established by
resolution of the village board. (Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-3-350: BILLS; WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE AND CHARGE FOR LATE PAYMENT:
Bills for sewer service shall be sent out bimonthly and shall be due and
payable twenty five (25) days from the billing date. An additional charge of
ten percent (10%) of the amount due the village shall be made on all bills
which have not been paid when due. The village may bill commercial users on a
monthly basis. (Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-4: GENERAL SANITARY SEWER DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
4-8A-4-400: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
   A.   General Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the wastewater sewer system any pollutant or wastewater which causes
interference or damage to the wastewater sewer system or violates any
ordinance, rule or regulation of the MWRD. These general prohibitions and the
specific prohibitions in subsection B of this section apply to all users of the
wastewater sewer system whether or not they are subject to categorical
pretreatment standards or any other federal, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements.
   B.   Specific Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the wastewater sewer system the following pollutants,
substances, or wastewater:
      1.   Pollutants which create fire or explosive hazard in the wastewater
sewer system including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup
flash point of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C)
using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      2.   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than nine (9), or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the wastewater sewer system or
equipment;
      3.   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the wastewater sewer system resulting in interference but in no
case solids greater than one-half inch (1/2") or 1.27 centimeters (1.27 cm);
      4.   Pollutants released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
will cause interference with the wastewater sewer system;
      5.   Wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty seven
degrees Fahrenheit (157°F) (65°C);
      6.   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference;
      7.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the wastewater sewer system in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems;
      8.   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the director of public works in a wastewater discharge permit;
      9.   Noxious or other malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance or repair. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-4-420: STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
State pretreatment standards located at title 35, subtitle C, chapter 1,
section 302, published in Barclay's official Illinois administrative rules, are
hereby incorporated by reference. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-4-430: LOCAL LIMITS:
The following pollutant limits are established to protect the wastewater sewer
system. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the limits
established by federal government, the state, the MWRD or the following,
whichever is more stringent:
50.0  mg/l ammonia
*     mg/l antimony
0.7   mg/l barium
*     mg/l beryllium
200   mg/l CBOD 5
500   mg/l COD
0.85  mg/l cadmium
0.5   mg/l chromium
0.5   mg/l chromium (hex - grab not to exceed 24 hours)
3.0   mg/l chromium (total)
1.0   mg/l copper
*     mg/l cyanide (grab) (weak acid dissociable)
0.5   mg/l cyanide (total) (grab)
45.0  mg/l fluoride
3.0   mg/l iron (dissolved)
30.0  mg/l iron (total)
0.5   mg/l lead
4.0   mg/l manganese
0.005 mg/l mercury
3.0   mg/l nickel
100   mg/l oil and grease
1.0   mg/l selenium
0.2   mg/l silver
*     mg/l thallium
0.80  mg/l total phenols
250   mg/l total suspended solids
7.5   mg/l zinc
 
(Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the
wastewater sewer system. All concentrations for metallic substances are for
"total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The village engineer may impose mass
limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration based limitations
above. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-4-440: VILLAGE'S RIGHT OF REVISION:
The village reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharge to the
wastewater sewer system without personal notice to any user. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-
1999)
4-8A-4-450: DILUTION:
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to
dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
to achieve a compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized
by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The village engineer may
impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition
of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-
814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-4-460: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
Users shall provide wastewater pretreatment as necessary to comply with this
chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set forth in this chapter
including sections
4-8A-4-400,
4-8A-4-420, and
4-8A-4-430 of this chapter within the time limitations specified by the EPA,
the state, the MWRD or the village engineer, whichever is more stringent and as
amended from time to time. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
village engineer for review, and shall be approved in writing by the village
engineer before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to
the village under the provisions of this chapter or any other body having
jurisdiction over such discharge. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814,
5-10-2007)
4-8A-4-470: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
   A.   Whenever deemed necessary, the village engineer may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste
streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
wastewater sewer system and determine that user's compliances with the
requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The village engineer may require any user discharging into the
wastewater sewer system to install and maintain, on the user's property and at
the user's expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for
flow equalization.
   C.   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the village engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of type and capacity approved by the village engineer and shall
be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the user at the user's expense. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814,
5-10-2007)
   D.   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-4-480: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS:
At least once every two (2) years the village engineer shall evaluate whether
each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control
plan. The village engineer may require any significant industrial user to
develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. An accidental
discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: (Ord.
99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   A.   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
   B.   Description of stored chemicals; (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
   C.   Procedures for immediately notifying the village engineer of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by section
4-8A-6-625 of this chapter; and (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814,
5-10-2007)
   D.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-5: PERMITS:
4-8A-5-500: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
   A.   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
wastewater sewer system without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit
from the village engineer, except that a significant industrial user that has
filed a timely application pursuant to section
4-8A-5-540 of this chapter may continue to discharge for the time period
specified therein, provided the discharge in all other respects does not
violate any provision of this chapter.
   B.   The village engineer may require other users as well as significant
industrial users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry
out the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814,
5-10-2007)
   C.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater
discharge permittee to the sanctions set forth in this chapter. Obtaining a
wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to
comply with all federal, state and MWRD pretreatment standards or requirements
and local limits or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local
law. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-5-505: WASTEWATER ANALYSIS:
When requested by the village, a user shall submit information on the nature
and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of the request.
The village may periodically require users to update this information. (Ord.
99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-5-510: INDUSTRIAL USER WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION:
   A.   Applications for discharge permits shall be made to the village and
shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth the purpose of connecting to
the wastewater sewer system, the premises to be served, the specifications of
the sewer pipe to be connected and the drain or drains from the structure to
the sewer pipe.
   B.   Prior to the issuance of a village wastewater discharge permit, the
industrial user shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and such other
fees, costs, and expenses which may be incurred by the village pursuant to
section
4-8A-8-800 of this chapter. Such fee is due and payable whenever a discharge
permit is issued, modified or renewed. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-5-530: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT; NEW SOURCE:
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin
or recommence discharging into the wastewater sewer system shall obtain such
permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application
for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section
4-8A-5-540 of this chapter, shall be filed at least one hundred eighty (180)
days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. (Ord.
99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-5-540: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS:
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall submit a
permit application on a form provided by the village. The village may require
all users to submit as part of an application the following information:
   A.   All information required by subsection 4-8A-6-600B of this chapter;
   B.   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processors on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged
to the wastewater sewer system;
   C.   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or
actual hours of operation;
   D.   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate
of production;
   E.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
   F.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to
show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and
elevation, and all points of discharge;
   G.   Time and duration of discharges; and
   H.   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the village to
evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-5-550: APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION:
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports shall be signed
by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitted false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment
for knowing violations.
(Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-5-560: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS:
The village will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. A wastewater discharge permit application shall be
deemed complete when the village has received all such data and additional
information required, if any. Within ninety (90) days of a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, the village will determine whether or not to
issue a wastewater discharge permit. The village may deny any application for a
wastewater discharge permit. No permit shall issue without the specific
approval of the village engineer. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814,
5-10-2007)
4-8A-5-565: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION:
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the village engineer to prevent interference of the
wastewater sewer system, protect the quality of the water body receiving the
MWRD's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management
and disposal, and protect against damage to the wastewater sewer system.
Wastewater discharge permits shall contain the following matters; provided,
however, a failure to include any such matter shall not invalidate or limit the
requirement of such permit: (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-
2007)
   A.   A statement that indicates that the wastewater discharge permit may be
revoked for noncompliance with this chapter;
   B.   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable;
   C.   Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
   D.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping
requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants
to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based
on federal, state, and local law; and
   E.   Notification requirement to report to the village both orally or in
writing, any violation of applicable pretreatment standards within twenty four
(24) hours of occurrence. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-5-575: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS:
The village may provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge
permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the village to reconsider
the issuance and/or terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30)
days of notice of its issuance.
   A.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   B.   In its petition, the appealing party shall indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
   C.   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
   D.   If the village engineer fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request
for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999;
amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   E.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision shall do so by filing a complaint with the
circuit court for Cook County within thirty five (35) days of the date of the
final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision. Such proceeding
shall be in accordance with the applicable statutes for judicial review of
administrative decisions, or declaratory judgment whichever applies. (Ord. 99-
586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-5-580: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION:
The village engineer may unilaterally modify a wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: (Ord. 99-586,
9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   A.   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
   B.   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
   C.   A change in the wastewater sewer system that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   D.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the village's wastewater sewer system, village personnel, or the receiving
waters;
   E.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
   F.   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
   G.   Revision of a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
   H.   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
   I.   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator.
The user shall be notified in writing of the modifications to the wastewater
discharge permit. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-5-585: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION:
The village engineer may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   A.   Failure to notify the village engineer of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
   B.   Failure to provide prior notification to the village engineer of
changed conditions pursuant to section
4-8A-6-620 of this chapter; (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-
2007)
   C.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
   D.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
   E.   Tampering with monitoring equipment; (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
   F.   Refusing to allow the village engineer timely access to the facility
premises and records; (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   G.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
   H.   Failure to pay fines;
   I.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
   J.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
   K.   Failure to complete and submit a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
   L.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership
of a permitted facility;
   M.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of
the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter;
   N.   Violation of this chapter, its permit; the Illinois act or the act, or
regulations promulgated under either act; or any rules, regulations or
ordinances of the MWRD;
   O.   Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge as determined by the user's or village's
analysis;
   P.   Failure to report an accidental discharge of a pollutant;
   Q.   Failure to report an upset of user's treatment facilities.
Wastewater discharge permits automatically expire upon cessation of operations
or transfer of business ownership unless a transfer is authorized by the
village. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user
automatically expire and are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit to that user. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-5-586: PROCEDURES FOR REVOCATION:
   A.   The village engineer may order any user who causes or allows any action
relative to a permit which is subject to a revocation under section
4-8A-5-585 of this chapter to show cause before a hearing officer designated by
the board of trustees why the permit should not be revoked. A notice shall be
served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by
such hearing officer regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to
be taken, the proposed action, and directing the user to show cause before the
hearing why its permit should not be revoked. The notice of the hearing shall
be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, except where the village engineer determines an emergency exists, at
least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or
officer of a user. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   B.   The board of trustees may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence, or may designate any of its members, its attorney or other person as
a hearing officer to:
      1.   Issue in the name of the village notices of hearings requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant
to any matter involved in such hearing;
      2.   Take the evidence;
      3.   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts
and other evidence, together with recommendation to the board of trustees for
action thereon.
   C.   At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken shall be
under oath and recorded. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to
any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual copying charges therefor.
   D.   After the board of trustees has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing:
      1.   The discharge permit be revoked and the service be disconnected;
      2.   That following a specified time the permit shall be revoked and
sewer service disconnected unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances have been installed and operated properly to comply
with the discharge permit;
      3.   The user to cease the unauthorized discharge effective after a
specified period of time; or
      4.   Such other relief as deemed necessary by the board of trustees to
abate the discharge be granted.
      5.   Further orders and directives as are necessary may be issued.
   E.   Following an order of revocation, the user shall cease discharging to
the village's wastewater sewer system. Failure to do so shall be evidence of
continuing harm to the village and provide grounds for the granting of
injunctive relief or temporary restraining orders. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-5-587: TRANSFER OF PERMITS:
   A.   The village may authorize a transfer of a wastewater discharge permit
upon application by user indicating a proposed transfer of business ownership.
   B.   At a minimum the village will require the new owner or operator to
provide a written certification that:
      1.   States that the new owner or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes;
      2.   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
      3.   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-5-590: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE:
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater
discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in
accordance with section
4-8A-5-500 of this chapter, a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to
the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 99-
586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-6: COMPLIANCE:
4-8A-6-600: BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS:
   A.   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of
a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, any
existing categorical user currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to
the wastewater sewer system shall submit to the village engineer a report which
contains the information listed in subsection B of this section. At least
ninety (90) days prior to the commencement of its discharge, a new source or a
source that becomes categorical user subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the village engineer a report
which contains the information listed in subsection B of this section. A new
source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. (Ord. 99-586, 9-
9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   B.   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
      1.   Identifying Information: The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
      2.   Environmental Permits: A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      3.   Description Of Operations: A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial clarifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the wastewater
sewer system from the regulated processes.
      4.   Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum flow, gallons per day, to the wastewater sewer system from regulated
process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      5.   Measurement Of Pollutants:
         a.   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
         b.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the village
engineer, or regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average concentrations, or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
section
4-8A-6-645 of this chapter. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-
2007)
         c.   Sampling shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in section
4-8A-6-650 of this chapter.
      6.   Certification: A standard, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certificate by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
      7.   Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section shall meet the requirements set out in section
4-8A-6-605 of this chapter.
      8.   Signature And Certification: All baseline monitoring reports shall
be signed and certified in accordance with section
4-8A-5-550 of this chapter. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-6-605: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS:
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
section
4-8A-6-600 of this chapter:
   A.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   B.   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; (Ord. 99-
586, 9-9-1999)
   C.   The user shall submit a progress report to the village engineer no
later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final
date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
   D.   In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the village engineer. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-
2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-6-610: REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE:
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the wastewater sewer
system, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall
submit to the village engineer a report containing the information described in
section
4-8A-6-615 of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long
term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports shall be signed and certified in accordance with section
4-8A-5-550 of this chapter. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-
2007)
4-8A-6-615: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS:
   A.   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the village engineer but in no case less than twice per year (in June and
December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
All periodic compliance reports shall be signed and certified in accordance
with section
4-8A-5-550 of this chapter. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-
2007)
   B.   Such reports shall contain:
      1.   Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the wastewater sewer system from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      2.   Measurement Of Pollutants:
         a.   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
         b.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the village
engineer, of regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample
shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance
with the procedures set out in section
4-8A-6-645 of this chapter. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-
2007)
         c.   Sampling shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in section
4-8A-6-650 of this chapter.
      3.   Certification: A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional O&M and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
   C.   All wastewater samples shall be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
   D.   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any pollutant more frequently than required by the village engineer, using the
procedures prescribed in section
4-8A-6-650 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-6-620: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
Each user shall notify the village engineer of any planned significant changes
to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or
volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change.
   A.   The village engineer may require the user to submit such information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section
4-8A-5-540 of this chapter.
   B.   The village engineer may issue a wastewater discharge permit under
section
4-8A-5-560 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under section
4-8A-5-580 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   C.   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
   D.   This section applies to discharges of hazardous waste for which a
notification has been submitted under section
4-8A-6-635 of this chapter. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-6-625: REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS:
   A.   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch
discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the wastewater
sewer system, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the village
engineer of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective
measures taken by the user.
   B.   Within ten (10) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the village engineer, submit a detailed written report describing the
cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the wastewater sewer system, natural resources, or any other damage
to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any
fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-
1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   C.   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in subsection A of this section. Employers shall ensure
that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-6-630: REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS:
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the village engineer as the village engineer may
require. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-6-635: NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify
the village engineer within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the village engineer within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if
the village engineer monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or
if the village engineer samples between the user's initial sampling and when
the user receives the results of this sampling unless the village engineer
requires otherwise. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-6-645: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part
of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part
136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance with the
procedures approved by EPA. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-6-650: SAMPLE COLLECTION:
   A.   Except as indicated in subsection B of this section, the user shall
collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the
village engineer may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a
minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will
provide representative samples of the effluent being discharged. In addition,
grab sample may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge
limits. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   B.   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds shall be obtained using grab
collection techniques. A minimum of four (4) grab samples are required. (Ord.
99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-6-655: TIMING:
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date received.
(Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-6-660: RECORD KEEPING:
Users subject to the reporting requirement of this chapter shall retain, and
make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained
pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include
the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of person(s)
taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the
analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such
analyses. Such records shall be retained and made available for a period of at
least five (5) years. Such period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user or the village, or where the
user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the village
engineer. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-6-690: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring
programs, and from the village engineer's inspection and sampling activities,
shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
village engineer, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request shall be asserted at
the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and
demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be
held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets
or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public,
but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies
for uses related to the program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 302 will not
be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public
without restriction. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-7: ENFORCEMENT:
4-8A-7-700: PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The village shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in
the village, or if none is published within the village then such newspaper as
the village shall designate, a list of the users which, during the previous
twelve (12) months, were in "significant noncompliance" with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance"
shall mean:
   A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
during a six (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit
for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
   B.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those which
thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product
of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable
criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH); (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
   C.   Any other discharge violation that the village engineer believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or damage,
including endangering the health of village personnel or the general public;
   D.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the village engineer's
exercise of his or her emergency authority to halt or prevent such discharge;
(Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   E.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
   F.   Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard datelines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
   H.   Any other violation(s) which the village engineer determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the village pretreatment
program or wastewater sewer system. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-
814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-7-705: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
When the village engineer or his/her authorized designee finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standards
or requirement, the village engineer or his/her authorized designee may serve
upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of the
receipt of said notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required
actions, shall be submitted by the user to the village engineer. Submission of
this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section
shall limit the authority of the village engineer to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
notice of violation. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-7-710: CONSENT ORDERS:
The village engineer or his/her authorized designee may enter into consent
orders of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will
include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the
same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections
4-8A-7-720 and
4-8A-7-725 of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable. Issuance of a
consent order shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-
10-2007)
4-8A-7-715: SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
The village engineer may order a user which has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear
before the village engineer and show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and
place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such
action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at
least three (3) days prior to the hearing, unless the village engineer
determines an emergency exists and less time is warranted. Such notice may be
served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall
not be a bar against, nor prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-7-720: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
When the village engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
village engineer may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the
user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may
be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional
self- monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order neither extends the
deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be
a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-7-725: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
When the village engineer or his/her authorized designee finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
village engineer may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the user to: (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999;
amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   A.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   B.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, nor a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-
1999)
4-8A-7-730: ADMINISTRATIVE SETTLEMENT IN LIEU OF CIVIL PENALTY:
   A.   When the village engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
village engineer may upon agreement of the user, enter an order of
administrative settlement in lieu of civil penalty against such user in an
amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such settlements shall be
assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other
long term average discharge limits, administrative settlements in lieu of civil
penalty shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
   B.   Users desiring to dispute such settlements shall file a written request
for the village engineer to reconsider the administrative settlements in lieu
of civil penalty along with full payment of the administrative settlement in
lieu of civil penalty amount within ten (10) days of being notified of the
administrative settlement in lieu of civil penalty. Where a request has merit,
the village engineer may conduct a hearing on the matter. In the event the
user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing
thereto, shall be returned to the user. The village engineer may add the costs
of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to
the administrative settlement in lieu of civil penalty. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999;
amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   C.   Issuance of an administrative settlement in lieu of civil penalty shall
not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action against
the user. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-7-735: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The village engineer or his/her authorized designee may immediately suspend a
user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears
to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The village engineer or his/her authorized designee may
also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the wastewater sewer system, or which
presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
   A.   Any user notified of suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop
or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the village engineer may take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the wastewater sewer system, its
receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The village engineer may
allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the village engineer that the period of endangerment has
passed, unless the termination proceedings in section
4-8A-7-740 of this chapter are initiated against the user.
   B.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the village engineer prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under section
4-8A-7-715 or
4-8A-7-740 of this chapter. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-
2007)
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to
any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-7-740: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
In addition to the provisions in section
4-8A-7-735 of this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
   A.   Violations of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
   B.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
   C.   Failure to report significant changes in operations of wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
   D.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purposes of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
   E.   Violations of the pretreatment standards in sections
4-8A-4-400,
4-8A-4-420 and
4-8A-4-430 of this chapter. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be
offered an opportunity to show cause under section
4-8A-7-715 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken.
Exercise of this option by the village engineer shall not be a bar to, nor a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-
1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-7-745: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the village engineer finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
village engineer may petition the circuit court through the village attorney
for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which
restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge
permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of
the user. The village engineer may also seek such other action as is
appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement imposed
by this chapter on activities of the user. The village engineer may also seek
such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief,
including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A
petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord.
0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-7-750: CIVIL PENALTIES/PENALTIES AND COSTS:
Any user who is found to have violated an order of the board of trustees or who
has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, any rules and
regulations, permits or orders issued hereunder, shall be fined in an amount
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). For the purpose of this section, each day in which any
such violation shall occur or continue, shall be deemed a separate violation,
and a separate violation shall be deemed to have occurred for each constituent
found to exceed the limits established in this chapter during any such day. For
each separate violation, each such person shall be fined an amount not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In addition to the penalties provided
in this chapter, the village may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs,
court reporter fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit
against the person found to have violated this chapter or the rules,
regulations, permits or orders issued hereunder. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-7-755: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
   A.   A user who wilfully or negligently violates any provision of this
chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per violation, per date. Each day on which a violation occurs or
continues shall be deemed a separate violation.
   B.   A user who wilfully or negligently introduces any substance into the
wastewater sewer system which causes personal injury or property damage shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or be subject to imprisonment for
not more than six (6) months, or both. Each day on which a violation occurs or
continues shall be deemed a separate violation. This penalty shall be in
addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage
available under state law.
   C.   A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day.
   D.   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine
of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. Each
day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate
violation. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-7-760: REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The village may
take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user.
Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the
village's enforcement response plan; provided, however, the village may take
other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. (Ord. 99-586, 9-
9-1999)
4-8A-7-770: PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The village engineer may decline to issue a wastewater discharge permit to any
user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a
satisfactory bond, with the village as beneficiary, in a form and of a sum not
to exceed a value determined by the village engineer to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-7-775: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The village engineer may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter,
a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that
it has obtained liability insurance or provides financial assurances sufficient
to restore or repair any damage to the wastewater sewer system it may cause by
its discharge. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-7-777: WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE:
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, village water service to the user may be
severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has
satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-7-780: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is
hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed
by the village engineer. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be
subject to the provisions governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the
village for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said
nuisance. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-7-785: RIGHT TO CUT OFF SERVICE; RECONNECTION PROCEDURE FOR NONPAYMENT:
   A.   The village shall have the right to discontinue its sewer service to
the user on due notice whenever the bills for sewer service, other charges,
penalties or fines pursuant to this chapter remain unpaid for thirty (30) days
after the due date specified, or in case the user fails to comply with, or
perform, any of the conditions or obligations for service.
   B.   A user's service so disconnected shall be reconnected after the user
has made settlement for all outstanding amounts owed, or has, to the village's
satisfaction, complied with or performed such other conditions or obligations
hereof which were in default, as the case may be. The user shall pay the entire
cost of disconnection and reconnection prior to reconnecting the service. (Ord.
99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-7-788: LIEN RIGHTS:
   A.   Whenever a bill for sewer service, including any charge, penalty or
fine pursuant to this chapter, remains unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been
rendered, the village may file with the Cook County recorder's office a
statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain a legal description of
the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the
village claims a lien for such amount as well as for all charges for sewer
service subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
   B.   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises, the
village shall notify the owner of the premises if his address is known to the
village, whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of ninety (90) days
after it has been rendered.
   C.   The failure of the village to record such lien claim or to mail such
notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the
right to foreclose the lien for unpaid sewer bills unless specifically
prohibited by law.
   D.   Property subject to a lien for unpaid sewer service charges shall be
sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied
to pay the charges, after deducting costs as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity or other
appropriate proceeding in the name of the village. The village may institute
such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction
over such matters against any property for which the bill for sewer service has
remained unpaid ninety (90) days after it has been rendered. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-
1999)
4-8A-7-790: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE; UPSET:
   A.   For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   B.   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of subsection C of this section, are met.
   C.   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      1.   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      2.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
      3.   The user has submitted the following information to the village
engineer within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset if this
information is provided orally, a written submission shall be provided within
five (5) days: (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
         a.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         b.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         c.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   D.   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   E.   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   F.   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. The requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-7-795: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE TO PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section
4-8A-4-400 of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in sections
4-8A-4-420 and
4-8A-4-430 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason
to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:
   A.   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference; or
   B.   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the village was
regularly in compliance with federal, state, MWRD and local requirements. (Ord.
99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-7-799: BYPASS:
   A.   A user may allow any user bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. Such user bypasses are
not subject to the provisions of subsections C and D of this section. (Ord. 99-
586, 9-9-1999)
   B.   1. If a user knows in advance of the need for a user bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the village engineer, at least ten (10) days before the
date of the user bypass, if possible.
      2.   A user shall submit oral notice to the village engineer of an
unanticipated user bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
twenty four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the user bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the
user becomes aware of the user bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the user bypass and its cause, the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the user bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or
planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the user bypass. The
user bypass does not result in a violation of any federal, state, MWRD, or
local law, rule, regulation or ordinance by the village.
   C.   1. User bypass is prohibited, and the village engineer may take an
enforcement action against a user for a user bypass, unless: (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-
1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
         a.   The user bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
         b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the user bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a user bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance;
         c.   The user submitted notices as required under subsection B of this
section; and
         d.   The user bypass does not result in a violation of any federal,
state, MWRD, or local law, rule, regulation or ordinance by the village. (Ord.
99-586, 9-9-1999)
   D.   The village engineer may approve an anticipated user bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the village engineer determines that it
will meet the four (4) conditions listed in subsection C of this section. (Ord.
99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-8: MONITORING:
4-8A-8-800: MONITORING PROGRAM BY VILLAGE:
The village engineer may create a program for monitoring industrial user
discharges; provided, that any industrial user that has a population
equivalent, as determined by the village engineer, equal to or greater than one
hundred (100) shall be monitored no less than once annually. All other
industrial users would be monitored at such frequency as deemed necessary by
the village engineer. Monitoring shall consist of the taking and testing of
grab samples or twenty four (24) hour composite samples as deemed reasonably
necessary by the village engineer for determination of the population
equivalent of the industrial user. The monitoring data collected shall be used
to determine the population equivalent. In the event that a sampling manhole
does not exist, the "sampling manhole" shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer
is connected, until such time as the sampling manhole has been constructed.
Industrial user shall be subject to fees for sampling and testing of their
discharge as it pertains to the village's monitoring program. (Ord. 99-586, 9-
9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
Where required by the village, additional control manholes or sampling chambers
shall be provided at the end of each industrial process within an industrial
user's facility suitable for the determination of compliance with pretreatment
standards. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-8-810: RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
The village engineer or his/her authorized designee shall have the right to
enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with
all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder. Users shall allow the village engineer or his/her authorized
designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of
any additional duties.
   A.   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the user shall
make the necessary arrangements, with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the village engineer or his/her
authorized designee will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes
of performing specific responsibilities.
   B.   The village engineer or his/her authorized designee shall have the
right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's
operations. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   C.   The industrial user may request that the representative of the village
state the purpose of any inspection, and further, may request that such
representative abide by reasonable safety and hygiene requirements. (Ord. 99-
586, 9-9-1999)
   D.   The village engineer may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary in accordance with section
4-8A-6-600 of this chapter. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment
shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by
the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated by the user biannually to ensure their accuracy.
   E.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the village engineer and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. (Ord.
99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   F.   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit or restrict any industrial
user from exercising any right it may have to object to the nature and extent
of any inspection access request, or to object to any inspection access request
as not necessary to carry out the purposes of the village pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
   G.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the village engineer or his/her
authorized designee access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-8-820: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the village engineer or his/her authorized designee has been refused access
to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program of the village designed to verify compliance
with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the village
engineer or his/her authorized designee may seek issuance of a search warrant
from the circuit court. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-
2007)
4-8A-8-840: CONTROL MANHOLE DEVICE AND SAMPLING REQUIREMENTS; LOCATION,
CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE AND FACILITY MONITORING:
   A.   When required by the village engineer, the owner and/or occupant of any
property served by a building sanitary sewer carrying industrial waste shall
install a suitable control manhole in the building sanitary sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall include, but not be limited to, being accessible, safely
located, and provide for one hundred ten (110) volt hookup and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the village engineer. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner and/or occupant at his expense, and
shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible to the village at
all times.
   B.   When in the judgment of the village engineer there exists sufficient
volumes and/or quantities of contaminants that may interfere with the
performance of the wastewater sewer system, the village engineer may require
the owner and/or occupant of any property and/or an industrial user served by a
building sanitary sewer carrying industrial wastes to install composite
sampling equipment and/or flow measurement equipment. Said composite sampling
and flow measurement equipment shall be installed by the property owner and/or
occupant at its expense and shall be maintained by it as to be functional at
all times, safe and accessible to the village. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999; amd.
Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
   C.   The owner and/or occupant shall be responsible for monitoring its
effluent to ensure that its discharge meets village, MWRD, state and federal
laws and requirements. It is also responsible for having knowledge of the
contaminants in its wastewater and the specific limitations relative to its
discharge. Records shall be kept by the owner and/or occupant of the results of
all sampling and/or flow measurements. Such documentation shall be available to
appropriate village personnel at all reasonable times. Records shall be kept by
the owner and/or occupant no less than three (3) years or longer if required by
state or federal laws prior to discard or if an enforcement action is pending.
(Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
   D.   Where composite sampling equipment is available, the village shall
utilize such composite samples for purposes of calculating surcharges pursuant
to section
4-8A-3-310 of this chapter. The average of all composite samples during the
monitoring period shall be used to determine the multiplier. Should the
composite sampling equipment malfunction or if it does not exist, the village
shall use composite grab samples of not less than four (4) aliquots in a twenty
four (24) hour period, unless the user agrees to less than four (4) grab
samples in a twenty four (24) hour period, to determine surcharges as set forth
in section
4-8A-3-310 of this chapter. The average of all grab samples taken by the
village during the billing period shall be used for the multiplier. Where
nonfunctional composite equipment exists and at such time that a grab sample
exceeds the limitations specified in section
4-8A-4-400 of this chapter for total suspended solids, ammonia, phosphorous or
grease, the village and waste generator shall split grab samples no less than
five (5) samples per week until the composite sampler is once again functional.
Should the composite sampler become functional prior to the end of the billing
period, composite samples shall be taken no less than five (5) per week for the
remainder of the billing period for computing the average of the grab and
composite samples to determine the billing multiplier. The village engineer
shall decide the time when split sampling will be taken. Should there be a
significant discrepancy between the owner's and/or occupant's test results and
the village's test results on split samples, the owner and/or occupant may
request billing to be based upon testing results from an independent testing
laboratory. Upon investigation by the village engineer as to the reasons for
the discrepancy in sample results, the village engineer shall take appropriate
corrective actions and/or authorized in writing the terms of using a certified
independent testing laboratory. The choice of independent laboratory shall be
at the discrepancy of the village engineer. All expenses incurred for
monitoring by an independent certified laboratory shall be at the expense of
the owner and/or occupant.
   E.   Should the village engineer find violations of standards set forth in
this chapter including sections
4-8A-4-400,
4-8A-4-420, and/or
4-8A-4-430 of this chapter, the village engineer may require the owner and/or
occupant to provide access for the use of laboratory testing equipment or to
contract for laboratory testing services and provide the village with a copy of
the test results of the constituent(s) monitored. Upon review of the products
and byproducts of the owner and/or occupant operation and the type of
wastewater that is indigenous to the operation, the village engineer shall also
stipulate what constituents are to be monitored to ensure proper performance by
the village sewerage system in compliance with this chapter, any MWRD
requirement, state and federal law.
   F.   Where nonfunctional or malfunctioning flow measurement equipment
exists, the water generator and/or industrial user shall notify the village
engineer within twenty four (24) hours of his or her knowledge of the
malfunction so appropriate interim measurement arrangements can be made. (Ord.
99-586, 9-9-1999; amd. Ord. 0-2007-814, 5-10-2007)
4-8A-8-850: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue
in full force and effect. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-8-860: ADMINISTRATION:
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
village president or his/her designee. (Ord. 99-586, 9-9-1999)
4-8A-9: PENALTY:
4-8A-9-900: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any portion of this chapter shall be
fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day on which a
violation continues or persists shall be deemed a separate offense. The village
engineer or his designee may issue violation notices of this chapter. (Ord. 0-
2007-814, 5-10-2007)
CHAPTER 8B
WATER UTILITY SYSTEM
SECTION:
4-8B-1: General Provisions
4-8B-1-100: Definitions
4-8B-2: General Use Requirement
4-8B-2-200: Connection Permit Required; Fee
4-8B-2-205: Insurance Required
4-8B-2-210: Supervision Of Connections; Inspections
4-8B-2-215: Turnon Of Water
4-8B-2-220: Hydrant Use
4-8B-2-225: Service Pipes And Connections
4-8B-2-230: New Developments; Use Of Or Disconnection From Mains
4-8B-2-235: Resale Of Water
4-8B-2-240: Tampering Or Interfering With System
4-8B-2-245: Water Service Outside Village Limits Prohibited
4-8B-3: Water Meters And Rates
4-8B-3-300: Meters Required; Charges
4-8B-3-305: Supervision Of And Standards For Meter Installation
4-8B-3-310: Location Of Meters
4-8B-3-315: Responsibility For Meters; Reading And Maintenance
4-8B-3-320: Water Rates Established
4-8B-3-325: Liability For Service
4-8B-3-330: Use Of Water During Building Construction
4-8B-3-335: Bills For Service; Penalty For Delinquencies
4-8B-3-340: Nonpayment Of Bills; Discontinuance Of Service
4-8B-3-345: Lien For Unpaid Bills; Foreclosure
4-8B-3-350: Review Of Rates; Revisions
4-8B-3-355: Disposition And Administration Of Revenues
4-8B-3-360: Accounts And Records
4-8B-4: Nondomestic Water Use; Bulk Deliveries
4-8B-4-400: Application For Temporary Hookup
4-8B-4-405: Responsibility To Provide Equipment
4-8B-4-410: Supervision Of Temporary Connections
4-8B-4-415: Water Rates And Charges For Nondomestic Purposes
4-8B-5: Limitation On The Use Of Water
4-8B-5-500: Purposes
4-8B-5-510: Outdoor Water Use Limitations During Drought Or Water Emergency
4-8B-5-515: Sod Installation
4-8B-6: Reserved
4-8B-7: Reserved
4-8B-8: Reserved
4-8B-9: Penalty
4-8B-9-900: Violation; Penalty
4-8B-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
4-8B-1-100: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The village administrator.
CLARIFICATION OF WORD USAGE: Shall is mandatory; may is permissible.
CURB STOP: A shutoff valve attached to a water service pipe from a water main
to a building installed near the curb, which may be operated by a valve key to
start or stop flow in the water supply lines of a building. May be referred to
as "buffalo box" or "round way".
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SERVICE AREA: That portion of the area surrounded by Bartlett Road on the north
and east, Higgins Road (State Route 72) on the south, and Sutton Road (State
Route 59) on the west that is located within the corporate boundary of the
village and the Rose School site at the southeast corner of Bartlett Road and
Penny Road.
SERVICE BOX: A valve box used with corporation or curb cock.
TYPES OF CHARGES:
Basic User Charge: The basic monthly assessment levied on all users of the
public water system for being connected to the system.
Meter Charge: The amount to be paid for the water meter and the cost of
installation.
Water User Charge: A charge based upon water usage that is levied on users of
the water system for the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement.
USER, WATER USER: A customer of the water utility system.
VILLAGE: The village of South Barrington.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The South Barrington village engineer or another individual
designated by the village. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-2: GENERAL USE REQUIREMENT:
4-8B-2-200: CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
The water distribution system for any building located within the service area
that is intended for or used for human habitation or occupancy shall be
supplied by potable water from the village water system only; provided,
however, that no connection shall be made to such municipal water system
without a permit issued by the village engineer and payment of the applicable
connection fee. All industrial, commercial or institutional users of water not
served or partially served by the village municipal system shall be required to
meter its water supply to the same standards, rules and regulations as apply to
the village system. The connection fees for the village water system are as
follows:
Water Meter Size (In Inches) Connection Fee
Water Meter Size (In Inches) Connection Fee
3/4                          $ 1,500.00
1                            2,000.00
11/2                         5,000.00
2                            8,000.00
3                            15,000.00
4                            25,000.00
6                            50,000.00
8 and over                   80,000.00
 
The connection fees set forth herein shall not affect or repeal any specific
valid arrangement for the payment of such connection fees or the connection of
specific properties. (Ord. 2011-946, 9-8-2011)
4-8B-2-205: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Each application for the permit to connect to or disconnect from a public water
main shall be accompanied by any certificate of insurance covering commercial
general liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage,
naming the village as an additional insured to hold the village harmless from
any damages and costs which might be caused by accidents. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-
10-2007)
4-8B-2-210: SUPERVISION OF CONNECTIONS; INSPECTIONS:
All water connections shall be made under the supervision of the village
engineer, and no connection shall be covered until the work has been inspected
by the village engineer or his designee. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-2-215: TURNON OF WATER:
   A.   Application For Turnon: Application to have water turned on shall be
made to the village on applications provided by the village and shall contain
an agreement by the applicant to abide by and accept all of the provisions of
this title as a condition governing the use of the village water supply by the
applicant.
   B.   Authority To Turn On: Only after the application for turnon has been
approved by the village shall water be turned on for the premises. No water
from the village water supply shall be turned on for service to any premises by
any person except the village engineer or some other person authorized by him
to perform this service.
   C.   Substandard Plumbing: No water shall be turned on for service in
premises in which the plumbing does not comply with the ordinances of the
village; provided, that water may be turned on for construction purposes in
unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this title. No water service
may be turned on without an appropriate water meter. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-
2007)
4-8B-2-220: HYDRANT USE:
   A.   Permit Required; Emergencies: No person, firm or corporation shall open
or draw water from any village fire hydrant or plug or interfere in any manner
therewith without the prior permission of the village engineer, or except in
the case of a fire or other similar emergency.
   B.   Fire Protection Services: The village engineer may issue a permit upon
request to any person, firm or corporation to make special connections with
village water mains in order to obtain a water supply for private hydrants and
standpipes for use in the case of fire. No charge shall be made for such permit
or for water used for fire protection purposes, but all such work in connection
with such fire protection system shall be done under the direction of the
village engineer. The owner of the premises where they are located shall
maintain such private facilities in good working order, and readily available
and open to inspections by the village at all times. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-
2007)
4-8B-2-225: SERVICE PIPES AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Installation From Curb Stop To Premises: All service pipes from the
curb stop to the premises to be served shall be installed by, and at the cost
of, the owner of the property to be served or the applicant for the service.
Such installations shall be under the supervision of the village engineer or
his designee.
   B.   Piping Specifications: All water service pipes from the main to the
meter shall be not less than one inch (1") in size. Only type K copper tubing
shall be used to connect the meter with the mains. All fittings and connections
shall be uniform in size and shall comply with specifications established by
the corporate authorities. In all cases where a service pipe enters a building,
it shall be furnished with a shutoff valve placed within twelve inches (12") of
the inside wall where the service enters the building between the meter and the
wall, and a similar shutoff valve shall be placed on the opposite side of the
meter within twelve inches (12") thereof. Such stops or valves shall have a
handle or wrench attached thereto for the purpose of turning same so that the
water may be turned off in case of leaks in the building. Such stops or valves
shall be kept accessible at all times.
   C.   Depth: All service pipes shall be buried at least four and one-half
feet (41/2') deep in the ground.
   D.   Repairs From Curb Stop To Building:
      1.   All repairs to service pipes from the curb stop to the building or
premises served shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the
building or premises served.
      2.   The village may, in case of emergency, repair any such service pipe,
and if this is done, the owner of the premises served shall repay the cost of
such repair work to the village.
      3.   In the event that a leak or break occurs in that portion of the
service pipe to be maintained by the owner of the premises, the village may
close the curb stop and discontinue the service of water to the premises until
the required repairs have been made by such owner.
      4.   The village shall not be liable for any damage caused by leak or
break in any service pipe, or for damage caused by a failure to repair the same
promptly; nor shall the village be liable for any damage caused by the repair
or installation of such pipes or resulting therefrom.
   E.   Excavations: Excavations for installing service pipes or repairing the
same shall be made in compliance with the ordinances relating to excavations in
streets.
   F.   Location Of Service Boxes:
      1.   Residential Service: Service boxes shall be placed on every service
pipe and shall be located near the curb line within the right of way or
easement. Such boxes shall be so located so that they are easily accessible,
and shall be protected from frost.
      2.   Commercial Service: Service boxes shall be so located so that they
are easily accessible, and shall be protected from frost in locations approved
by the village engineer.
   G.   Connection With Main: The service pipe from the main to the curb stop
shall hereafter be installed, subject to approval and inspection by the village
engineer, by and at the expense of the owner of the property or applicant for
service. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-2-230: NEW DEVELOPMENTS; USE OF OR DISCONNECTION FROM MAINS:
   A.   Definition: For the purposes of this section, "disconnection" means: 1)
closing the corporation stop into the water main; 2) removing the service box
and curb stop from the water service distribution system; and 3) accomplishing
any restoration work on the property in question.
   B.   Reuse Or Disconnection: When an application for a building or site
development permit is made for a property which, prior to the date of the
application, has been connected to the village water system, the application
must state whether the proposed building or development will use the existing
water system connection, or if a new or different water service and connection
is required by any law, ordinance or regulation, or if the applicant, though
not required to, desires a new or different water service and connection. If a
new or different water service and connection is required as aforesaid, or if
the applicant desires a new or different water service and connection and such
desired service and connection is approved by the village, then, in each such
event, the applicant must disconnect the existing service, as provided in this
section, in order to obtain the permit.
   C.   Responsibility For Disconnection; Inspection: It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant for the building or development permit to bear
all expenses to accomplish the disconnection as provided in this section,
including the restoration work. The disconnection shall be made only by a
licensed plumber and shall be inspected by the village engineer or his designee
before the work is covered.
   D.   Restrictions On Reuse: Under no circumstances shall any lead water
service lines serving said property be reused. All such water service lines
shall either be replaced with type K copper or with other materials that have
been approved by the village engineer, or abandoned. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-
2007)
4-8B-2-235: RESALE OF WATER:
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the water
supply to any premises other than that for which the original sale has been
made, as evidenced by meter installation, except as may be specifically
authorized by the village engineer in cases of emergency use. (Ord. 0-2007-815,
5-10-2007)
4-8B-2-240: TAMPERING OR INTERFERING WITH SYSTEM:
   A.   Meters: No unauthorized person shall break or tamper with any seal
placed by the village upon any meter or other fixture which is part of the
village municipal water system. Meters shall be left in the condition as set by
the village and shall not be interfered with or tampered with in any manner. No
meter shall be removed, relocated or otherwise disturbed without the permission
of the village engineer; except, that duly licensed plumbers making repairs to
frozen services may remove the meter, provided it is immediately delivered to
the village engineer for inspection and test, and provided, that a bond wire is
installed prior to the removal. In no case shall a pipe coupling or bypass be
installed in the line in place of or around a meter, except in case of a frozen
meter, the public works personnel shall make such installation. Any person
violating this provision shall, in addition to such fines as established by
this code, be liable to pay an amount estimated by the village engineer to
cover the charges for water service not recorded by reason of the incorrect or
lost registration on the meter.
   B.   Obstructing Access:
      1.   No person shall in any manner obstruct the access to any stopcock,
hydrant or valve, or any public faucet or opening for taking water in any
street, alley, public ground or place connected with or part of the village
water system, nor pile or place any lumber, brick or building material or other
article, thing or hindrance whatsoever within twelve feet (12') of the same, or
so as to in any manner hinder, delay or obstruct the members of the fire
department in reaching the same and, in addition, it is unlawful for any person
in any manner to interfere with or obstruct the members of the fire department
in reaching the same.
      2.   No person shall prevent or deny access to any authorized village
employee attempting to read or inspect any meter during normal business hours.
   C.   Obstructing Flow: It is unlawful for any person in any manner to
interfere with or obstruct the flow, retention, storage or authorized use of
water in the village water system, reservoir or plant, or any part thereof, or
to injure, deface, remove or displace any water main, hydrant, service pipe,
water meter, service box, public fountain, valve, equipment or building
connected with the village water system, or well, or to cause, suffer or permit
any of said things to be done. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-2-245: WATER SERVICE OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No building or other structure shall be connected to the village's
water system unless the parcel of real property on which the building or
structure is located is within the corporate limits of the village.
   B.   Any property within the corporate limits of the village that is
connected to and served by the village's water system shall be disconnected
from the village's water system upon disconnection of such property or part
thereof from the village unless the village has consented to such disconnection
and/or has entered into a written agreement to provide or continue to provide
such water service. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-3: WATER METERS AND RATES:
4-8B-3-300: METERS REQUIRED; CHARGES:
   A.   Meters Required; Charges Established: All premises using the village
water system shall be supplied with an adequate water meter approved by the
village engineer and furnished by the village. No meter shall be installed
unless there shall first have been paid to the village the meter charges
established by resolution of the village board.
   B.   Review Of Charges, Exemption: The water meter charge is intended to
cover the cost of the water meter as well as the cost of the inspection and
sealing of the same. If the village installs the meter, an additional charge
will be made to cover the cost of the installation. The determination of the
village engineer as to any water meter charge shall be subject to review by the
corporate authorities at the request of the applicant. The foregoing water
meter charges shall not be applicable to water meters for fire sprinkling
systems as provided in subsection 4-8B-2-220B of this chapter. (Ord. 0-2007-
815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-3-305: SUPERVISION OF AND STANDARDS FOR METER INSTALLATION:
Meters shall be installed under the direction of the village engineer or his
designee in a location that will be accessible for maintenance, reading and
repairs. The standards for installation of meters shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
   A.   Meters shall not be set in any place where ground or surface water can
rise and cover it or otherwise interfere with its operation.
   B.   Where a service pipe enters a building, it shall be furnished with a
shutoff valve placed within twelve inches (12") of the inside wall where the
service enters the building between the meter and the wall, and a similar
shutoff valve shall be placed on the opposite side of the meter within twelve
inches (12") thereof. Such stops or valves shall have a handle or wrench
attached thereto for the purpose of turning same so that the water may be
turned off in case of leaks in the building. Electrical ground wires, when so
installed, shall only be connected to the street side of the meter and before
the shutoff valve.
   C.   In all new or remodeling construction, an electrical raceway conduit
shall be provided for the physical protection and maintenance of the meter
wiring. This conduit is to be continuous from the remote meter location to the
location of the inside meter.
   D.   A device to permit reading the meter from outside the building shall be
installed with each meter. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-3-310: LOCATION OF METERS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   All meters installed in any structure shall be so located so as to
permit authorized village employees ready and safe accessibility for the
purpose of reading and maintaining such meters.
      2.   No building permit shall be issued for the erection or construction
of any single-family residential structure or multiple-family residential
structure unless the plans accompanying the application for any such permits
show compliance with provisions of this title.
      3.   In the event that a meter is situated in a location that is
inaccessible or difficult to access, the village engineer shall notify the
owner in writing of such condition. If the condition is not remedied in a
satisfactory manner at the expense of the owner within thirty (30) days after
the date such notice is sent, the water supply may be shut off in accordance
with the provisions of section
4-8B-3-340 of this chapter, and shall remain shut off until such condition has
been remedied.
   B.   Large Consumers: Large consumers, including commercial, manufacturing,
office and research establishments, and public buildings, shall provide
unobstructed access to the meter location for ready access during normal
working hours. All such water meters and appurtenant equipment shall become and
remain the property of the village upon installation and approval by the
village engineer or his designee.
   C.   Multi-Tenant Buildings: Each multi-tenant building shall have a common
meter room. The service pipe for a multi-tenant building shall enter the
building in the meter room and shall be furnished with a shutoff valve placed
in a location approved by the village engineer. All water meters used for
village billing purposes that serve the water users in the building shall be
located in the common meter room. Shutoff valves shall be placed on each side
of the meter within twelve inches (12") of the meter. All shutoff valves shall
have a handle or wrench attached thereto so that the water may be turned off in
case of leaks in the building or it is necessary to shut off the water service.
   D.   Second Meter For Water Irrigation Systems:
      1.   Upon payment of necessary fees to the village, a water user may
install a second water meter for the purpose of metering water for lawn
irrigation systems that do not result in drainage or release of water into the
sanitary sewer system.
      2.   The second meter shall be located in close proximity to the primary
meter. At the time of installation of the meter, the village shall inspect the
plumbing to confirm that only nonsewerage water flow is connected to such
second meter and that the primary meter is connected so as to meter all water
use. The village may conduct periodic inspections to determine that the meter
is properly connected and that only nonsewerage flows are being metered. (Ord.
0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-3-315: RESPONSIBILITY FOR METERS; READING AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Meters Furnished By Village: All meters used in connection with the
water system shall be furnished by the village and shall be and remain the
property of the village.
   B.   Cost Of Meters And Repairs: The actual cost to the village of
furnishing each meter shall be paid by the person ordering the same. The actual
cost of keeping such meter in repair shall be paid by the person ordering same
or by the owner or occupant of the premises as soon as the billing for same is
presented. The person upon whose application any meter is installed or the
occupant or owner of the premises where installed shall be liable for any
breakage by freezing or otherwise, or any loss or damage to said meter in any
manner except by ordinary use and wear, and the cost of making good such damage
or loss shall be paid by the person upon whose application such meter was
installed, or by the occupant or owner of the premises where installed as soon
as the billing for same is presented, and the amount thereof shall be a lien
against the premises in which such meter is located to the same extent and with
the same effect as delinquent water charges.
   C.   Reading Meters: The village administrator shall cause to be read every
water meter used in the village at such times as are necessary in order that
bills may be sent out at proper times. Reading inside meters shall be required
at least once a year. All meters shall be inspected upon a schedule determined
by the village administrator.
   D.   Accuracy Of Meters, Tests: Any user who disputes the accuracy of his
meter may request that such meter be tested. Upon payment to the village of a
fee established by resolution of the village board, the disputed meter will be
removed by representatives of the village and the meter will be delivered to a
testing facility designated by the village. The meter will be tested in
accordance with the American Water Works Association "Standard Practice For
Testing Of Meters". If, after such testing, the meter proves to be within three
percent (3%) of being accurate, the fee paid shall be retained by the village
to cover the cost of removal, testing and reinstallation of the meter. If,
after such testing, the meter is not accurate within three percent (3%), the
meter shall be repaired and replaced at no cost to the user, and the testing
fee shall be refunded in full. Further, if such testing indicates that the user
has been overcharged for his utility, then an appropriate adjustment will be
made and a credit issued to his account.
   E.   Tampering With Meter: No meter shall be removed or otherwise disturbed
without having first obtained permission to do so from the village engineer.
(Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-3-320: WATER RATES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Computation: The charge to be paid by every person using water from the
village water system within the corporate limits of the village shall be
computed bimonthly (every 2 months) based upon the basic user charge determined
by the size of the water meter and the quantity of water used (water user
charge).
   B.   Rates: The rates and charges imposed to be paid by every person using
water from the village water system shall be as follows:
      1.   Basic User Charge: Established by resolution of the village board as
a monthly rate based upon meter size.
      2.   Basic Water Charge: Established by resolution of the village board
as a rate per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used.
   C.   Large Users; Monthly Bills: The village may, but shall not be obligated
to, bill on a monthly basis consumers using in excess of one hundred thousand
(100,000) gallons of water during each bimonthly billing period, such monthly
billing may be based upon one estimated and a second actual reading. (Ord. 0-
2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-3-325: LIABILITY FOR SERVICE:
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the water
service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for such service to such
premises, and such service is furnished to the premises by the village only
upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of such
service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village. All users of
the system shall be liable to pay for all water delivered to the premises and
measured by the meter, including any water consumed due to a leak or faulty
equipment on the user's property. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-3-330: USE OF WATER DURING BUILDING CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Application For Use: During construction of any building and before any
water meter is installed as is herein provided, any owner or contractor so
constructing such building may be permitted to use the village water supply by
making application therefor and paying the flat fee prescribed in this section.
   B.   Restrictions On Use: Any owner or contractor shall use the village
water supply only for purposes directly related to the construction of the
building for which a building permit has been issued. Use of the village water
supply for other purposes not directly related to construction of the building,
watering of landscape and filling of swimming pools shall be prohibited.
Unmetered water usage shall cease when a water meter is installed for the site.
   C.   Permit And Fee: Upon payment of a fee established by resolution of the
village board, a permit for the use of water during construction will be
issued. Such permit shall be valid for ninety (90) days and shall be
prominently displayed with the building permit.
   D.   Penalty: Any owner or contractor who violates this section shall be
punishable as provided in section
4-8B-9-900 of this chapter. Each day in which any violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-3-335: BILLS FOR SERVICE; PENALTY FOR DELINQUENCIES:
Bills for water service shall be dated and sent on a bimonthly basis. Such
bills shall be due and payable not later than twenty five (25) days thereafter.
After said twenty five (25) day period, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the
amount of the bill shall be collected as part of said bill. For convenience in
billing, the village may be divided into districts, with a different bimonthly
billing period for each district. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-3-340: NONPAYMENT OF BILLS; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
The water supply may be shut off from any premises for which the bill remains
unpaid twenty five (25) days after the due date; provided, however, that prior
to such shutoff, a written notice shall be mailed or delivered to the person(s)
liable for such bill. Such notice shall advise them of their right to file a
written objection with the village within ten (10) days of the date of the
notice and that such objection shall include the reason for their objection to
such action. If no objection is filed and the bill is not paid, the water
service shall be shut off. If an objection is filed, the water shall not be
shut off until the village administrator has reviewed the objection, considered
the facts and made a decision on the basis of the information available. When
the water supply has been shut off from a premises, the "shutoff/reconnection"
fee shall be added to the amount owed and must be paid prior to the turning on
of the water supply. An additional "after hours" fee shall be charged if the
village is requested to restore service outside normal working hours which, for
the purpose of this section, are defined as Monday through Friday (except
holidays) from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. In
addition to any reconnection fee required herein, if the water supply to any
premises was shut off due to nonpayment, prior to reconnection, the village may
require a cash deposit in an amount equal to the average bill for the last four
(4) months. Fees required by this section shall be established by resolution of
the village board. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-3-345: LIEN FOR UNPAID BILLS; FORECLOSURE:
   A.   Claim For Lien:
      1.   Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid thirty (30) days
after it has been shut off, the village administrator shall file with the
county recorder of deeds of Cook County a statement of lien claim. This
statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the
amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this
amount as well as for all charges for water served subsequent to the period
covered by the proper village officials, as provided by law.
      2.   If the consumer of water whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of
the premises, and the village administrator has notice of this, notice shall be
mailed to the owner of the premises, if his address is known to the
administrator, whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of thirty (30)
days after it is due.
      3.   The failure of the village administrator to record such lien claim
or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall
not affect the right to collect the unpaid water bill.
   B.   Foreclosure Of Lien:
      1.   Property subject to a lien for unpaid water charges shall be sold
for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to
pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure, of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the
village.
      2.   The village attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute
such proceedings, in the name of the village, in any court having jurisdiction
over such matters, against any property for which the bill for water has
remained unpaid thirty (30) days after it has been rendered. (Ord. 0-2007-815,
5-10-2007)
4-8B-3-350: REVIEW OF RATES; REVISIONS:
The adequacy of the water service charge shall be reviewed periodically. The
water service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect changes in debt
service or in operation and maintenance costs, including replacement costs.
(Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-3-355: DISPOSITION AND ADMINISTRATION OF REVENUES:
The village treasurer shall receive all revenues from the water user service
charges and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system
as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the
fund designated as the "water fund" of the village of South Barrington. The
village treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner as
provided in the Illinois municipal code and the ordinances and policies of the
village. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-3-360: ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS:
   A.   System Of Accounts And Records: The village treasurer shall establish a
proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in
which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative
to the water system and, at regular annual intervals, shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the water system. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-4: NONDOMESTIC WATER USE; BULK DELIVERIES:
4-8B-4-400: APPLICATION FOR TEMPORARY HOOKUP:
   A.   Applications Generally: Every purchaser of bulk amounts of water for
nondomestic purposes such as swimming pools, ice rinks or other purposes
requiring delivery of large quantities of water shall apply to the village
engineer to arrange for a temporary hookup to the village water system. In such
application, the purchaser shall specify the specific date and time at which
the temporary connection service is requested. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-4-405: RESPONSIBILITY TO PROVIDE EQUIPMENT:
The purchaser may obtain water from a hydrant at the water treatment site. The
purchaser shall provide the necessary vehicle, in which case, to transport the
water from such hydrant to the desired site. The village shall not be
responsible for quality and cleanliness of the water beyond the point of
delivery into whatever vehicle provided by the purchaser. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-
10-2007)
4-8B-4-410: SUPERVISION OF TEMPORARY CONNECTIONS:
All temporary connections to fire hydrants for the purposes of supplying bulk
amounts of water for nondomestic use shall be made under the supervision of the
village engineer, and he shall determine which hydrant shall be used for such
temporary connection. Only village personnel shall be permitted to operate fire
hydrants or to make hookups for such purposes. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-4-415: WATER RATES AND CHARGES FOR NONDOMESTIC PURPOSES:
   A.   Rates Established:
      1.   Purchasers That Are Water System Users: Purchasers receiving water
service from the Village shall be charged for the actual amount of water used
at the current rate applicable to their property as established by this code.
An additional service fee shall be established by the Village Board for the
cost of the temporary hookup. The charges shall be added to the users regular
water billing.
      2.   Purchasers Not Water System Users: Purchasers not receiving water
service from the Village shall be charged two hundred percent (200%) of the
current rate established for the actual amount of water used. An additional
service fee shall be established by the Village Board for the cost of the
temporary hookup. Purchasers not receiving water service from the Village shall
deposit in cash with the Village an amount equal to two hundred percent (200%)
of the estimated charges. The balance, if any, shall be returned to the
purchaser upon determination of the final bill.
   B.   Determination Of Water Used: The actual amount of water used shall be
determined by the use of a water meter connected to the fire hydrant, to be
furnished and installed by the Village. The purchaser shall post a deposit for
the use of the water meter.
   C.   Additional Charges: The purchaser will be billed for any overtime
salaries that must be paid to Village personnel by a request for a temporary
hookup at a time outside of regular working hours. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007;
amd. Ord. O-2022-1308, 2-17-2022)
4-8B-5: LIMITATION ON THE USE OF WATER:
4-8B-5-500: PURPOSES:
   A.   The Village of South Barrington desires to be a good steward of our
natural resources and encourage water conservation to all residents;
   B.   The Village of South Barrington municipal water system has developed
extensive storage, pumping and pipeline systems to distribute potable water to
the areas served by the Village water system;
   C.   The Village is located in a climate where drought like conditions
periodically occur;
   D.   High demand, together with drought-like conditions and/or system
constraints, may reduce the available water in local storage to the point of
creating a water shortage;
   E.   The Village finds that it may from time to time be necessary to
implement measures to restrict water use as deemed appropriate to conserve the
water supply of the Village to protect the health, safety and general welfare
of the areas served by the Village water system during periods of potential
water shortage and to promote conservation of water. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-
2007; amd. Ord. O-2022-1308, 2-17-2022)
4-8B-5-510: OUTDOOR WATER USE LIMITATIONS DURING DROUGHT OR WATER EMERGENCY:
In order to promote good resource conservation practices and to preserve
potable water supplies during abnormally dry to drought conditions, the use of
the Village's potable water for outdoor watering of landscaping and lawns may
be limited. The Village President may establish limitations on the outdoor
watering of landscaping and lawns until such time that the abnormally dry to
drought water conditions have resolved. Failure to comply with the water
restrictions shall be a violation of this chapter and subject to penalty. (Ord.
0-2007-815, 5-10-2007; amd. Ord. O-2022-1308, 2-17-2022)
4-8B-5-515: SOD INSTALLATION:
The installation of sod within the Village between June 15 and September 15 is
discouraged. The use of the Village's potable water supply for watering of sod
during a drought or water emergency shall be prohibited. (Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-
10-2007; amd. Ord. O-2022-1308, 2-17-2022)
4-8B-6: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-7: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-8: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-2007-815, 5-10-2007)
4-8B-9: PENALTY:
4-8B-9-900: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, household, firm or corporation who violates or assists in the
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a
business offense and shall be fined as hereinafter provided for each such
violation. The maximum fine shall be one thousand five hundred ($1,500.00)
dollars. Each day on which, or during which, a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. In addition to any fine imposed, a person,
household, firm or corporation found to be in violation of this section shall
be responsible for any and all responsive costs incurred to investigate such
violation.
The fines imposed pursuant to a violation under this chapter shall be as
follows:
   A.   For violations of
4-8B-510 Outdoor Watering Restrictions, the first violation shall be punishable
by a fine of no less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars. A second violation by
the same person, household, firm or corporation within a twelve (12) month
period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than three hundred ($300.00)
dollars. A third or subsequent violation by the same person, household, firm or
corporation within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of
no less than five hundred ($500.00) dollars.
   B.   For all other violations under this chapter; the first violation shall
be punishable by a fine of no less than five hundred ($500.00) dollars. A
second violation by the same person, household, firm or corporation, within a
twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than one
thousand ($1,000.00) dollars. The third or subsequent violation by the same
person, household, firm or corporation, within a twelve (12) month period shall
be punishable by a fine of no less than one thousand five hundred ($1,500.00)
dollars.
   C.   Each day on which a violation continues or persists shall be deemed a
separate offense. The village engineer, code enforcement officer or designee
may issue violation notices for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 0-2017-1165,
10-12-2017; amd. Ord. O-2022-1308, 2-17-2022)
CHAPTER 8C
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
4-8C-100: Purpose
4-8C-105: Application Of Provisions
4-8C-110: Village Policy
4-8C-115: Definitions
4-8C-120: Water System Described
4-8C-125: Illinois Plumbing Code (Part) Adopted
4-8C-130: Cross Connections Restricted
4-8C-140: Surveys And Inspections
4-8C-145: Backflow Prevention
4-8C-150: Booster Pumps
4-8C-155: Violations And Enforcement
4-8C-160: Liability For Cleanup
4-8C-165: Penalty
4-8C-100: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is as follows:
   A.   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which would backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply systems.
   B.   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety.
   C.   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public's and consumer's potable water systems. (Ord. 0-2007-816, 5-10-2007)
4-8C-105: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water
supply system of the village. (Ord. 0-2007-816, 5-10-2007)
4-8C-110: VILLAGE POLICY:
The village engineer shall be responsible for protection of the public water
supply system from contamination due to backflow or backsiphonage of
contaminants through the customer's water service connection. The village
engineer shall be responsible for causing surveys and investigations to be made
of industrial and other nonresidential accounts served by the public water
supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water
supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of
public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or as often
as the village engineer shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be
maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5) years.
The installation of an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the
safety of the public water supply system. The village engineer shall give
notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at
each service connection immediately beyond the water meter. The consumer shall
immediately install such approved device or devices at the consumer's own
expense. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install
such device or devices shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service
to the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The consumer
shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair as
required in subsection 4-8C-145B of this chapter for a period of at least five
(5) years. (Ord. 0-2007-816, 5-10-2007)
4-8C-115: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
ASSE: American Society of Sanitary Engineering.
AGENCY: Illinois environmental protection agency.
AIR GAP: The air gap in a water supply system is the unobstructed vertical
distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe
or faucet supplying water to a tank or plumbing fixture and the flood level rim
of the receptacle.
APPROVED: Accepted or acceptable under an applicable specification stated or
cited in this chapter or accepted as suitable for the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system. These auxiliary waters may
include water from another purveyor's public water supply system; fire
sprinkler connections or water from a source such as wells, lakes, ponds, or
streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted or
contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which
the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the
distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow or backsiphonage into a potable water system. All
devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the
Illinois plumbing code and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
BOOSTER PUMP: A mechanical device used to increase domestic water pressure.
CCDI: Cross connection control device inspector.
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM (CWS): A public water supply that is owned or operated
by the village of South Barrington.
CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: The service connection and any water system located on
the customer's premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a
customer's water system with the exception of the water meter and its
connections.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree that could create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
Direct Cross Connection: A cross connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
Indirect Cross Connection: A cross connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by a vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves under ASSE standard 1015. A "double check valve assembly"
must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and
suitable connections for testing the water tightness of each check valve.
DRAINAGE: The routing of discharged used water from a reduced pressure
principle backflow preventer, due to the proper operation of the device,
pressure fluctuation, or malfunction of the device. Drainage shall be directed
to a gravity flow sanitary drain, or an ejection system which is rated to be
capable of meeting a full flow discharge from the device, or combination of
devices which may be present. This shall apply to all domestic, irrigation, and
fire prevention applications.
DUAL CHECK VALVE: An assembly composed of single, independently acting check
valves under ASSE standard 1024 for containment.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting in a real or potential danger to the health and well being
of consumers. The word "severe", as used to qualify health hazard, means a
hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
INSPECTION: A physical inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois plumbing
code, 77 Illinois administrative code section 890.
NONCOMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM (NONCWS): A public water supply that is not a
community water supply.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative code section 604.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension
of a plumbing system by any person. "Plumbing" includes all piping, fixtures,
appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including,
without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private water
supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to,
within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work
or assemble. "Plumbing" includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and
appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation
system of any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or
assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the building's
sanitary sewer or private sewage disposal system for a distance of ten feet
(10') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative
code section 604 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its designed termination point.
PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced into the public
or a customer's potable water system. This includes, but is not limited to:
   A.   Polluted or contaminated waters.
   B.   Process waters.
   C.   Used waters originating from the public water supply system that may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality.
   D.   Cooling waters.
   E.   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams, or irrigation systems.
   F.   Chemicals in solution or suspension.
   G.   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY (PWS): All mains, pipes, water meters, and structures
through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells
and well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants,
reservoirs, storage tanks, water meters and appurtenances, collectively or
severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing
water for drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least fifteen
(15) service connections or which regularly serve at least twenty five (25)
persons at least sixty (60) days per year. A "public water supply" is either a
community water supply or a noncommunity water supply.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE standard 1013. During normal flow
and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks
shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check
valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the
supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located
at each end of the device, and shall be fitted with properly located test
cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at
the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping systems
regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and
must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of
all cross connection control devices and methods located within that customer's
piping system. The survey must be in written form, and shall not be an actual
plumbing inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
THERMAL EXPANSION: A condition which occurs in a domestic water system, where a
backflow preventer has been installed, creating a closed water system. Thermal
expansion occurs when the cold water supplied to the hot water tank is heated.
The expansion of the water caused by heat creates a need for the displacement
of the expanded properties of the water. This is accomplished by installing a
diaphragmed thermal expansion tank device, which displaces the expanded volume
of water, keeping the internal piping system safe from extreme internal
pressures.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's
water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no
longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
VILLAGE: Village of South Barrington.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The South Barrington village engineer or another individual
designated by the village.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system. (Ord.
0-2007-816, 5-10-2007)
4-8C-120: WATER SYSTEM DESCRIBED:
The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the public
water supply system and the consumer's water system.
   A.   Public Water System:
      1.   The public water supply system shall consist of the source
facilities and the distribution system and shall include all those facilities
of the potable water system under the control of the village engineer up to the
point where the consumer's water system begins.
      2.   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized
in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public
water supply distribution system.
      3.   The public water supply distribution system shall include the
network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's
water system.
   B.   Consumer's Water System: The consumer's water system shall include all
parts of the facilities, including the service connection, used to convey water
from the public water supply distribution system to points of use. (Ord. 0-
2007-816, 5-10-2007)
4-8C-125: ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE (PART) ADOPTED:
Subpart I of December 1993 Illinois plumbing code is hereby adopted hereto and
by this reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof. Copies of the
Illinois plumbing code are on file in the office of the village clerk for
public use and inspection. (Ord. 0-2007-816, 5-10-2007)
4-8C-130: CROSS CONNECTIONS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Connections between the village water system and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested, and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   B.   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply not of equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality as
determined by inspection and analysis by the agency. Control of all cross
connections to a supply is the responsibility of the owner or official
custodian of the supply. If a privately owned water supply source meets the
applicable criteria, it may be connected to a water supply upon approval by the
owner or official custodian and by the agency. Where such connections are
permitted, it is the responsibility of the public water supply officials to
assure submission from such privately owned water supply source or sources
samples and operating reports as required by 35 Illinois administrative code
sections 605 and 606 as applicable to the cross connected source.
   C.   No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply, other than the regular public
water supply of the village, may enter the supply or distribution system of the
village unless such private auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method
of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the village
engineer and the Illinois environmental protection agency. (Ord. 0-2007-816, 5-
10-2007)
4-8C-140: SURVEYS AND INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Surveys: Upon request by the village engineer or designee, the consumer
shall furnish written survey documentation regarding the piping system or
systems or water use within the customer's premises. The refusal to provide
requested information shall, within the discretion of the village engineer, be
deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this
chapter.
   B.   Inspections: It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer, upon
the request from the village engineer or his designee, to arrange for a
physical inspection, at his cost, of water use practices on the consumer's
premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross connections
to the water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow
into the consumer's or the public potable water system. The physical inspection
shall confirm that all installations of the backflow devices are installed per
manufacturer specifications and as provided in this chapter. All maintenance,
repair, and testing records must be available and current during inspection.
All cross connection control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted by
licensed plumbers as provided in 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/3(1).
   C.   Access And Verification: The consumer's premises shall be open at all
reasonable times to the approved cross connection control device inspector or
the village engineer or his designee for verification of the written survey and
of physical inspection information, in regard to the presence or absence of
cross connections within the consumer's premises, and testing, repair and
maintenance of cross connection control devices within the consumer's premises.
(Ord. 0-2007-816, 5-10-2007)
4-8C-145: BACKFLOW PREVENTION:
   A.   Responsibilities Of Consumer: It is the responsibility of the water
consumer to prevent backflow into the public water system by ensuring that:
      1.   All cross connections are removed; or approved cross connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and backsiphonage.
      2.   Cross connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
      3.   Cross connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the agency as a
cross connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
      4.   In new constructions, a properly sized floor drain shall be required
for the discharge from the reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
device.
      5.   Thermal expansion is required on all domestic water services
protected by cross connection control devices. Protection from thermal
expansion shall incorporate properly sized thermal expansion tanks, properly
placed within the system, at the hot water tank.
      6.   All outside hose bibs shall be an antisiphon type.
   B.   Certification And Maintenance Of Devices:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which
backflow prevention devices are required by this chapter to ensure that the
backflow protection devices are installed and have inspections, tests,
maintenance and repairs made in accordance with the following schedule or more
often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in the manufacturer's
instructions:
         a.   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of
the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter.
         b.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed prior to
certification expiration.
      2.   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
      3.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
      4.   The owner of the premises shall maintain a maintenance log which
shall include testing and records as follows:
         a.   Each cross connection control device shall be tested at the time
of installation and at least annually or more frequently, if recommended by the
manufacturer.
         b.   Maintenance records shall be available for inspection by the
agency or the village engineer or his designee at any time.
         c.   Each cross connection control device shall have a tag attached
listing the date of most recent test, testing company, name of CCCDI, approval
number and type and date of repair.
         d.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
            (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection.
            (2)   Company name, approval number, and name of person performing
the test.
            (3)   Test results.
            (4)   Repairs or servicing required.
            (5)   Repairs and date completed.
            (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.
      5.   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this chapter are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer within ten (10) days of notification, or sooner, if required by the
village engineer or his designee. The village engineer or his designee may
immediately disconnect water service if deemed that a public health hazard
exists because of a cross connection.
      6.   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed, or otherwise made ineffective without specific written authorization
by the village engineer.
   C.   Where Protection Required:
      1.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on
connections to the public water supply as described in the plumbing code, 77
Illinois administrative code section 890, and the agency's regulations, 35
Illinois administrative code section 653. In addition, an approved backflow
prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water
system serving premises where, in the judgment of the village engineer, actual
or potential hazards to the public water supply system exist.
      2.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
         a.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the village engineer, and the
source is approved by the Illinois environmental protection agency.
         b.   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system that are no longer under the
sanitary control of the village engineer.
         c.   Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment
of the village engineer and the cross connection control device inspector, are
not correctable or contain intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to determine whether or not cross connections exist.
         d.   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross connection survey.
         e.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
         f.   Premises that have a fire sprinkler system where "potable" water
is supplied by the village.
      3.   In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not
necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities: Any premises used
for residential purposes where, in the judgment of the village engineer, actual
or potential hazards to the public water supply system exist.
         a.   All premises used for nonresidential purposes including, but not
limited to, all commercial uses, office, retail, manufacturing, storage,
agricultural, industrial, educational or governmental.
         b.   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
         c.   Pools.
         d.   Irrigation systems.
   D.   Type Of Protection Required:
      1.   The type of protection required under this section shall depend on
the degree of hazard which exists, based upon the determination of the village
engineer, as follows:
         a.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that
could cause a severe health hazard.
         b.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
         c.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause
a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
      2.   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for
a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall
be installed on the fire safety system connected to the public water supply
when:
         a.   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant, or
other chemicals;
         b.   Water is pumped into the system from another source;
         c.   Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; or
         d.   There is a connection whereby another source can be connected to
the fire sprinkler system.
      3.   The type of protection required by this section shall be determined
by the village engineer. Installation standards shall be determined by the
village engineer in accordance with this chapter, Illinois Compiled Statutes
and the Illinois administrative code. Such installations shall be inspected by
the village engineer prior to the turnon of water from the village water
supply.
   E.   Backflow Prevention Devices:
      1.   Approval Required: All backflow prevention devices or methods
required by this chapter shall be approved by American Society of Sanitary
Engineering, and may carry the following additional endorsements: the Research
Foundation for Cross Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, American Water Works Association, or American National Standards
Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification.
      2.   Installation And Maintenance: Installation of approved devices shall
be made in accordance with 35 Illinois administrative code section 653.802, and
only as specified by the Research Foundation for Cross Connection Control of
the University of Southern California or applicable industry specifications.
Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be
performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on site. (Ord.
0-2007-816, 5-10-2007)
4-8C-150: BOOSTER PUMPS:
   A.   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure
cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the village engineer,
at least once each year, that the device is operable. (Ord. 0-2007-816, 5-10-
2007)
4-8C-155: VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Discontinuance Of Water Service: The village engineer shall deny or
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water
service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by this
chapter is not installed, tested, maintained, repaired and inspected in a
manner acceptable to the village engineer, or if it is found that the backflow
prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross
connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure cutoff device required
by this chapter is not installed and maintained in working order. Immediate
disconnection upon oral or written notice can be effected when the village
engineer is assured that imminent danger of contamination of the public water
supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of
the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party
can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of
the public water supply; provided, that in the reasonable opinion of the
village engineer or the Illinois environmental protection agency, such action
is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the
public water supply. Neither the village nor the village engineer, or their
agents or assigns, shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or
lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply
in accordance with the terms of this chapter, whether or not said termination
was with or without notice.
   B.   Restoration Of Water Service: Water service to such premises shall not
be restored until the regulations and to the satisfaction of the village
engineer, and the required reconnection fee of one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) is paid to the village. (Ord. 0-2007-816, 5-10-2007)
4-8C-160: LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP:
The consumer is responsible for backsiphoned material or contamination through
backflow. Should contamination of the potable water supply system occur through
an illegal cross connection or by an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, the owner of the premises
shall bear the cost of cleanup of any contamination of the public water supply
and any repairs required to clean the potable water supply system. (Ord. 0-
2007-816, 5-10-2007)
4-8C-165: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any portion of this chapter shall be
fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day on which a
violation continues or persists shall be deemed a separate offense. The village
engineer or his designee may issue violation notices of this chapter. (Ord. 0-
2007-816, 5-10-2007)
CHAPTER 9
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-9-1: Definition Of Inoperable Motor Vehicle
4-9-2: Exterior Storage Prohibited
4-9-3: Penalties
4-9-4: Procedure On Nonpayment
4-9-1: DEFINITION OF INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE:
For the purposes of this Chapter, an "inoperable motor vehicle" is defined to
mean any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least thirty (30) days,
the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed or on which the engine,
wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that
the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. (Ord. 0-78-
108, 8-10-1978)
4-9-2: EXTERIOR STORAGE PROHIBITED:
No person in charge of or in control of premises, whether as owner, lessee,
tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall allow an inoperable motor vehicle to
remain on such property longer than ten (10) days; and no person shall leave
any such vehicle on any property within the Village for a longer time than ten
(10) days; except, that this Section shall not apply with regard to any vehicle
in an enclosed building or so located upon the premises as not to be readily
visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property. This
Section shall further not apply with regard to any vehicle on the premises of a
business enterprise operated in a lawful place, other than in a residential
district, and operated in a lawful manner, when the keeping or maintenance of
such vehicle is necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or with
regard to a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in
a lawful place and manner by the Village or any other public agency or entity.
(Ord. 0-78-108, 8-10-78)
4-9-3: PENALTIES:
The penalty for the violation of any section of this Chapter shall be not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00);
provided, however, that in the event that the owner or operator makes payment
to the Village within fourteen (14) calendar days after the date of the
personal issuance of or the issuance of a hang-on ticket, the penalty shall be
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for such violation. In the further event that the
owner or operator does not make payment within the initial fourteen (14) day
period as specified herein, but does make payment within a period of time as
specified in a final notice, the penalty shall be thirty five dollars ($35.00)
for such violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day a
violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-89-341, 9-14-89)
4-9-4: PROCEDURE ON NONPAYMENT:
In the event that the person to whom a citation is issued pursuant to this
Chapter fails to settle and pay said violation within the prescribed time, or
within a period of time specified in a final notice, then the police officer or
the designated Village employee is authorized to cause a notice to appear to be
served upon said alleged violator by personal service or certified mail, return
receipt requested, and is authorized to file a complaint and to prosecute the
same in the circuit court of the appropriate county. (Ord. 0-89-341, 9-14-89)
CHAPTER 10
VACANT LOT PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
SECTION:
4-10-1: Adoption of Preamble
4-10-2: Activities Prohibited on Vacant Lots or Properties
4-10-3: Protective Barrier Required
4-10-4: Violation Prohibited
4-10-5: Penalty for Violation
4-10-1: ADOPTION OF PREAMBLE:
The President and Board of Trustees hereby find that the facts stated in the
preamble to Ordinance 0-91-389 are true and correct and hereby adopt the same
as part of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-91-389, 8-8-91)
4-10-2: ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED ON VACANT LOTS OR PROPERTIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any one or more of the following
activities on vacant lots or properties:
   A.   Direct driver(s) of automobiles or construction related vehicles to
drive on any portion of vacant lots or properties for the purpose of gaining
access to or from another lot or property.
   B.   Drive automobiles or construction related vehicles on any portion of
vacant lots or properties for the purpose of gaining access to or from another
lot or property.
   C.   Park automobiles or construction related vehicles on any portion of
vacant lots or properties when such automobiles or vehicles are not engaged in
permitted activities on the lot on which they are parked.
   D.   Stockpile construction materials on any portion of vacant lots or
properties when such materials are not intended to be used for the lot on which
they are stockpiled. (Ord. 0-91-389, 8-8-91)
4-10-3: PROTECTIVE BARRIER REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to initiate construction activities for
which a building permit is required to be obtained from the Village without
first having installed a temporary protective barrier along the entire length
of any property line which adjoins vacant lots or properties. Such protective
barrier shall consist of wooden snow fencing supported by metal fence posts
driven into the ground at intervals not to exceed fifty feet (50'), or other
barrier material specifically approved by the Building Officer. The protective
barrier shall remain in place, in a complete and effective manner, for the
duration of the construction process, up to and including the date of the final
inspection. (Ord. 0-91-389, 8-8-91)
4-10-4: VIOLATION PROHIBITED:
Written and/or verbal permission from the owner(s) of adjacent vacant lots or
properties shall not permit any person to violate the provisions contained in
Section
4-10-1 through Section
4-10-3 of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-91-389, 8-8-91)
4-10-5: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   Any person who violates any provisions of Section
4-10-2 above will be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each offense; and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a
violation occurs or continues to exist.
   B.   If any person fails to install and/or maintain the protective barrier
as provided for in Section
4-10-3 above, a stop work order may be issued by the building officer until
such time as the necessary protection has been installed in accordance with
this Chapter. Violators shall also be subject to a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense;
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a
violation occurs or continues to exist. (Ord. 0-91-389, 8-8-91)
CHAPTER 11
MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM
SECTION:
4-11-1: Definitions
4-11-2: Findings
4-11-3: Required Use Of Municipal Waste System
4-11-4: Private Collectors And Haulers
4-11-5: Municipal Waste System Account; Rates And Charges
4-11-6: Penalty
4-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
AGENCY: The solid waste agency of northern Cook County.
MUNICIPAL WASTE SERVICE AGREEMENT: The agreement between the municipality and a
municipal waste service contractor to provide for the collection,
transportation and disposal services of system waste from residential dwellings
within the municipality.
MUNICIPAL WASTE SERVICE CONTRACTOR: The person designated by the municipal
waste service agreement to provide for the collection, transportation and
disposal services of system waste from residential dwellings within the
municipality.
MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM: The waste collection, transportation and disposal
system of the municipality operated under license pursuant to section
4-11-4 of this chapter, including all physical assets of the municipality used
for the collection, transportation and disposal of system waste, all amounts on
deposit in the municipal waste system account and all amounts collected on
account of rates and charges imposed by the municipality.
MUNICIPALITY: The village of South Barrington.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, or corporation, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PROJECT USE AGREEMENT: The 1992 project use agreement by and between the
municipality and the agency, as amended, from time to time.
SYSTEM WASTE: A. Garbage and general household waste,
   B.   Institutional waste,
   C.   Commercial and office waste,
   D.   Industrial lunchroom waste, and
   E.   Construction and demolition waste discarded by persons located within
the municipality. (Ord. 2009-877, 3-12-2009)
4-11-2: FINDINGS:
The municipality finds as follows:
   A.   It is necessary for and in the best interests of the municipality to
regulate and control the collection, transportation and disposal of municipal
waste in the exercise of its police power in order to protect the health,
safety and welfare of its residents.
   B.   The municipality is authorized pursuant to article VII, section 6 of
the Illinois constitution, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-19-1 et seq., and
intergovernmental corporation act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 220/3.2 to
provide for the method or methods of collection, transportation and disposal of
municipal waste within its corporate limits and to provide that the method
chosen may be the exclusive method to be used within the corporate limits.
   C.   The municipality acting pursuant to article VII, section 10 of the
Illinois constitution and section 3.2 of the intergovernmental cooperation act
has entered into an intergovernmental agreement with twenty five (25) other
north and northwest suburban Cook County municipalities, thereby creating the
agency to provide an efficient and environmentally sound municipal waste
disposal system.
   D.   The municipality has entered into a project use agreement by which the
agency will acquire, construct, operate, equip and improve a municipal solid
waste project to provide for the disposal of system waste of the municipality
and other members of the agency.
   E.   Under the project use agreement, the municipality is obligated to
establish a municipal waste disposal system, to cause system waste collected
within its corporate limits to be delivered to the agency and to make certain
payments to the agency, all as described in the project use agreement.
   F.   It is necessary and in the best interests of the municipality to
provide for the environmentally sound and efficient collection, transportation
and disposal of system waste by creating a municipal waste system, by providing
for the disposal of system waste by delivery to the agency and to impose the
rates and charges provided for herein. (Ord. 0-92-402, 3-12-1992, eff. 5-1-
1995)
4-11-3: REQUIRED USE OF MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM:
   A.   All persons owning or occupying real estate within the corporate limits
of the municipality shall dispose of system waste through the municipal waste
system. All system waste shall be collected by or on behalf of the municipality
pursuant to the terms of this chapter and shall be delivered to a transfer
station as directed by the agency and the municipality or as otherwise agreed
to by the agency and the municipality under the project use agreement.
   B.   No person shall dispose of system waste through the municipal waste
system unless the system waste complies with all the rules and regulations
applicable thereto and established, from time to time, by either the
municipality or the agency.
   C.   Any person disposing of system waste through the municipal waste system
shall pay the rates and charges established, from time to time, by the
municipality.
   D.   Owners, agents, tenants, or occupants of any residential dwelling must
secure waste collection service from the municipal waste service contractor
designated in the municipal waste service agreement.
   E.   Commercial and industrial waste may be collected by waste collectors
with no service agreement with the village. (Ord. 2009-877, 3-12-2009)
4-11-4: PRIVATE COLLECTORS AND HAULERS:
   A.   No person shall collect, transport or dispose of residential system
waste unless they are designated as the village's municipal waste service
contractor in the municipal waste service agreement.
   B.   No person shall collect, transport or dispose of nonresidential system
waste unless they are authorized and licensed in accordance with the laws of
the state of Illinois.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter is intended to impair any license or franchise
issued before the effective date of this chapter to any person which authorizes
the person to collect, transport and dispose of municipal waste which
constitutes system waste to a location other than the transfer station
designated by the agency and the municipality. (Ord. 2009-877, 3-12-2009)
4-11-5: MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM ACCOUNT; RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Establishment: There is hereby created and established an account
within the general fund known as the municipal waste system account.
   B.   Adoption Of Budget:
      1.   Each fiscal year, the finance committee shall recommend and the
village board shall adopt a budget for the municipal waste system. The budget
shall estimate the revenue required to:
         a.   Pay all operating and maintenance expenses of the municipal waste
system, including all obligations to the agency under the project use
agreement.
         b.   Pay, as they become due, interest on and principal of any revenue
bonds or other obligations payable from the revenues of the municipal waste
system.
         c.   Provide for all unpaid claims.
         d.   Maintain appropriate depreciation and reserve funds, including
reserves for uncollected charges.
      2.   The budget shall estimate the amounts available to pay those
obligations from:
         a.   Rates and charges to be imposed on persons disposing of system
waste through the municipal waste system.
         b.   Other amounts to be credited to the municipal waste system
account.
   C.   Rates To Cover Obligations: The rates and charges imposed for use of
the municipal waste system shall be sufficient, after taking into account
monies then on hand in the municipal waste system account and the proceeds of
fees to be collected which have been assigned and pledged to the municipal
waste system:
      1.   To pay all operation and maintenance expenses of the municipal waste
system, including all obligations to the agency under the terms of the project
use agreement;
      2.   To pay as they become due, interest on, and principal of any revenue
bonds or other obligations payable from revenues of the municipal waste system;
      3.   To provide for all unpaid claims; and
      4.   To provide adequate depreciation and reserve funds for the municipal
waste system, including reserves for uncollected charges.
   D.   Rates Set By Municipality: Rates to be billed by the municipal waste
service contractor shall be as determined by the municipality in the municipal
waste service agreement.
   E.   Billing Of Property Owners: Municipal waste service contractor shall
bill owners and occupants of residential real estate within the municipality
served by the municipal waste system as agent for the municipality.
   F.   Liability For Charges: The owners and occupants of residential real
estate within the municipality served by the municipal waste system shall be
jointly and severally liable to pay all rates and charges imposed by the
municipality pursuant to the provisions of this section and the municipal waste
service agreement.
   G.   Delinquent Bills, Penalties: Penalties with respect to delinquent bills
shall be as determined, from time to time, by the municipality.
   H.   Collection Of Monies: All amounts collected from rates and charges
imposed under this section and due the municipality shall be credited to the
municipal waste system account. (Ord. 2009-877, 3-12-2009)
4-11-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which such violation continues unabated after ten (10) days from
receipt of notice. (Ord. 0-92-402, 3-12-1992, eff. 5-1-1995)
CHAPTER 12
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-12-1: Refuse Container Required
4-12-2: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
4-12-3: Penalties
4-12-4: Severability
4-12-1: REFUSE CONTAINER REQUIRED:
Each occupant, tenant or person in possession of any residence, commercial
building, or office shall provide sufficient refuse containers for accumulation
of normal refuse. Every person in possession of any premises shall cause all
garbage and refuse brought into or produced therein to be disposed in the
appropriate container.
All refuse containers shall comply with the specifications provided by the
village's waste hauler. No other type of container shall be acceptable.
Unsanitary, leaking or defective receptacles or receptacles without covers
shall be cleaned, repaired or replaced by the owner or occupant at their
expense. All containers shall be cleaned as often as is necessary to maintain
them in a sanitary condition. (Ord. 2005-751, 9-8-2005)
4-12-2: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Scattering Of Matter: No person shall cast, place or deposit anywhere
within the village any substance, article or thing in such a manner that it or
any of them may be carried or deposited by the action of the sun, wind, rain,
snow, or animal into or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or
other public place, or upon any private premises.
   B.   Placement And Removal Of Curbside Garbage Collection Containers: No
garbage collection containers shall be placed at the curbside, adjacent street
or sidewalk area of any premises earlier than three o'clock (3:00) P.M. of the
day preceding the regularly scheduled garbage collection day. Any such
container shall be removed from the curbside, adjacent street or sidewalk area
of the premises no later than nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of the day after the
regularly scheduled garbage collection day. At no time shall any garbage
collection container be placed upon any street or sidewalk so as to obstruct
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   C.   Waste Accumulated On The Premises Prohibited: The owner, lessee, or
occupant of any premises located within the village shall remove from said
premises, or otherwise dispose of, all garbage, rubbish and refuse, and shall
keep the premises free and clear of any accumulation of any such refuse. (Ord.
2005-751, 9-8-2005)
4-12-3: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a first offense, and fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each offense thereafter. Each day that a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense. The South Barrington police department or
its authorized designee, is hereby authorized to issue any and all such
citations. (Ord. 2005-751, 9-8-2005)
4-12-4: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 2005-751, 9-8-2005)
CHAPTER 13
OUTDOOR STORAGE OF JUNK AND HOUSEHOLD GOODS
SECTION:
4-13-1: Storage Of Junk Prohibited
4-13-2: Outdoor Storage Of Household Goods Prohibited
4-13-3: Observance Of Violation
4-13-4: Notice Of Violation
4-13-5: Service Of Notice
4-13-6: Investigation
4-13-7: Abatement Of Nuisance
4-13-8: Penalties
4-13-1: STORAGE OF JUNK PROHIBITED:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: The storage of junk, trash and refuse on private
property is prohibited and declared a nuisance within the village of South
Barrington unless specifically authorized under the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Defined: "Junk, trash and refuse" are defined herein to include any and
all waste matter, whether reusable or not, which is offensive to the public
health, safety or the aesthetics of the neighborhood, and is specifically
intended to include, but not be limited to, the whole or parts of
nonfunctioning or wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors,
machinery, and appliances. (Ord. 2009-889, 10-8-2009)
4-13-2: OUTDOOR STORAGE OF HOUSEHOLD GOODS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: The outdoor storage of household goods on private
property is prohibited and declared a nuisance within the village of South
Barrington unless specifically authorized under the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Defined: "Household goods" are defined herein to include, but not be
limited to, lawn maintenance equipment and tools, bicycles, appliances, indoor
household furniture, vehicle parts, tools, clothing and building materials.
(Ord. 2009-889, 10-8-2009)
4-13-3: OBSERVANCE OF VIOLATION:
Any person who observes a violation of this chapter may file an affidavit with
the building department setting forth in detail the violation, its location,
and the name of the owner and occupant of the property on which such nuisance
is alleged. The building officer or authorized designee shall investigate such
charge, and if such nuisance exists, issue a notice of violation to the owner
or occupant of the property. (Ord. 2009-889, 10-8-2009)
4-13-4: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Upon observing any violation of this chapter, the building officer or
authorized designee shall issue a notice of violation directed to the owner of
record of the property on which such nuisance occurs, as shown in the records
of the recorder of deeds of Cook County, or to the occupant of such property,
or to both. The notice shall describe the violation and shall establish a
reasonable time limit for the abatement of the nuisance by the owner or
occupant. For the purposes of this chapter, a reasonable time shall be not less
than two (2) days or more than ten (10) days after service of the notice. (Ord.
2009-889, 10-8-2009)
4-13-5: SERVICE OF NOTICE:
The building officer or authorized designee shall serve the notice of violation
upon the owner or occupant of the property, or both. After service of the
notice, the building officer or authorized designee shall make a copy of the
notice, showing the time of service, the person that was served, and the manner
in which it was served. In the event that the owner or occupant cannot be found
by personal service, service may be made by attaching a copy of the notice upon
the property, and by mailing a copy by registered mail to the last known
address of the owner or occupant, or both. (Ord. 2009-889, 10-8-2009)
4-13-6: INVESTIGATION:
Immediately upon the termination of the time allowed in the notice to abate the
nuisance, the building officer or authorized designee shall investigate to
determine whether or not the nuisance has been abated. (Ord. 2009-889, 10-8-
2009)
4-13-7: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
In the event the owner or occupant of the nuisance property fails to timely
abate the nuisance, then the village or the person who filed an affidavit with
the building department shall file a complaint in the circuit court of Cook
County to abate the nuisance and to punish the owner or occupant, or both, as
provided for in this chapter. The village may also adjudicate a violation of
this chapter by means of the administrative adjudication of ordinance
violations established by section
1-6-7 of this code. (Ord. 2009-889, 10-8-2009)
4-13-8: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined an
amount not less than thirty dollars ($30.00) or more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. Every day a violation occurs or continues to occur
shall be deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. 2009-889, 10-8-2009)
CHAPTER 14
PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS
SECTION:
4-14-1: Definitions
4-14-2: Location Of Portable Storage Units
4-14-3: Size Of Portable Storage Units
4-14-4: Condition, Usage And Maintenance Of Portable Storage Units
4-14-5: Permit Required
4-14-6: Violation; Penalty
4-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT: Any container designed for the outdoor storage of
personal property which is typically rented to owners or occupants of
residential property for their temporary use on the exterior of the property
and which is delivered to the property and removed by vehicle.
SITE: A tract, or plot of residential real estate occupied or that may be
occupied.
USER: The owner or occupant of residential real estate entering into an
agreement with a portable storage unit company for the placement of a portable
storage unit on a residential site located in the village of South Barrington.
(Ord. 2009-896, 12-10-2009)
4-14-2: LOCATION OF PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS:
Portable storage units may be temporarily located in residential zoning
districts provided the portable storage unit shall be placed within the
required zoning setback restrictions, unless the portable storage unit is
located on a private driveway, then in such case, the portable storage unit may
be located outside of the front yard setback requirement as long as the
portable storage unit does not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Under
no circumstances may a portable storage unit be placed in a right of way or
public parkway. (Ord. 2009-896, 12-10-2009)
4-14-3: SIZE OF PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS:
The portable storage unit shall be no larger than one hundred thirty (130)
square feet in area and no higher than ten feet (10') from grade. (Ord. 2009-
896, 12-10-2009)
4-14-4: CONDITION, USAGE AND MAINTENANCE OF PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS:
   A.   The exterior of the portable storage unit shall be constructed of
weatherproof material.
   B.   A portable storage unit shall have no signage other than the name,
address and telephone number of the person or firm engaged in the business of
renting or otherwise placing the portable storage unit and the signage must be
permanently adhered to, or painted on, the portable storage unit.
   C.   The user shall, at all times while the portable storage unit is located
at the site, be responsible for ensuring that the portable storage unit is
maintained in good condition, free from evidence of deterioration, weathering,
discoloration, graffiti, rust, ripping, tearing or other holes or breaks. When
not in immediate use, all storage units shall be locked.
   D.   No portable storage unit shall be resided in by any person, used as
living quarters, or occupied by a person for the conduct of business. In
addition, no portable storage unit shall be used to store solid waste,
construction debris, demolition debris, recyclable materials, business
inventory, commercial goods, goods or property other than at the residential
property where the portable storage unit is located or any other illegal or
hazardous material. Upon reasonable notice to the user and upon reasonable
cause to believe the portable storage unit is being used in violation of the
provisions of this section, the village may inspect the contents and/or use of
any portable storage unit at any reasonable time.
   E.   A portable storage unit may be temporarily parked at a site for a
period of ten (10) consecutive days without a portable storage unit permit. In
any event where a portable storage unit is parked at a site for a period
exceeding ten (10) consecutive days, the village shall require the user to
obtain a portable storage unit permit as provided in section
4-14-5 of this chapter which would authorize the portable storage unit to be
temporarily parked for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days for each
portable storage unit permit. Extended permits may be obtained by the user,
however, no portable storage unit shall remain on a site for a period exceeding
one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days.
   F.   Users are limited to a maximum of four (4) portable storage unit
permits, inclusive of extended permits, per calendar year. (Ord. 2009-896, 12-
10-2009)
4-14-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity to use, have
or cause a portable storage unit to be parked at any residential property
within the village for a period in excess of ten (10) consecutive days without
having first secured a portable storage unit permit from the village therefor
in accordance with the requirements of this section.
   A.   The portable storage unit permit application shall contain the name,
address, phone number and emergency contact person of the entity providing the
portable storage unit, the name and address of the applicant to whom the
portable storage unit is supplied, whether the person owns, rents, occupies, or
controls the property, the address at which the portable storage unit will be
placed, the delivery date, removal date, active building permit number, if
applicable, and a sketch depicting the location and the placement of the
portable storage unit.
   B.   The portable storage unit permit shall be valid for a period of thirty
(30) consecutive days. In the event the user requests an extension of the
portable storage unit permit, the user shall complete an extended permit
application which shall contain the same information as the original portable
storage unit permit. An extended permit shall be granted for a period of thirty
(30) consecutive days.
   C.   A portable storage unit permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
shall be submitted with the completed site permit application, which permit fee
covers the thirty (30) day period the portable storage unit is authorized to be
on site by the initial permit. An extended permit fee of five dollars ($5.00)
shall be submitted with the completed extended permit application, which permit
fee covers the thirty (30) day period the portable storage unit is authorized
to be on site by the extended permit. (Ord. 2009-896, 12-10-2009)
4-14-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
fined in an amount not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2009-896, 12-10-2009)
CHAPTER 15
DUMPSTERS
SECTION:
4-15-1: Dumpsters In Residential Zoning Districts
4-15-1: DUMPSTERS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Dumpster Defined: For purposes of this chapter "dumpster" shall mean
any container or receptacle that is one cubic yard or more, designed and used
outdoors to hold refuse, garbage, or construction material. This definition is
not to include and this chapter does not apply to residential garbage bins
utilized for regular residential garbage pick up.
   B.   Permit Required: Dumpsters are temporarily permitted on private
property in residential zoning districts provided the property owner first
secures a dumpster permit from the village of South Barrington. During a period
of active construction or rehabilitation of the subject property, a building
permit will be sufficient to authorize the use and location of a dumpster on
the property. If not during a period of active construction or rehabilitation,
a dumpster permit issued by the village of South Barrington shall be required
to authorize the use and location of a dumpster, and in such event, a dumpster
permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall apply.
   C.   Location Of Dumpsters: Dumpsters may be temporarily located in
residential zoning districts provided the dumpster shall be placed within the
required zoning setback restrictions, unless the construction dumpster is
located on a private driveway, then in such case, the dumpster may be located
outside of the front yard setback requirement as long as the dumpster does not
obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   D.   Duration: Dumpsters may remain located on the property during the
period of active construction or rehabilitation provided a building permit has
been issued by the village of South Barrington. If not during a period of
active construction or rehabilitation, a dumpster may also be temporarily
located on the property for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) consecutive
days, provided a dumpster permit has been issued by the village of South
Barrington.
   E.   Violation; Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
2009-897, 12-10-2009)
CHAPTER 16
PHOSPHORUS CONTAINING FERTILIZER
SECTION:
4-16-1: Definitions
4-16-2: Prohibition
4-16-3: Impervious Surfaces, Drainageways And Buffer Zones
4-16-4: Exemptions
4-16-5: Signs
4-16-6: Enforcement
4-16-7: Interpretation
4-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them:
COMMERCIAL APPLICATOR: A person who is engaged in the business of applying
fertilizer for hire.
FERTILIZER: A substance containing nitrogen, phosphorus, potash or any other
recognized plant nutrient element or compound which is used primarily for its
plant nutrient content. Fertilizer shall not include the following natural
products which shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter:
agricultural limestone, marl, sea solids and unprocessed animal manure, which
have not been manipulated so as to alter or change them chemically, burnt or
hydrated lime, and sewage sludge produced by any sanitary district.
NONCOMMERCIAL APPLICATOR: A person who applies fertilizer but who is not a
commercial applicator.
PLANT NUTRIENT PHOSPHORUS: Any compound, mixture or substance containing
phosphorus that may be used to stimulate or aid plant growth or health,
including, but not limited to, compounds, mixtures or substances that:
   A.   Have a nonzero P205 fertilizer grade, percentage or ratio;
   B.   Contain any type of ammonium phosphate, calcium phosphate,
superphosphate or phosphoric acid;
   C.   Are packaged or labeled as containing any of the above or as containing
any compound, molecule, mixture or substance containing phosphorus or the
chemical symbol, "P". (Ord. 2010-911, 6-10-2010)
4-16-2: PROHIBITION:
No commercial or noncommercial applicator, including homeowners and tenants,
shall apply to any area within the village any fertilizer, whether in liquid or
granular form, which contains any amount of phosphorus or other compound
containing phosphorus, such as phosphate, except:
   A.   The naturally occurring phosphorus in unadulterated natural or organic
fertilizing products such as yard waste compost; or
   B.   As otherwise provided in section
4-16-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-911, 6-10-2010)
4-16-3: IMPERVIOUS SURFACES, DRAINAGEWAYS AND BUFFER ZONES:
No commercial or noncommercial applicator shall apply any fertilizer to:
Impervious surfaces;
Areas within drainage ditches;
Waterways or within ten feet (10') thereof;
Any delineated wetland and any area established as a natural buffer zone
therefor; and
Frozen ground.
Any person who accidentally applies fertilizer to these areas shall immediately
remove it. (Ord. 2010-911, 6-10-2010)
4-16-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exemptions to the prohibitions described in this chapter:
   A.   The prohibition against the use of fertilizer containing phosphorus
shall not apply to turf and lawn areas for which soil tests confirm, as
determined by applicator, the ambient phosphorus content is below optimum
phosphorus levels for typical area soils. The scope of this exemption shall
only be for such volume or concentration of phosphorus necessary to permit such
turf or lawn area to contain phosphorus levels equal to the optimum phosphorus
levels for typical area soils. Phosphorus applied as fertilizer pursuant to
this exemption shall be integrated into the soil where it is immobilized and
generally protected from loss by stormwater runoff.
   B.   The prohibition contained in section
4-16-2 of this chapter shall not apply to any farming or agricultural business,
provided the use of fertilizers is related to the growth of a product or
maintenance of growing fields. Appropriate steps shall be taken to integrate
the fertilizer into the soil where it is immobilized and generally protected
from loss by stormwater runoff. This exemption shall not apply to the standard
lawn area of said farm or agricultural business.
   C.   The prohibition contained in section
4-16-2 of this chapter shall not apply in the event that the fertilizer is
being applied to establish a new lawn that is in its first growing season. A
building department permit shall be obtained from the village providing
evidence of compliance with this exception. (Ord. 2010-911, 6-10-2010)
4-16-5: SIGNS:
Any person, firm, corporation or partnership which sells any fertilizer at
retail shall be required to post a sign at the point of sale for fertilizer
containing the following legend:
The Village of South Barrington prohibits the application of fertilizer
containing phosphorus to any lawn or turf area and any impervious surface,
drainage way, wetland or buffer zone.
Such sign shall have an area not less than 93.5 square inches and shall be
conspicuously posted no less than four feet (4') above the ground. (Ord. 2010-
911, 6-10-2010)
4-16-6: ENFORCEMENT:
Any person, corporation, firm, franchise or other entity found to violate this
chapter shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation. Each
application of fertilizer shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-911,
6-10-2010)
4-16-7: INTERPRETATION:
This chapter shall not be interpreted as regulating the application of
pesticides or as regulating any other activity regulated by the Illinois
pesticide act. (Ord. 2010-911, 6-10-2010)
CHAPTER 17
COAL TAR PAVEMENT PRODUCTS
SECTION:
4-17-1: Definitions
4-17-2: Enforcement
4-17-3: Regulation Of The Application Of Seal Coat Products Containing Coal Tar
4-17-4: Violation And Penalty
4-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
COAL TAR: A byproduct of the process used to refine coal. Coal tar contains
high levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).
COAL TAR PAVEMENT PRODUCT: A material that contains coal tar and is for use on
an asphalt or concrete surface, including a driveway or parking area.
POLYCYCLIC AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS (PAHs): A group of organic chemicals that are
present in coal tar and are an environmental concern because they are toxic to
aquatic life.
SEAL COAT: A black liquid that is sprayed or painted on asphalt pavement in an
effort to protect and beautify the asphalt. Most seal coat products are coal
tar or asphalt based. (Ord. 2012-961, 4-12-2012)
4-17-2: ENFORCEMENT:
Violations of this chapter will be enforced by the village of South Barrington.
(Ord. 2012-961, 4-12-2012)
4-17-3: REGULATION OF THE APPLICATION OF SEAL COAT PRODUCTS CONTAINING COAL
TAR:
   A.   No person shall apply any coal tar containing seal coat product within
the village of South Barrington.
   B.   A person who owns property on which a coal tar pavement product is used
is presumed to have used a coal tar pavement product in violation of this
section. (Ord. 2012-961, 4-12-2012)
4-17-4: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a municipal
civil infraction subject to the remedies specified in title 1, chapter 4,
"General Penalty", of this code.
(Ord. 2012-961, 4-12-2012)
CHAPTER 18
LIMITATION ON THE USE OF WATER
SECTION:
4-18-1:    Purposes
4-18-2:    Definitions
4-18-3:    Outdoor Water Use Limitations
4-18-4:    Sod Installation
4-18-5:    Penalty
4-18-1: PURPOSES:
   A.   The Village of South Barrington has developed extensive storage,
pumping and pipeline systems to distribute potable water to the village and
other areas served by the village water system;
   B.   The village recognizes that the aquifer that potable water is drawn
from is a finite natural resource;
   C.   The village has developed a plan to conserve outdoor water use and
moderate water use to meet the essential needs of the village and other areas
served by the village water system;
   D.   The village is located in a climate where droughtlike conditions
periodically occur;
   E.   Abnormally high outdoor water use, together with droughtlike
conditions, and/or system constraints, may reduce the available water in local
aquifers to the point of creating a significant strain on the water system; and
   F.   The village finds that it is necessary to provide and implement
measures to conserve water use to protect the water supply of the village to
ensure the health, safety and general welfare of the village residents and
other areas served by the village water system during periods of potential
water shortage.
(Ord. 2025-1442, 9-11-2025)
4-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
IRRIGATION SYSTEM: A system consisting of pipes, valves and sprayers connected
to the village's potable water supply provided by the village system to
manually or automatically be operated/used to irrigate lawns or landscaping.
LANDSCAPE: The area of the property planted with vegetation other than grass.
LAWN: The area of the property planted with grass.
LAWN SPRINKLER: A device attached to a hose designed to allow for the
unattended watering of lawns or landscaping.
LAWN WATERING: Any means or methods of applying water to a lawn and/or
landscaping.
ODD/EVEN ADDRESSES: Address shall be considered odd or even based upon the last
digit in the numerical street address (i.e., 2437 [odd], 2342 [even]).
(Ord. 2025-1442, 9-11-2025)
4-18-3: OUTDOOR WATER USE LIMITATIONS:
   In order to promote good resource conservation practices and to preserve
potable water supplies, the outside use of the village's potable water supply
is limited as follows:
   A.   Restrictions: The outside use of the potable water supply provided by
the village system for landscaping and lawn watering by the use of a lawn
sprinkler or irrigation system is permitted between the hours of five o’clock
(5:00) a.m. and nine o’clock (9:00) a.m., and between the hours of five o’clock
(5:00) p.m. and ten o’clock (10:00) p.m., except as provided in subsection 4-
18-3-B of this section. Lots with odd numbered addresses will be permitted to
use potable water for lawn watering by the use of a lawn sprinkler or
irrigation system on odd numbered days (as long as they are not two (2)
consecutive days in a row) and lots with even numbered addresses will be
permitted to use potable water for lawn watering by the use of a lawn sprinkler
or irrigation system on even numbered days. This requirement is effective
yearly between May 15 and September 15. In addition, new/replacement sprinkle
systems shall be equipped with a WaterSense labeled irrigation controller and
shall be in compliance with Section 2.5(g) of the Illinois Plumbing License Law
(225ILCS 320).
   B.   Exceptions: The restrictions shall apply to all residential, commercial
and industrial properties except for the following uses, which shall be
permitted at all times:
      1.   Residential use of water by watering can, bucket or handheld hose
equipped with a water nozzle, valve, or similar shutoff device, for landscape
and lawn watering which is attended when in use;
      2.   Residential use of water for filling small children's wading pools
and water oriented play devices when those play devices are being actively
used;
      3.   Residential use of water for car washing so long as the hose, if
any, is fitted with a water nozzle, valve, or similar shutoff device, at the
discharge end of the hose and the water is shut off when not being applied to
wash or rinse the vehicle, and which is attended when in use;
      4.   Residential, commercial and industrial use of water for property
maintenance cleaning purposes, such as washing windows, deck cleaning and the
like; and
      5.   A commercial or industrial service involving water usage as part of
an ongoing business operation, such as a car wash.
      6.   New lawns (less than three (3) months old) may be exempted from this
provision with a village permit.
(Ord. 2025-1442, 9-11-2025)
4-18-4: SOD INSTALLATION:
   The installation of sod within the village between May 15 and September 15
is discouraged.
(Ord. 2025-1442, 9-11-2025)
4-18-5: PENALTY:
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall result in a two
hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine for each offense. Each day on which a
violation continues or persists shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 2025-1442, 9-11-2025)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Department Created
5-1-2: Chief Of Police
5-1-3: Oath Of Office; Commission
5-1-4: Duties Of Department Members
5-1-5: Serve As Witnesses; Fees
5-1-6: Rules And Regulations
5-1-7: Mandatory Retirement Age
5-1-8: Deputy Police Chief
5-1-9: Board Of Police Commissioners
5-1-9-1: Appointment Of The Chairperson
5-1-9-2: Appointments Of Full Time Members Of The Police Department
5-1-9-3: Promotions
5-1-9-4: Discipline Of Part Time Police Officers
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created and established an executive department of the village
which shall be known as the department of police. Such police department shall
consist of such number of full time members, including a chief of police,
patrolmen and part time reserve patrolmen as are from time to time determined
by the board of trustees. The board of trustees may, by motion, constitute a
public safety committee. (Ord. 0-78-90, 4-13-1978; amd. 1992 Code; Ord. 0-97-
514, 6-12-1997)
5-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of
chief of police who shall be head of the department of police. He shall be
appointed by the village president, with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees.
   B.   Duties: The chief of police shall have the custody, care and control of
the police department, subject to the direction of the village president. He
shall devote his entire time to the municipal affairs of the village, to
preserve the peace, order, safety and cleanliness thereof, and to this end he
shall execute and enforce all applicable statutes, ordinances and orders of the
village president and board of trustees. He shall be charged with the duty of
protecting the rights of persons and property, providing a proper police force
at every fire, to take notice of any nuisance, to take notice of any
impediment, obstruction or defect in the streets, avenues and public places of
the village, to remove the same or cause immediate notice thereof to be given
to the proper person whose duty it may be to attend to the removal of the same,
and he shall cause to be enforced all ordinances of the village and applicable
statutes of the state. He shall keep a complete record of all arrests, fines
and disposition of all calls and investigations.
   C.   Reports Required: The chief of police shall, not later than January 31
of each year, make an annual report to the president and board of trustees, in
writing, of the state of the police force, with a detailed statement of the
transactions of the department of police for the preceding calendar year, with
such statistics and suggestions in regard to the requirements of the department
as he may deem advisable. He shall also make reports of any matter or thing
concerning such department whenever suggested by the president and board of
trustees.
   D.   Compensation: The compensation of all police department personnel shall
be established annually by the board of trustees.
   E.   Removal From Office; Reinstatement: The village president may remove
the police chief on any formal charge whenever he is of the opinion that the
interests of the village demand removal, but he shall report the reasons for
the removal to the board of trustees at the next regular meeting of the board
of trustees. If the president fails or refuses to report to the board of
trustees the reasons for the removal, or if the board of trustees, by a two-
thirds (2/3) vote of its members authorized by law to be elected, disapproves
of the removal, the chief of police thereupon shall be restored to his office.
The vote shall be by ayes and nays which shall be entered upon the journal of
the president and board of trustees. Upon restoration, the chief of police
shall take a new oath of office. (Ord. 0-2003-681, 4-17-2003)
5-1-3: OATH OF OFFICE; COMMISSION:
Before entering upon his duties, each member of the Department of Police shall
take and subscribe to the same oath or affirmation as provided by the statutes
to be taken and subscribed by all Municipal officers. After subscribing to his
oath of office, each member of the Department of Police shall be issued an
official commission card signed by the President. Said card shall be retained
in the personal possession of the member at all times while on duty. (Ord. 0-
78-90, 4-13-1978)
5-1-4: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
   A.   Generally: It shall be the duty of all members of the Department of
Police to see to the enforcement of all ordinances and statutes effective in
the Village and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and to
arrest violators thereof. Every member of the Department of Police is hereby
declared to be a conservator of the peace.
   B.   Serve Processes: All members of the Department of Police shall be
authorized to serve writs, summonses and other processes; but no patrolman
shall serve any such process except upon the order of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 0-78-90, 4-13-1978)
5-1-5: SERVE AS WITNESSES; FEES:
Every member of the Department of Police shall appear as a witness whenever it
is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or a State or
Federal law. No such member shall receive any witness fee for such service in
any action or suit to which the Village is a party and all fees due for such
services shall, if paid, be turned over to the Village Treasurer. (Ord. 0-78-
90, 4-13-1978)
5-1-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Village President and Board of
Trustees, may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the conduct and
guidance of the members of the department as he shall see fit. (Ord. 0-78-90,
4-13-1978)
5-1-7: MANDATORY RETIREMENT AGE:
The age of retirement of any full-time sworn police officer in the service of
the Village shall be sixty-six (66) years, and any full-time sworn police
officer employed by the village shall be required to cease employment as a
sworn police officer upon his or her attainment of the age of sixty-six (66)
years, provided however that the Police Chief who continues to demonstrate the
physical fitness necessary to successfully perform the essential functions of
the position, pursuant to an appropriate medical exam, may extend the mandatory
retirement age for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months, but in no case
shall a Police Chief continue to be employed in that capacity upon attaining
the age of seventy-two (72) years. (Ord. 2018-1176, 2-8-2018; amd. Ord. 2019-
1195, 3-14-2019; Ord. 2020-1229, 3-11-2020; Ord. 2021-1266, 3-11-2021; Ord. O-
2021-1299, 11-11-2021; Ord. O-2022-1310, 3-10-2022; Ord. 2023-1354, 3-9-2023;
Ord. 2024-1396, 3-14-2024)
5-1-8: DEPUTY POLICE CHIEF:
   A.   Office Created: There is hereby created the position of Deputy Police
Chief. The Village President may appoint and can remove the Deputy Police Chief
with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees. The Deputy Police
Chief shall be qualified as a sworn police officer prior to his appointment as
Deputy Police Chief.
   B.   Duties: The Deputy Police Chief shall report to, be evaluated by and
provide those services as required by the Chief of Police. In the event that
there is a vacancy in the Office of Chief of Police or in the event that the
Chief of Police is incapacitated or otherwise not able to perform his duties,
the Deputy Police Chief shall have the same powers and duties generally as that
of Chief of Police, during any vacancy in the office or during the absence or
incapacity of the Chief of Police.
   C.   Compensation: The compensation of the Deputy Police Chief shall be
established by the Village Board of Trustees.
   D.   Rank Upon Removal: A Deputy Police Chief shall serve at the discretion
of the Village President. If a Deputy Police Chief is removed from that
position and continues as a sworn officer with the South Barrington Police
Department, he or she shall revert to the rank of Sergeant without regard as to
whether a vacancy exists in that rank. (Ord. 0-2008-840, 1-10-2008; amd. Ord.
2025-1421, 1-9-2025)
5-1-9: BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS:
The provisions of division 2.1 of article 10 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.) are hereby adopted by reference with respect to all
full time sworn police officers, except as modified herein. To the extent that
any section or provision of this code conflicts with the provisions of division
2.1 of article 10 of the Illinois Municipal Code, this code shall control and
prevail. (Ord. 2014-1032, 9-11-2014; amd. Ord. 2025-1421, 1-9-2025)
5-1-9-1: APPOINTMENT OF THE CHAIRPERSON:
The Village President, with the advice and consent of the Village Board of
Trustees, shall designate a Chairperson to serve during the Municipal fiscal
year. (Ord. 2009-881, 5-14-2009)
5-1-9-2: APPOINTMENTS OF FULL TIME MEMBERS OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT:
   A.   The provisions of section 10-2.1-17 of article 10 of the Illinois
Municipal Code 1  (the "Act") are applicable to full time members of the Police
Department, except as modified by this section.
   B.   The provisions of section 10-2.1-4 of the Act are hereby modified to
provide that the Village President, with the advice and consent of the Village
Board of Trustees, will appoint all full time members of the Police Department,
including the Chief of Police. The minimum educational requirement for the
original appointment of full-time police officers is a bachelor's degree from
an accredited college or university. After completing the Final Eligibility
Register, the commission will certify to the Village President and the Board of
Trustees, the Final Eligibility Register of candidates for original appointment
to the position of full- time police officer. Each time an original appointment
as a full-time officer is to be made from the Final Eligibility Register, the
Village President will recommend for appointment one person from the top ten
(10) eligible candidates from the current Final Eligibility Register. Such
recommendation to the Village Board will be made subsequent to the Village
President's interview of the candidate and upon the candidate's satisfactory
completion of a polygraph examination and a thorough background investigation.
A candidate whom the Village President considers to be unsuitable for
recommendation for employment in the Police Department will be stricken from
the Final Eligibility Register. With the advice and consent of the Village
Board of Trustees, a conditional offer of employment will be issued by the
Village President to the recommended candidate, conditioned upon the
candidate's satisfactory completion of the required psychological and medical
examinations. If the candidate fails to satisfactorily complete the required
psychological and medical examinations, the conditional offer of employment
will be rescinded by the Village President and such candidate will be stricken
from the Final Eligibility Register. Upon satisfactory completion of the
required psychological and medical examinations, the Village President will
issue a letter of appointment to such candidate. Notwithstanding the above, an
original appointment to a full- time member of the Police Department may also
be made by the Village President's appointment, upon the recommendation of the
Chair of the Board of Police Commissioners, the Chair of the Village Public
Safety Committee and the Chief of Police, and with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees, of a qualified part-time police officer currently
employed with the Village's Police Department who has served the Village
honorably for at least two (2) years, taking precedence over candidates on any
existing eligibility register. The Village President has the final authority,
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, to determine whether it
is in the best interests of the Village to appoint a part-time officer to fill
a full-time vacancy in the Police Department or to select a candidate from a
Final Eligibility Register.
   C.   If the Board of Police Commissioners becomes aware of information
regarding a person listed upon an eligibility register that would have
disqualified that person from being listed on the register if it had been
learned prior to the creation of the register, the Board of Police
Commissioners will strike the name from the eligibility register.
   D.   Should the Final Eligibility Register contain fewer than ten (10) names
at any given time, the Village President may request that the Board of Police
Commissioners prepare a new Final Eligibility Register. If the new Final
Eligibility Register is established prior to the expiration of the current
Final Eligibility Register, persons remaining on the current list may request
that their names be placed upon the new Final Eligibility Register based upon
their scores from the previous register, or they may choose to retest. If the
person chooses to retest for the new eligibility register, the new scores will
be used for the preparation of the new eligibility register and original test
scores will be forfeited.
   E.   All persons appointed as part time or full-time police officers,
including any part-time officer appointed to a full-time officer position, will
have an eighteen (18) month probationary period. The Board of Police
Commissioners may remove a person from any other eligibility register for
police officer if they fail to satisfactorily complete their probationary
period.
   F.   The provisions of this section
5-1-9 do not apply to auxiliary police officers. (Ord. 2017-1162, 9-14-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4.
5-1-9-3: PROMOTIONS:
   A.   The provisions of section 10-2.1-15 of the Act are hereby modified to
provide that all promotions to the rank of Sergeant will be made by the Village
President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees of the Village.
Full-time police officers who are non-probationary and have completed eighteen
(18) months of continuous service with the South Barrington Police Department
are eligible to be evaluated for promotion to the rank of Sergeant as set forth
in the Rules and Regulations of the Board of Police Commissioners of the
Village of South Barrington. The Village President and Board of Trustees of the
Village may establish educational requirements for promotion to the rank of
Sergeant; however officers hired to a full time position in the South
Barrington Police Department on or before March 1, 2009, are not required to
meet an educational requirement for promotion that is more stringent than that
in effect on March 1, 2009.
   B.   All promotional appointments will be considered as probationary
appointments. Accordingly, members so assigned will be subject to an eighteen
(18) month probationary period. No less than thirty (30) days before the end of
said probationary period, the Chief of Police will recommend to the Village
President either the retention of the promotional appointment or reassignment
of the appointee to his or her previous position. The Village President, with
the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees, will make the final
decision with respect to the retention or reassignment of the appointee, which
decision will be final and not subject to review by the Board of Police
Commissioners.
   C.   The position/rank of "Senior Sergeant" and "Deputy Chief" will be an
exempt rank and assignments to the position/rank of "Senior Sergeant" or
"Deputy Chief" will not be subject to the provisions of this section.
Assignments to the position/rank of "Senior Sergeant" or "Deputy Chief" will be
made by the Village President, from the officers holding the rank of Sergeant,
with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2017-1162,
9-14-2017; amd. Ord. 2018-1178, 4-24-2018; Ord. 2025-1424, 2-13-2025)
5-1-9-4: DISCIPLINE OF PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
The provisions of section 10-2.1-17 of the Act shall not apply to part time
police officers. Part time police officers shall be subject to discipline,
including suspension or discharge, in the discretion of the Chief of Police,
and such disciplinary actions shall not be subject to review by the Board of
Police Commissioners. (Ord. 2009-881, 5-14-2009)
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Definitions
5-2-2: Receiving Station Alarms And Digital Dialer Systems; Minimum Standards
5-2-3: Restrictions On Local Alarms And Direct Dialers
5-2-4: False Alarms
5-2-5: Application; Filing; Revocation Or Suspension
5-2-6: Penalties
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   ALARM: Any device known as a burglar or holdup/panic alarm.
   ALARM USER: The person, family, household, firm, entity, partnership,
association, corporation, company, organization or state, or subdivision
thereof other than the village, of any kind, in control of any building,
structure, or facility or portion thereof wherein an alarm system or protection
system is maintained.
   BURGLAR ALARM:: A system designed to notify the police department, either
automatically or by manual operation, of an unauthorized intrusion.
   FALSE ALARM: The transmission of any alarm signal caused by human error or
mechanical malfunction, whether or not the exact cause of the error or
malfunction is identified, or any other activation of the signal when no actual
emergency exists, other than for testing purposes.
   FIRE ALARM: A system designed to notify the fire department, either
automatically or by manual operation, of an actual or imminent fire.
   HOLDUP/PANIC ALARM: A system designed to notify the police department of a
robbery or other serious criminal act.
   TYPES OF ALARM SYSTEMS:
      Digital Dialer System: A system employing automatic telephone dialing
devices which transmits a prerecorded, taped voice message via a telephone
trunk line.
      Direct Dial System: A system employing automatic telephone dialing
services which transmits a prerecorded, taped voice message via a telephone
trunk line and/or cellular line.
      Local Alarm: An alarm that sounds audibly on the exterior of the premises
of the user.
      Receiving Station Alarms: A system connected directly to the dispatch
center or alarm company from the source of the alarm by permanent, dedicated
telephone lines and/or cellular lines, which constantly scans its customers'
alarms and provides a coded tape if an alarm is triggered, which tape states
the type of alarm, time received, location and alarm status. (Ord. 2009-880, 5-
14-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-1224, 2-13-2020)
5-2-2: RECEIVING STATION ALARMS AND DIGITAL DIALER SYSTEMS; MINIMUM STANDARDS:
All direct "hardwire" and "wireless" cellular receiving station alarm systems
and digital dialer systems shall meet the following minimum standards:
   A.   The system shall conform to all applicable standards of the
Underwriters Laboratories or the National Fire Protection Association.
   B.   Alarm systems shall be maintained by the owner or lessee in such
physical condition that false alarms will be prevented. Alarm users must notify
the police department prior to any system tests to avoid a false alarm.
   C.   Alarm users shall be required to file and maintain an alarm permit
through the village police department. There shall be no cost for the issuance
of the permit. Requirements for alarm permits are established in section
5-2-5  of this chapter.
   D.   Alarm permits are non-transferable. Every alarm user must apply for an
alarm permit. (Ord. 2009-880, 5-14-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-1224, 2-13-2020)
5-2-3: RESTRICTIONS ON LOCAL ALARMS AND DIRECT DIALERS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any local alarm system to
sound continuously for more than fifteen (15) minutes. The sounding of such
alarm for a continuous period of more than fifteen (15) minutes is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
   B.   No person shall operate or maintain a direct dialer system which dials
any telephone number within the police department or dispatch center.
   C.   Direct dialers shall not be used for signaling fire or medical alert
alarms. (Ord. 2009-880, 5-14-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-1224, 2-13-2020)
5-2-4: FALSE ALARMS:
   A.   Charges Established:
      1.   If the police department responds to more than three (3) false
alarms in a calendar year at any premises having an alarm system, the user of
such alarm system shall be notified via mail that they have reached assessment
status.
      2.   The below table is the billing schedule for false alarms.
 
Number Of Alarms With A Permit Without A Permit
0-3              No charge     No charge
4-6              $50 for each  $100 for each
7-9              $100 for each $200 for each
10+              $150 for each $300 for each
 
   B.   Notice Of Charge; Reconsideration; Final Decision:
      1.   Payment of a false alarm charge is due within sixty (60) days.
      2.   A permit holder may request reconsideration of a charge through the
village’s adjudication process.
      3.   Within five (5) days after the receipt of a request for
reconsideration from a user, the chief of police shall notify the user of his
decision. The chief's decision shall be final.
   C.   New Alarm Systems Exempt: Except in the case of a holdup/panic alarm,
whenever a new alarm system is installed, the user shall be given thirty (30)
days from the date of the installation of such alarm system within which no
alarm from the premises shall be deemed to be a false alarm.
   D.   If any alarm user fails to file a permit and encounters a false alarm
after the initial thirty (30) day grace period, a warning letter will be sent
stating user has thirty (30) days to file a permit application. If the alarm
user continues to not file a permit and begins to incur charges, as stated in
this section, fines will double the amount of the false alarm charge until a
permit is filed. (Ord. 2009-880, 5-14-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-1224, 2-13-2020)
5-2-5: APPLICATION; FILING; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
   A.   Application Required: Each person desiring to install, maintain or
operate a fire, smoke or medical emergency alarm, as defined herein, shall file
an application on such forms as provided by the village. Each person desiring
to install, maintain or operate a burglar or "holdup/panic alarm", as defined
herein, shall file an application on such forms as provided by the village. The
application shall be submitted to the chief of police and shall contain the
following information:
      1.   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
      2.   Name, address and telephone number, and type of business of premises
where alarm system is to be located.
      3.   Name and telephone number of at least two (2) persons responsible
for the premises where the alarm is located to be contacted to deactivate the
alarm system.
      4.   The name and telephone number of the person, firm or corporation
authorized to deactivate the alarm system when none of the persons named in
subsection A3 of this section can be reached.
      5.   The name and telephone number of the person, firm or corporation
responsible for the maintenance and repair of the alarm system.
      6.   In the event none of the above persons will be available at any
particular time, it is the responsibility of the alarm user to notify the
QuadCom communications center of an alternate person to contact.
   B.   Authority To Revoke Or Suspend: The chief of police has the authority
to revoke or suspend the operation of alarm systems, including local alarms, if
any inspection or other evidence reveals noncompliance with the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 2009-880, 5-14-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-1224, 2-13-2020)
5-2-6: PENALTIES:
Failure to pay any charge assessed under this chapter within sixty (60) days of
notice of the charge being sent by the police department shall result in the
issuance of a notice of ordinance violation in accordance with the procedures
of the village's administrative adjudication hearing ordinance. The penalty for
failure to pay surcharges assessed under this chapter shall not be less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00);
provided, however, that in the event that the owner or occupant makes payment
for such violation, together with payment in full of all outstanding alarm
charges, prior to a public hearing before the village's administrative hearing
officer, the penalty shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for such violation.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each and every day a violation
occurs or continues. After completion of an administrative hearing, remaining
unpaid accounts may be sent to collections. (Ord. 2009-880, 5-14-2009; amd.
Ord. 2020-1224, 2-13-2020)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: General Provisions
5-3-3: Control Of Animals
5-3-4: Animal Bites
5-3-5: Impounding Animals
5-3-6: License Fee
5-3-7: Inoculations
5-3-8: Estrus (Heat)
5-3-9: Diseased Animal
5-3-10: Disposition Of Dead Animals
5-3-11: Violations; Penalty
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ANIMAL: Any live vertebrate creature except man.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER/WARDEN: Any employee of the Village designated by the
Chief of Police to exercise police powers in the enforcement of this Chapter.
AUTHORIZED PERSON: Any member of the Police Department, animal control officer/
warden or any person under their supervision.
BITE: Seizure of a person with the jaws or teeth of any cat, dog or other
animal capable of transmitting rabies so that the person so seized has been
wounded or pierced and further includes contact of the saliva of such cat, dog
or other animal with any break or abrasion of the skin.
CAT: All members of the feline family.
CONTROL: Any owned animal that is secured by one or more of the following:
   A.   A leash or lead no longer than six feet (6') in length;
   B.   An electrical or mechanical device designed to keep an animal confined
to the owner's property;
   C.   A fence, cage, crate or enclosure;
   D.   A vehicle;
   E.   The presence and voice of the owner or member of the owner's family.
DISEASED ANIMAL: Any animal affected with a disease contagious or infectious to
both humans and animals.
DOG: All members of the canine family.
ENCLOSURE: Any fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming
or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and to
confine a dog or other animal, designed with secure sides, top and bottom
adequate to prevent escape.
IMPOUNDMENT: The removal and taking into custody of animals pursuant to this
Chapter.
KENNEL: Any establishment or premises where more than four (4) dogs or four (4)
cats or any combination thereof, over four (4) months of age are boarded or
kept for any purpose whatsoever, or on which more than two (2) such animals are
boarded for compensation or kept for sale, with the exception of regularly
established veterinary hospitals, pet shops, pounds or shelters.
LEASH: Any restraint, cord, thong or chain not more than six feet (6') in
length, designed for the purpose of keeping the animal under control. The leash
must securely fasten to the collar or harness of the animal and must be of
sufficient strength to contain the animal.
POUND: Any facility licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture and
approved by the Chief of Police for the purpose of enforcing this Chapter and
used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals.
SHELTER: Any establishment where dogs, cats or other animals are received,
housed and distributed with or without charge.
STRAY ANIMAL: Any animal running at large in the public way or on private
property other than that of the owners or keepers of such animals.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: A. Any individual animal that when unprovoked inflicts bites
and attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property.
   B.   Any individual animal with a propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise do any act that
might endanger the safety of human beings, domestic animals or any other
property of another, including, but not limited to, a disposition to mischief
or fierceness which might lead to attack to the foregoing.
   C.   Any individual animal which attacks a human being or domestic animal
without provocation, whether in play, anger or outbreak of untrained nature.
   D.   No animal shall be deemed vicious if it bites attacks or menaces a
trespasser on the property of its owner or harms or menaces anyone who has
tormented or abused it or is a professionally trained animal for law
enforcement or guard duties.
VILLAGE: The Village of South Barrington, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 0-94-
455, 12-12-1994)
5-3-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
It shall be unlawful to:
   A.   Inhumanely beat, underfeed, overload or abandon any animal.
   B.   Fail to provide any animal with proper shelter, protection from weather
or veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering.
   C.   Own, keep, harbor or maintain within the Village any breed of fowl that
are or will be used in the pursuit of and staging of cockfighting on any
premises.
   D.   Promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct or carry on any animal fight of a
similar nature, nor any simulated version of same that involves baiting or
inciting an animal toward intent to fight.
   E.   Hold a greased pig contest.
   F.   Keep animals in violation of the "Illinois Humane Care for Animals Act"
or the "Illinois Welfare Act".
   G.   Intentionally strike Canadian geese or other wildlife with a motor
vehicle. Geese and other wildlife shall have the right of way when crossing
streets within the Village. Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle,
strikes an animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be
possible, or shall immediately report such injury to the animal owner, if
known; or to the appropriate law enforcement agency; or to the local humane
society.
   H.   Torment, shoot at with slingshots, BB or pellet type guns or other
firearms, pelt with rocks or otherwise disturb any animals.
   I.   Give away or use any live animal as a prize for or as an inducement to
enter any contest, game, or other compensation or an inducement to enter a
place of amusement or offer such animal as an incentive to enter any business
agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.
   J.   Bring or cause to have brought into the Village, sell, offer for sale,
barter or display living baby chicks, ducklings, or other fowl or rabbits which
have been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an
artificial color, or give away as pets or sell, offer for sale, barter or give
away at no cost or as novelties or prizes. Nothing in this Section shall be
construed to prohibit legitimate commerce in poultry for agricultural or food
purposes.
   K.   Poison or cause to be poisoned any domesticated animal. The only
exception will be by written permit from the Illinois Department of Agriculture
for the purpose of controlling diseases transmissible to humans or other
animals and only when all other methods and means have been exhausted. Any
drugs used for euthanasia shall be by or under the direction of a licensed
veterinarian.
   L.   Take the nest or eggs or young of any bird that is protected by Federal
or State law.
   M.   Keep or permit to be kept or display for exhibition purposes any wild
animal contrary to Federal, State, and local laws or regulations.
   N.   Leave any animal unattended in a motor vehicle or enclosed trailer when
the outside temperature exceeds eighty six degrees Fahrenheit (86°F) (30°C) or
contain any animal in such manner that said animal does not have proper air
circulation while confined in a motor vehicle, trailer, kennel, doghouse, or
any type of container or structure in which an animal may be confined.
   O.   Own any animal which is known to be infected with any disease
transmissible to other animals or man, including severe parasitism, unless such
animal shall be confined in such a manner as not to expose other animals or
man. (Ord. 0-94-455, 12-12-1994)
5-3-3: CONTROL OF ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful:
   A.   Consent Required: For the owner or any person who has in his custody or
control, any dog, cat, or other animal to enter upon the premises of another
within the Village without the consent of the owners.
   B.   Public Body Of Water: To permit any animal, whether licensed or not, to
enter any public body of water, pond, fountain or stream.
   C.   Food Establishment: To permit any animal to enter any place where food
is stored, prepared, served or sold to the public, or any public building or
hall, provided however, that this Section shall not apply to any blind person
using a trained, seeing eye dog, to veterinary offices or hospitals, or to
animal shows or exhibitions.
   D.   Trespass: To permit any animal to run uncontrolled or trespass on
private or public property.
   E.   Damage: To permit any animal to damage or destroy any property.
   F.   Vehicles: To permit any dog to chase, run after or jump at vehicles
using the public thoroughfares.
   G.   Threatening Animal: To permit any dog to habitually snap, growl, snarl,
jump upon or otherwise threaten persons lawfully using any common thoroughfare,
sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place where people
congregate or walk.
   H.   Vicious Or Dangerous Animal: To own, keep, harbor or maintain any
vicious or dangerous animal or animal with vicious propensities in a manner
which may or does endanger the safety of persons or property off his premises
or lawfully on his premises. Any dog, cat or other animal that has previously
demonstrated vicious propensities shall not be permitted upon a public street
or highway, or upon any premises other than those of the person owning such
dog, cat or other animal unless the dog, cat or other animal wears a muzzle
securely fastened about its mouth in such a manner that it cannot bite, and is
on a leash securely fastened to a collar or harness. The overall length of the
leash including the handle shall not exceed three feet (3'), and be held by its
owner or other person able to control such dog, cat or other animal and while
lawfully on the premises of the owner, shall not be allowed to come in contact
with any person who is not a member of the immediate household.
   I.   Disturbance Of The Peace: To permit any dog, cat, or other animal to
howl, yelp, whine or meow, bark or make noise in such a manner as to disturb
any person or neighborhood at anytime of the day or night.
   J.   Unsanitary Conditions: To allow any places where any animal is or may
be kept to become unclean or unsanitary or become offensive to those residing
in the vicinity.
   K.   Livestock: To harbor or keep any live horse, cattle, swine, sheep or
goat or to raise any chickens, rabbits, or fowl anywhere in the Village.
Exceptions are animals kept in agriculture zoning districts or as allowed under
special use.
   L.   Number Of Dogs Or Cats: To keep on the premises more than three (3)
dogs or cats or any combination thereof over four (4) months of age, or more
than two (2) such animals boarded for compensation or kept for sale with the
exception of regularly established and zoned veterinary hospitals, pet shops,
pounds or shelters.
   M.   Excrement Removal: For any person to cause or permit a dog to be on any
property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person unless such
person has in his immediate possession a device for the removal of excrement
and a depository for the transmission of excrement to a receptacle located upon
owned or possessed by such person.
   N.   Removal Required: For any person in control of, causing or permitting
any dog to be on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by
such person to fail to remove excrement left by such dog to a proper receptacle
located on property owned or possessed by such person.
   O.   Bites: To fail to report an animal bite.
   P.   Domestic Pets: To keep, harbor or maintain any animal which may
endanger the safety of persons or property. This includes animals other than
commonly recognized domestic pets which may harm or injure humans or other
animals by injection of toxins, by constriction or suffocation, or by vicious
biting, scratching or mauling. It is no defense to a violation of this item
that the keeper of such animal prohibited herein has attempted to domesticate
such animal. Exception to this Section are animals displayed or harbored in a
zoo, carnival or circus.
   Q.   Public Street Or Highway: To permit any dog, cat or other animal upon a
public street or highway, or upon any premises other than those of the person
owning such dog, cat or other animal unless such dog, cat or other animal is on
a leash securely fastened to a collar or harness. The overall length of the
leash including the handle shall not exceed six feet (6') and be held by its
owner or other person able to control such dog, cat or other animal and while
lawfully on the premises of the owner, shall not be allowed to come in contact
with any person who is not a member of the immediate household.
   R.   Vicious Animal Requirements:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain an animal
which has been found to be a vicious animal unless such animal is at all times
kept in an enclosure. The only times that a vicious animal may be allowed out
of the enclosure are if it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain
veterinary care for the vicious animal or to comply with the order of a court
of competent jurisdiction, provided that said vicious animal is securely
muzzled and restrained with a chain having a tensile strength of three hundred
(300) pounds and not exceeding three feet (3') in length, and shall be under
the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the vicious
animal.
      2.   Any animal which has been found to be a vicious animal and which is
not confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the law enforcement
authority having jurisdiction in such area and shall be turned over to a
licensed veterinarian for destruction by lethal injection.
      3.   No owner or keeper of a vicious animal shall sell or give away any
vicious animal.
   S.   Public Nuisance: It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public
nuisance by permitting any dangerous animal to leave the premises of its owner
when not under control by leash or other recognized control methods.
   T.   Exemptions: Guide dogs for the blind or hearing-impaired, support dogs
for the physically handicapped and sentry, guard, or police-owned dogs are
exempt from this Section; provided an attack or injury to a person occurs while
the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this
Section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in
accordance with Section
5-3-7 of this Chapter. It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog
to notify the Police Department of changes of address. In the case of a sentry
or guard dog, the owner shall keep the Police Department advised of the
location where such dog will be stationed.
   U.   Complaint: The Village Prosecutor may file a complaint to enjoin all
persons for maintaining or permitting such, to abate the same, and to enjoin
the owner of such dog or other animal from permitting same to leave his
premises when not under control by leash or other recognized control methods.
(Ord. 0-94-455, 12-12-1994)
5-3-4: ANIMAL BITES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person knowing that an individual has been
bitten by an animal to refuse to notify, within twenty four (24) hours, the
authorized person. When the authorized person receives information that any
person has been bitten by an animal, the authorized person shall have the owner
confine the biting animal under observation of a licensed veterinarian for a
period of ten (10) days beginning within twenty four (24) hours of the biting
incident. The biting animal may be confined in the house of its owner in a
manner which will prohibit it from biting any person or animal if a licensed
veterinarian adjudges such confinement satisfactory.
   B.   When the biting animal is currently inoculated with rabies vaccine, the
animal's health shall be reported by the veterinarian to the authorized person
of the Village and the Cook County Department of Animal and Rabies Control on
the first and tenth day of the observation period for rabies.
   C.   When the biting animal is not currently inoculated with rabies vaccine,
the animal's health shall be reported by the veterinarian to the authorized
person of the Village and the Cook County Department of Animal and Rabies
Control on the first, fifth and tenth day of the observation period for rabies.
   D.   It shall be the responsibility of the Police Department to complete the
Cook County Animal Dog Bite card as soon as a bite is reported and mail it to
the Cook County Department of Animal Control within twenty four (24) hours.
   E.   Owners of caged rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils, rats and mice
that have been owned over thirty (30) days shall not be required to obtain a
veterinary examination when their caged animal has bitten a person, but shall
report the health of the biting animal by telephone or in person to the
authorized person of the Village and the Cook County Department of Animal and
Rabies Control on the first and tenth day following the bite.
   F.   Cattle, sheep, swine and horses that have bitten a person shall be
confined to the owner's property and examined by a veterinarian on the first
and tenth day after a bite.
   G.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a biting animal to euthanize,
sell, give away or otherwise dispose of, or have inoculated against rabies, the
animal known to have bitten a person until it has been released from
confinement for observation for rabies.
   H.   If the dog, cat or other animal bites again during the confinement
period, it will be impounded for the full ten (10) day period commencing from
the date of the second bite. Owners allowing their dog, cat or other animal to
bite during the confinement period will be subject to court citation. Owners
not returning their animals for follow-up examination on the appropriate dates
will be in violation and subject to court citation.
   I.   The owner of said dog, cat or other animal shall be responsible for all
fees and charges incurred to meet the requirement of this Section. (Ord. 0-94-
455, 12-12-1994)
5-3-5: IMPOUNDING ANIMALS:
   A.   Any dog, cat, or other animal doing any of the acts prohibited in
Section
5-3-4 of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and such
animal may be seized and impounded as provided herein.
   B.   After such animal is impounded, the Police Department, animal warden or
authorized representative shall ascertain whether they are licensed, and if so,
shall within a reasonable time notify the person to whom the license was issued
that said animal has been impounded and may be redeemed. All animals impounded
pursuant to this Section shall be held for a minimum of seven (7) days after
notification of the owner. In case any animal is not released, it shall be
humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of, provided that none of said animals
shall be used for experimental purposes.
   C.   Any dog, cat or other animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of
this Section may be redeemed upon payment of the required redemption fee,
fines, license and vaccinations as provided herein. The animal shall be
returned to the owner, provided he shall:
      1.   Show satisfactory proof of ownership.
      2.   Pay any fines or penalties imposed for violation of the Village
ordinance.
      3.   Pay the cost of keeping the animal while impounded by the Village at
its pound.
      4.   Secure any animal license or rabies vaccination, if applicable and
due.
   D.   If ownership of the animal is established and the owner refuses to
redeem the same, he shall remain obligated to pay all fines and impoundment
expenses. (Ord. 0-94-455, 12-12-1994)
5-3-6: LICENSE FEE:
   A.   All dogs and cats, three (3) months of age or older, harbored, kept or
maintained in the village shall be licensed; provided, however, that dogs kept
in pet shops, pounds, shelters, hospitals or kennels need not be licensed while
kept at such pet shop, pound, shelter, hospital or kennel.
   B.   Application for dog and cat licenses shall be on forms provided by the
village and shall be submitted with the fee to the village clerk.
   C.   The fee to license each dog or cat is five dollars ($5.00).
   D.   The license period shall be for the life of the dog or cat.
   E.   Upon payment of the fee as provided, the village clerk shall provide
each owner with a license tag and a memorandum of registry on each animal. The
license tag shall be securely affixed to a substantial collar and shall be worn
by each dog or cat at all times. Tags shall not be transferable to other
animals and are nonrefundable. (Ord. 0-2002-665, 9-12-2002)
5-3-7: INOCULATIONS:
   A.   Every owner, except animal shelters, animal impounding facilities and
laboratory animal facilities, of a dog or cat four (4) months or more of age
shall cause such dog or cat to be inoculated with rabies vaccine by a licensed
veterinarian at such intervals as approved by the Illinois department of
agriculture. The rabies vaccine shall be licensed by the United States
department of agriculture and approved by the Illinois department of
agriculture.
   B.   No license for a dog or cat shall be issued unless the application for
said license is accompanied by a certificate by a veterinarian that said dog or
cat has received inoculations for rabies prevention within the preceding year
as required by this section.
   C.   Any dog or cat which is kept or maintained in the village shall display
the Cook County rabies tag on the cat or dog. (Ord. 0-94-455, 12-12-1994)
5-3-8: ESTRUS (HEAT):
Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure
enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact
with another animal except for planned breeding. (Ord. 0-94-455, 12-12-1994)
5-3-9: DISEASED ANIMAL:
   A.   No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease
shall be allowed to run at large, or be exposed to any public place whereby the
health of man or other animals may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal
be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner, except under the
supervision of an authorized person.
   B.   It should be made the duty of such person so authorized to secure such
disposition of any diseased animal and secure treatment of affected premises as
to prevent the communication and spread of contagion and infection, except as
otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 0-94-455, 12-12-1994)
5-3-10: DISPOSITION OF DEAD ANIMALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any dead animals which he
owns to remain within the village for more than twenty four (24) hours. No such
animal shall be buried within the village limits except that dead animals may
be buried on property owned, operated and maintained for agricultural purposes
in the manner hereinafter provided.
   B.   No dead animal shall be buried on any property owned, operated or
maintained for agricultural purposes unless a permit therefor has been obtained
from the police or public health department.
   C.   No dead animal weighing seventy five (75) pounds or less shall be
buried in any grave that is less than three feet (3') deep. No dead animal
weighing more than seventy five (75) pounds shall be buried in any grave that
is less than six feet (6') deep. No dead animal shall be buried within a grave
that is within seventy five feet (75') of any stream, watercourse or well.
   D.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the burial of birds.
(Ord. 0-94-455, 12-12-1994)
5-3-11: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
thirty dollars ($30.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense; provided, however, that in the event that the owner does not make
payment to the village within fourteen (14) calendar days after the date of the
personal issuance of a ticket or the issuance of a hang-on ticket as specified
in a final notice, the penalty shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for such
violation and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which the violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2013-1004, 12-12-2013)
CHAPTER 4
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Disorderly Conduct
5-4-2: Discharge Of Firearms
5-4-3: Drugs And Drug Paraphernalia
5-4-4: Recyclable Materials Collection
5-4-5: Curfew
5-4-6: Retail Theft
5-4-7: Theft
5-4-8: Trespass
5-4-9: Fireworks; Fireworks Displays
5-4-10: Damage To Property Of Another; Parental Responsibility; Restitution
5-4-11: Operation Of Motor Vehicles On Village Owned, Maintained Or Controlled
Property Prohibited
5-4-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person within the village
of South Barrington to knowingly:
      1.   Do any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke, make or aid in a breach of the peace; or
      2.   Transmit or cause to be transmitted in any manner to any peace
officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an
offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed, knowing
at the time of such transmission that there are no reasonable grounds for
believing that such an offense will be committed, is being committed, or has
been committed; or
      3.   Enter upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose deliberately look into a dwelling on the property through any window or
other opening in it; or
      4.   Transmit or cause to be transmitted a false report to any public
safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe that
transmitting such a report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the
public; or
      5.   Call the number "911" for the purpose of making or transmitting a
false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call
or transmission is made, the person knows there are no reasonable grounds for
making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or transmission
could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency.
   B.   Penalty: Any person found guilty or liable of violating this section or
any portion of this section shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per
violation. (Ord. 2007-830, 9-13-2007)
5-4-2: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
   A.   Discharge Of A Firearm Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to discharge a
firearm or air gun within the village limits; provided, that this section shall
not be construed to: 1) prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a
firearm in the performance of his duty; 2) prohibit any person from discharging
a firearm when lawfully defending his person or property; or 3) prohibit any
person from discharging a firearm for the purpose of practicing shooting at
targets upon approved target ranges, whether public or private.
   B.   Hunting Or Trapping: It shall be unlawful to hunt or trap any wildlife
located within the village limits and outside any occupied or unoccupied
dwelling. For the purposes of this section, "hunt" shall mean the act of a
person possessing a weapon or being accompanied by a dog or a bird of prey for
the purpose of taking wildlife; "trap" shall mean the capture or the attempt to
capture any wildlife, by setting or placing a leg hold trap, body gripping
trap, cage or a live trap or other similar device; "take" shall mean to hunt,
shoot, pursue, lure, kill, destroy, capture, gig, snare, trap, ensnare, or
harass wildlife, or to attempt to do same; and "wildlife" shall mean any bird
or mammal living in a state of nature without the care of man. The provisions
of this section shall not be construed to prohibit any citizen from taking
appropriate measures to eradicate household pests, vermin and rodents.
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00), or be imprisoned for not more than twenty (20) days in a
penal institution other than the penitentiary, or both. (Ord. 0-91-375, 1-10-
1991)
5-4-3: DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:
 
CANNABIS:      Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 3 of the Cannabis Control Act,
               as if that definition was incorporated herein.
               All equipment, products, or materials intended to be used for planting,
CANNABIS       propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, producing,
PARAPHERNALIA: processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
               containing, concealing, ingesting, or otherwise introducing cannabis into the
               human body.
CONTROLLED     Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 102 of the Illinois Controlled
SUBSTANCE:     Substances Act, as if that definition were incorporated herein.
DELIVER OR     The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession, with or without
DELIVERY:      consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
               All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other than methamphetamine
               manufacturing materials as defined in section 10 of the Methamphetamine Control
               and Community Protection Act and cannabis paraphernalia, which are intended to
               be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
               manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
               testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
               injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body
               cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the Illinois Controlled
               Substances Act. Drug paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to:
               1.   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding,
               converting, producing, processing or preparing a controlled substance;
               2.   Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the
               potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
               3.   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for
               identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
DRUG           substances;
PARAPHERNALIA: 4.   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting a
               controlled substance by private persons;
               5.   Objects primarily intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or
               otherwise introducing cocaine oil into the human body including, where
               applicable, the following items:
                  a.   Water pipes;
                  b.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
                  c.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
                  d.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
                  e.   Carburetor pipes;
                  f.   Electric pipes;
                  g.   Air driven pipes;
                  h.   Chillums;
                  i.   Bongs;
                  j.   Ice pipes or chillers.
               6.   Any item whose purpose as announced or described by the seller or possessor
               is for use in violation of this section.
 
   B.   Sale, Delivery To Or Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia; Penalty; Public
Nuisance:
      1.   a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an
item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing a controlled substance into the human body, or for the
purpose of preparing a controlled substance for that use. The provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to persons legally authorized to possess
hypodermic syringes or needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act.
In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to knowingly possess an item of cannabis paraphernalia with the
intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis into
the human body, or for the purpose of preparing cannabis for that use.
         b.   In determining intent under this section the court,
administrative hearing officer or other trier of fact may take into
consideration the proximity of the cannabis or controlled substance to the
cannabis paraphernalia or drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or
controlled substance on or in the cannabis paraphernalia or drug paraphernalia.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, or
deliver for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia. It
shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell cannabis
paraphernalia unless such person is employed and licensed as a cannabis
dispensing agent by a cannabis dispensing organization.
      3.   Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any item of
drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or delivered for
any commercial consideration is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Any
store, place, or premises not licensed as a cannabis dispensing organization
from which or in which any item of cannabis paraphernalia is kept for sale,
offered for sale, sold, or delivered for any commercial consideration is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
      4.   The Village Attorney, upon direction of the Village President and
Board of Trustees, may commence an action in the Circuit Court of Cook County
to abate the public nuisance as described herein.
   C.   Exceptions; Determination: This section shall not apply to:
      1.   Items marketed for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging,
labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to
lawful research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale;
      2.   Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in
connection with the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance.
      3.   Items exempt under this division C include, but are not limited to,
garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette rolling
papers.
      4.   Items listed in the definition of "drug paraphernalia" in division A
of this section which are marketed for decorative purposes, when such items
have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any
illicit purpose prohibited by this section, state, or federal law.
      5.   In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this
subsection, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other
logically relevant factors, the following:
         a.   The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the
item involved has been put;
         b.   Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the
item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the
device upon its functioning;
         c.   Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item
concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put;
         d.   Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the
time and place of sale or commercial delivery;
         e.   Any national or local advertising, concerning the design, purpose
or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising
occurs;
         f.   The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was
displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or
otherwise exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;
         g.   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
         h.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community;
         i.   All reasonable and common sense inferences shall be drawn in
favor of the legitimacy of any transaction or item suspect under the provisions
of this section.
   D.   Possession, Use, Or Delivery Of Cannabis:
      1.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years to knowingly possess any quantity of any substance
containing cannabis, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver
pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
      2.   a.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person who is a
resident of this state to knowingly possess cannabis in excess of the following
amounts:
            (1)   Thirty (30) grams, but less than one hundred (100) grams, of
cannabis flower;
            (2)   Five hundred (500) milligrams tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in
cannabis-infused products; and
            (3)   Five (5) grams cannabis concentrate.
         b.   The possession limits contained herein are to be considered
cumulative.
      3.   a.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person who is
not a resident of this state to knowingly possess cannabis in excess of the
following amounts:
            (1)   Fifteen (15) grams, but less than one hundred (100) grams, of
cannabis flower;
            (2)   Two hundred fifty (250) milligrams tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
in cannabis-infused products; and
            (3)   Two and one half (2.5) grams cannabis concentrate.
         b.   The possession limits contained herein are to be considered
cumulative.
      4.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to possess
cannabis, as follows:
         a.   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
         b.   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
         c.   In a vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in a
reasonably secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the
vehicle is moving; or
         d.   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child care or other similar social service care on the premises.
      5.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to use
cannabis, as follows:
         a.   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
         b.   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
         c.   In any motor vehicle;
         d.   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child care or other similar social service care on the premises;
         e.   In any public place; or
         f.   Knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone under twenty one
(21) years of age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
      6.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to smoke
cannabis in any place where smoking is prohibited under the Smoke Free Illinois
Act and in retail tobacco stores (as defined in Section 10 of the Smoke Free
Illinois Act).
      7.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to facilitate
the use of cannabis by any person who is not allowed to use cannabis under the
Village Code, the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act.
      8.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to transfer
cannabis to any person contrary to the Village Code, the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
      9.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit his or her
residence, private property under his or her control, or any vehicle under his
or her control, to be used by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years
to consume cannabis, unless authorized pursuant to the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act.
      10.   It shall be unlawful for any person to cultivate cannabis unless
permitted pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act,
except, that the effect of this subsection shall be limited to persons
cultivating less than six (6) cannabis plants.
      11.   It shall be unlawful for any person permitted to cultivate cannabis
pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act to cultivate
more than five (5) cannabis plants in excess of five inches (5") tall; to
cultivate cannabis in a place that is not an enclosed, locked space; or to
store cannabis plants in a location that is subject to ordinary public view.
   E.   Seizure And Forfeiture: Any drug paraphernalia or substance containing
cannabis that is the subject of a violation of this section shall be subject to
seizure and subject to forfeiture upon a finding of guilty or finding of liable
of any person for a violation of this section. Upon appropriate order of court
or administrative hearing officer, the drug paraphernalia and/or substance
containing cannabis shall be destroyed.
   F.   Penalty: Any person found to have violated the provisions of this
section shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2007-
830, 9-13-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-1235, 4-9-2020)
5-4-4: RECYCLABLE MATERIALS COLLECTION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, obtain, possess or pick
up any recyclable item placed for collection in front of a residence as part of
the village recycling program, unless said person has been authorized by the
village to render such collection services.
   B.   Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be fined not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 0-89-326, 3-9-1989)
5-4-5: CURFEW:
   A.   Definitions: In this section:
    CURFEW HOURS: 1. Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Saturday;
      2.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. on Sunday; and
      3.   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN:
      1.   Person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      2.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
   PARENT: A person who is:
      1.   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person;
or
      2.   At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
   REMAIN: To:
      1.   Linger or stay; or
      2.   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer
or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   B.   Offenses:
      1.   A minor commits the offense of curfew violation if he or she remains
in any public place or on the premises of any establishment during curfew
hours.
      2.   A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in custody or
control of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits the minor
to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment during
curfew hours.
   C.   Defenses: It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this
section that the minor was:
      1.   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or other person over
the age of eighteen (18) years with custody or control of the minor;
      2.   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      3.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      4.   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      5.   Involved in an emergency;
      6.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police
department about the minor's presence;
      7.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental
agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental agency, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;
      8.   Exercising his or her first amendment rights protected by the United
States constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech,
and the right of assembly; or
      9.   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
emancipation of minors act.
   D.   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for
being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
no defenses set forth in subsections C1 through C9 of this section are present.
   E.   Violation; Penalty: Any person convicted or found liable of a violation
of any provision of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), provided,
however, that neither a person who has been made a ward of the court under the
juvenile court act of 1987, nor that person's legal guardian, shall be subject
to any fine. In addition to or in lieu of the fine imposed by this section, the
court or any administrative hearing officer may order a parent, legal guardian,
or other person convicted or found liable of a violation of subsection B of
this section to perform up to twenty five (25) hours of community service as
determined appropriate by the court or administrative hearing officer, except
that the legal guardian of a person who has been made a ward of the court under
the juvenile court act of 1987 may not be ordered to perform community service.
The dates and times established for the performance of community service by the
parent, legal guardian, or other person convicted of a violation of subsection
B of this section shall not conflict with the dates and times that the person
is in school or is employed in his or her regular occupation. (Ord. 2007-830,
9-13-2007)
5-4-6: RETAIL THEFT:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them unless a contrary meaning is
clear from the context:
    FULL RETAIL VALUE: The merchant's stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.
   MERCHANDISE: Any item of tangible personal property.
   MERCHANT: An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any
agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or
independent contractor of such owner or operator.
   MINOR: A person who is less than eighteen (18) years of age, is
unemancipated and resides with his parents or legal guardian.
   PEACE OFFICER: Has the meaning ascribed to that term in section 2-13 of the
Illinois criminal code 1 .
   PERSON: Any natural person or individual.
   PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Includes, but is not limited
to, the retail mercantile establishment; any common use areas in shopping
centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a
merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of such
retail mercantile establishment.
   RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where merchandise is displayed,
held, stored or offered for sale to the public.
   THEFT DETECTION DEVICE REMOVER: Any tool or device specifically designed and
intended to be used to remove any theft detection device from any merchandise.
   THEFT DETECTION SHIELDING DEVICE: Any laminated or coated bag or similar
device designed and intended to shield merchandise from detection by an
electronic or magnetic theft alarm sensor.
   TO CONCEAL MERCHANDISE: Although there may be some notice of its presence,
that merchandise is not visible through ordinary observation.
   UNDER RING: To cause the cash or other sales recording device to reflect
less than the full retail value of the merchandise.
   B.   Offense Of Retail Theft: A person commits the offense of retail theft,
which shall be a violation of this code, when he or she knowingly:
      1.   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried
away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such
merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise; or
      2.   Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia
of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile
establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in
consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of
depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
      3.   Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full
retail value of the merchandise; or
      4.   Represents to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner of
property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or attempts to
convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in exchange
for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant.
   C.   Intent: If any person:
      1.   Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings,
unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment; and
      2.   Removes that merchandise beyond the last known checkout stand or
station for receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile
establishment such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or
transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the
intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or
benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such
merchandise.
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of subsection B of this
section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2007-830, 9-13-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 5/2-13.
5-4-7: THEFT:
   A.   Definitions: The following words shall be defined as follows:
    OBTAIN: 1. In relation to property, to bring about a transfer of interest
or possession, whether to the offender or to another, and
      2.   In relation to labor or services, to secure the performance thereof.
   OBTAINS OR EXERTS CONTROL OVER PROPERTY: Includes, but is not limited to,
the taking, carrying away, or the sale, conveyance, or transfer of title to, or
interest in, or possession of property.
   OWNER: A person, other than the offender, who has possession of or any other
interest in the property involved, even though such interest or possession is
unlawful, and without whose consent the offender has no authority to exert
control over the property.
   PROPERTY: Anything of value, including, but not limited to: money,
commercial instruments, admission or transportation tickets, labor, or
services, or otherwise of value to the owner; things growing on, affixed to, or
found on land, or part of or affixed to any building; electricity, gas and
water; telecommunications services; birds, animals and fish, which ordinarily
are kept in a state of confinement; food and drink; samples, documents.
   B.   Theft Committed:
      1.   A person commits the offense of theft which is a violation of this
section when he or she knowingly:
         a.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the
owner; or
         b.   Uses, conceals or abandons the property of another in such manner
as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
         c.   Obtains the temporary use of property, labor or services of
another which are available only for hire, by means of threat or deception or
knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the
property, labor or services.
   C.   Violation; Penalty: Any person found guilty or liable of a violation of
this section shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such offense.
(Ord. 2008-853, 4-10-2008)
5-4-8: TRESPASS:
   A.   Offense: A person commits the offense of trespass which is a violation
of this section when he or she:
      1.   Knowingly and without lawful authority enters or remains within or
on a building or property of another; or
      2.   Enters upon the land, building or property of another, after
receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner, occupant or person in
lawful possession, that such entry is forbidden; or
      3.   Remains upon the land or building of another, after receiving notice
from the owner, occupant or person in lawful possession to depart.
   B.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall,
upon a finding of guilty or finding of liable, be fined in an amount not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for each offense. (Ord. 2007-830, 9-13-2007)
5-4-9: FIREWORKS; FIREWORKS DISPLAYS:
   A.   Definitions: The following words and phrases shall be defined as
follows:
    CHIEF OR FIRE CHIEF: The chiefs of the Countryside and/or Barrington fire
protection districts or his or their duly authorized representatives.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS: Those fireworks that must comply with the construction,
chemical composition and labeling regulations of the U.S. consumer products
safety commission, as set forth in 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and classified
as fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the United States department of transportation
under 49 CFR 172.101. "Consumer fireworks" shall not include snake and glowworm
pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby
traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads", and "auto burglar
alarms"; sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which
paper or plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths grain or less of
explosive compound is used, provided they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy
pistol paper or plastic caps that contain less than twenty hundredths grain of
explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition or deflagration of
consumer fireworks to produce a visual or audible effect.
   DISPLAY FIREWORKS: 1.3G or special effects fireworks, as further defined in
the pyrotechnic distributor and operator licensing act.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT: The Countryside and/or Barrington fire protection
districts.
   FIREWORKS: Shall mean and include any combustible or explosive composition,
or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the
purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion,
deflagration or detonation, and shall include "consumer fireworks", and
"display fireworks (1.3G fireworks)", as defined herein.
   PERMITTEE: Shall mean and include any person, firm or corporation and/or
agent or employee of such person, firm or corporation who has been issued a
permit for supervised displays of fireworks in the village of South Barrington
under the terms of this section.
   PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of display
fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of
whether admission is charged, and as may be further defined in the pyrotechnic
distributor and operator licensing act.
   VILLAGE: The village of South Barrington, Cook County, Illinois.
   B.   Permit Required: Except as hereinafter provided, no person, firm,
partnership or corporation shall offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at
retail, keep with intent to sell at retail, use or explode any fireworks within
the village, provided that the fire chief of the responding jurisdiction may
upon first receiving authorization from the village board of trustees, issue
permits for supervised pyrotechnic displays of fireworks in the village,
including, but not limited to, fair associations, shopping centers, units of
government and other civic organizations, or groups of individuals.
      1.   Such permits may be issued upon approval of an application submitted
to the fire chief and village administrator and after compliance with all fire
code regulations, and the filing of a bond by the applicant as provided
hereinafter.
      2.   Every such display shall be handled by a competent operator, and
shall be of such composition, character and so located, discharged or fired as
in the opinion of the fire chief shall not constitute a hazard to property or
endanger any person or persons.
         a.   Pursuant to such permit having been granted, possession, use and
distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose
only; no permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
         b.   The village police chief, or his designee, is hereby authorized
to confiscate, seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the
owner all stocks of fireworks or combustibles offered or exposed for sale,
stored or held in violation of this section.
         c.   No consumer fireworks display shall be permitted in the village
unless otherwise conducted as a part of a pyrotechnic display.
   C.   Application For Fireworks Permit:
      1.   Application for permit to operate a display of fireworks in
conformance with the terms of this section shall be made in writing to the
village administrator and fire chief of the covering jurisdiction on forms
provided by the chief.
      2.   Such application shall set forth:
         a.   The name of the organization sponsoring the display, together
with the names of persons actually in charge of the firing of the display.
         b.   Evidence of financial responsibility.
         c.   The date and time of day at which the display is to be held.
         d.   The exact location planned for the display.
         e.   A description setting forth the age, experience and physical
characteristics of the persons who are to do the actual discharging of the
fireworks.
         f.   The number and kinds of fireworks to be discharged.
         g.   The manner and place of storage of such fireworks prior to the
display.
         h.   A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held
showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the location of
all buildings, highways and other lines of communication, the lines behind
which the audience will be restrained, and the location of all nearby trees,
overhead wires or other overhead obstructions.
   D.   Conduct Of Display:
      1.   No permit shall be granted for any display of fireworks where the
discharge, failure to fire, faulty firing or fallout of any fireworks or other
objects would endanger persons, buildings, structures, forests or brush, nor in
any case where the point at which the fireworks are to be fired is less than
two hundred feet (200') from the nearest permanent building, public highway,
railroad and other means of travel or fifty feet (50') from the nearest
aboveground telephone or telegraph line, tree or other overhead obstruction.
      2.   All physical arrangements for firing and storage must be approved by
the fire chief or his/her designee.
      3.   Spectators at a display of fireworks shall be restrained behind
lines or barriers as designated by the fire protection district, but in no case
less than two hundred feet (200') from the point at which the fireworks are to
be discharged. Only authorized persons and those in actual charge of the
display shall be allowed inside these lines or barriers during the unloading,
preparation or firing of fireworks.
      4.   All fireworks that fire a projectile shall be so set up that the
projectile will go into the air as nearly as possible in a vertical direction,
provided that they may be directed in such a manner that the falling residue
from the deflagration will fall into a lake or other large body of water where
such fireworks are to be fired beside the said body of water. Furthermore, no
firing tube or tubes shall be utilized in rapid succession or in any other
manner so as to cause overheating or instability of such tube or tubes.
      5.   No fireworks display shall be held during any windstorm in which the
wind reaches a velocity of more than twenty (20) miles per hour.
      6.   All fireworks articles and items at places of display shall be
stored in a manner and in a place secure from fire, accidental discharge and
theft and in a manner approved by the Fire Chief.
      7.   Fire protection and extinguishing equipment shall be provided by the
permittee as required by the Fire Chief or his/her designee.
      8.   The person to whom a permit has been issued shall arrange for the
detailing of a fire guard consisting of one member of the Fire Protection
District or such larger number of members as may be deemed necessary by the
Fire Chief.
         a.   The Fire Chief may require such fire guard to be at the site as
soon as the fireworks are delivered to the site and such fire guard may be
required to remain at such site by the said Fire Chief until after the
conclusion of the display and removal of all remaining fireworks and/or debris
from the said site.
         b.   The expense for such fire guard shall be paid by the permittee.
      9.   There shall be at all times no fewer than two (2) licensed
pyrotechnic operators of the display constantly on duty during the discharge.
      10.   Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded
shall be immediately disposed of or removed in a manner which is safe for the
particular type of fireworks.
         a.   The debris from the discharged fireworks shall be properly
disposed of by the operator before he leaves the premises.
         b.   The operator, upon the conclusion of the display, shall make a
complete and thorough search for any unfired fireworks or pieces which have
failed to fire or function and shall dispose of them in a safe manner.
         c.   Such search shall be instituted at the earliest possible time
following the conclusion of the display, but in no event later than the first
two (2) hours of daylight which follow.
      11.   Upon failure of a permittee to comply with any regulation contained
in this section, the Fire Chief and/or the fire guard at the scene are hereby
authorized to seize, take, remove or cause to be removed all or any stock of
fireworks or combustibles and/or to terminate any display upon observing such
violation.
   E.   Qualifications Of Operators: The person in actual charge of firing of
the fireworks in a display, as well as his/her assistant, shall be able bodied,
at least twenty one (21) years of age, capable of reading, writing, speaking
and understanding the English language and otherwise competent for the task,
and shall be a lead pyrotechnic operator licensed by the Office of the State
Fire Marshal. (Ord. 2007-830, 9-13-2007)
   F.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined an amount not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day of violation shall be deemed a
separate offense. In addition, any fireworks confiscated pursuant to this
section shall be destroyed upon written order of court or Administrative
Hearing Officer. (Ord. 0-2017-1164, 9-14-2017)
5-4-10: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY OF ANOTHER; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY; RESTITUTION:
   A.   Definitions:
    LEGAL GUARDIAN: A foster parent, a person appointed guardian of a person or
given custody of a minor by a court of competent jurisdiction, but does not
include a person appointed guardian only to the estate of a minor, or appointed
guardian, or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act.
   MINOR: A person who is above the age of seven (7) years, but not yet
seventeen (17) years of age.
   OWNER: A person or entity who holds a legal or equitable title to property
or that has a possessory interest in property.
   PARENTS: A father and mother of a minor child, whether by birth or adoption,
and shall include the parent having legal custody of the minor in the event the
parents are divorced or separated.
   PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, unit of government, municipality, company or organization of any
kind, including the village of South Barrington.
   PROPERTY: Includes any real estate including improvements thereon, and
tangible personalty whether privately or publicly owned or maintained.
   RESTITUTION: Includes paying to a person who owns property damaged or
destroyed by an act herein proscribed in an amount equal to the damages
incurred up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as a result of the act of an
offender.
   B.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Knowingly or recklessly damage any property of another without his
consent; or
      2.   Knowingly or recklessly by means of fire or explosive damage
property of another; or
      3.   Knowingly or recklessly start a fire on the land of another without
his consent; or
      4.   Knowingly or recklessly injure a domestic animal of another without
his consent; or
      5.   Knowingly deposit on the land or in the building of another, without
his consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
intends to interfere with the use by another of the land or building.
   C.   Penalty: Any person found guilty or liable of violating the provisions
of this section shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
In addition to any fine imposed herein, the court or administrative hearing
officer may order restitution to be paid by the offender in the amount not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   D.   Parents Or Legal Guardians Responsible: The parents or legal guardians
of a minor who is found by a court or administrative hearing officer to have
violated the provisions of this section shall be jointly and severally
responsible for making restitution as herein provided. The parents or legal
guardians of any minor shall be made defendants to the hearing or judicial
proceeding at which a determination is made as to whether a violation of this
section has taken place. (Ord. 2007-830, 9-13-2007)
5-4-11: OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON VILLAGE OWNED, MAINTAINED OR CONTROLLED
PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and phrases
shall mean:
    BICYCLE PATH: Any paved or unpaved roadway, pathway or continuous trail,
open to or dedicated primarily to bicycle travel and physically separated from
motorized vehicular traffic by open space or barrier.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled whether by gas or
electric power including low speed electric bicycles and low speed gas
bicycles, but excluding motorized wheelchairs and except for vehicles moved
solely by human power.
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR: Any self-propelled vehicle, including a three (3)
wheel vehicle, designed for and used by a person with disabilities, that is
incapable of a speed in excess of eight (8) miles per hour on level ground.
   NONHIGHWAY VEHICLE: A motor driven vehicle not specifically designed to be
used on a public street, highway or thoroughfare, including, but not limited
to:
      1.   All-terrain vehicles as defined by section 1-101.8 of the Illinois
vehicle code 1 ;
      2.   Golf carts, as defined by section 1-123.9 of the Illinois vehicle
code 2 ;
      3.   Neighborhood vehicles as defined by section 1-148.3(m) of the
Illinois vehicle code 3 ;
      4.   Off road motorcycles as defined by section 1-153.1 of the Illinois
vehicle code 4 ;
      5.   Low speed vehicles as defined by section 1-140.7 of the Illinois
vehicle code 5 ; and
      6.   Low speed gas bicycles as defined by section 1-140.15 of the
Illinois vehicle code 6 .
   VILLAGE: Village of South Barrington, Cook County, Illinois.
   WALKING/JOGGING PATH: Any paved or unpaved path, lane or trail constructed,
maintained, used or dedicated primarily for the purpose of walking, hiking or
running regardless of location, length or surface material, excluding those
public roadways used primarily for motor vehicle travel or areas designated for
motor vehicle parking.
   B.   Unlawful Acts:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on,
over or upon any bicycle path, walking path, hiking path, easement or other
property owned, maintained or under the control of the village;
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a nonhighway vehicle
on, over or upon the grounds or common areas of any multi-family residential
property or any single-family residential property, other than one's own
single-family residential property, without the consent of the owners thereof.
   C.   Exceptions: The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to motor
vehicles operated on public streets and highways as otherwise permitted by the
provisions of chapter 11 of the Illinois vehicle code 7  and to operators of
motorized wheelchairs, emergency vehicles, village owned vehicles and
authorized maintenance vehicles.
   D.   Motor Vehicle Code Not Abridged: Unless otherwise prohibited by village
ordinance, nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the use of
motor vehicles on any public roadway, street or highway otherwise permitted by
the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code 8 .
   E.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a first offense. Any person violating the
provisions of this section for a second or subsequent time within a twelve (12)
month period shall be fined in an amount not less than one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
subsequent offense within a twelve (12) month period.
   F.   Signage: Appropriate signage shall be erected on village owned,
maintained or controlled property prohibiting the use of nonhighway vehicles on
all bicycle and walking, bicycle or jogging paths. (Ord. 2010-922, 10-14-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/1-101.8.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/1-123.9.
3 3. 625 ILCS 5/1-148.3(m).
4 4. 625 ILCS 5/1-153.1.
5 5. 625 ILCS 5/1-140.7.
6 6. 625 ILCS 5/1-140.15.
7 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-100 et seq.
8 2. 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
CHAPTER 5
PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS
SECTION:
5-5-1: General Purpose
5-5-2: Appointments Of Part Time Police Officers
5-5-3: Special Requirements (Rep. by Ord. 2014-1032, 9-11-2014)
5-5-4: Tools And Equipment Used
5-5-5: Physical Demands
5-5-6: Work Environment
5-5-7: Selection Guidelines
5-5-8: Supervision Received
5-5-9: Supervision Exercised
5-5-10: Essential Duties And Responsibilities
5-5-1: GENERAL PURPOSE:
A part time police officer shall serve under the direction of his or her
immediate supervisor or senior, full time officer on duty, and shall comply
with all rules and regulations of the village of South Barrington public safety
committee and the policies of the village. Such officer is responsible in a
supplementary role for the protection of life and property, prevention of
crime, apprehension of criminals and the general enforcement of laws and
ordinances. His or her duties generally consist of routine patrol, preliminary
reports and investigations, and enforcement of traffic regulations. Part time
police officers may, at the direction of the chief of police, be assigned to
assist full time patrol officers with special tasks. The work involves an
element of personal danger. The officer must be able to exercise sound
independent judgment under stress. Work assignments are general, and the
primary function of the part time police officer is to assist the full time
police officer in fulfilling all duties and responsibilities and general patrol
duties. The officer's instructions are received from supervisors or senior full
time officers, who shall review work methods and results through reports,
personnel evaluations and discussion with the officer. (Ord. 0-97-518, 6-12-
1997)
5-5-2: APPOINTMENTS OF PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
Appointments for part time police officers shall be made in accordance with the
standards set forth in this section. Any candidate for part time police officer
shall be a certified police officer in good standing, having been certified by
the Illinois law enforcement training standards board under section 8.1 of the
Illinois police training act 1 , and who is either currently working as a full
time police officer for an Illinois law enforcement agency, laid off as a full
time police officer by an Illinois law enforcement agency, or who has retired
as a full time police officer from an Illinois law enforcement agency.
The village shall permanently post on its website an advertisement for part
time police officers, providing, in part, the minimum qualifications for
employment for part time police officers, and further stating that applications
for part time police officers may be submitted by eligible candidates to the
office of the chief of police at any time. At any time that the village seeks
to fill a vacancy in the position of part time police officer, the chief of
police shall conduct an interview, either in person or by telephone, of
eligible candidate(s). Following such interview(s), the chief of police shall
either approve or disapprove any candidate who has been interviewed by the
chief of police. If the chief of police approves a candidate, a background
investigation of such candidate shall be conducted by the village. If such
candidate passes the background investigation, as determined by the chief of
police or his/her designee, such candidate may be eligible to be interviewed by
a committee consisting of the chief of police, the chairperson of the village's
safety committee or the chairperson's designee (provided that such designee
must be another current member of the safety committee), and the chairperson of
the South Barrington board of police commissioners, or the chairperson's
designee (providing that such designee must be another current member of such
police commission). Such committee members shall be provided with copies of the
background investigation material prior to the interview by the committee.
If such candidate is approved by the above described committee, the candidate
shall then be scheduled for a polygraph examination (i.e., "lie detector
test"). If such candidate successfully completes such test, the candidate shall
be interviewed by the village president. If the village president approves of
the hiring of such candidate, the village president shall recommend such
candidate for appointment. With the advice and consent of the village board of
trustees, a conditional letter of employment shall be issued by the village
president to the person recommended. Upon satisfactory completion of a
psychological and physical examination, such person shall be appointed as a
part time police officer. The village president shall issue a certificate of
appointment to such part time police officer. (Ord. 2014-1032, 9-11-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/8.1.
5-5-3: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2014-1032, 9-11-2014)
5-5-4: TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT USED:
The position requires the ability to operate the following equipment:
   A.   Motor vehicles, reasonably and safely under routine and emergency
conditions, sometimes for lengthy periods of time;
   B.   Firearms, with demonstrated proficiency in the care and use of
assigned/authorized weapons;
   C.   Basic office equipment, including, but not limited to, typewriters,
telephone, computer terminals, mobile data terminals, etc.;
   D.   Writing implements and basic drawing templates, including the ability
to write legible documents and produce simple diagrams; and
   E.   Basic tools and equipment necessary to perform job tasks and functions
including, but not limited to, speed detection, radar, two-way radios, first
aid equipment, fire extinguishers, handcuffs and other weapons, gas masks,
helmets, standard police uniform, simple tools (pry bars, hydrant wrenches,
tape measures, etc.), cameras, fingerprinting equipment, water rescue
equipment, etc. (Ord. 0-97-518, 6-12-1997)
5-5-5: PHYSICAL DEMANDS:
   A.   The officer must be in the physical condition required to:
      1.   Effect arrest;
      2.   Subdue resisting individuals;
      3.   Chase fleeing suspects;
      4.   Run to person requiring emergency assistance;
      5.   Lift and carry equipment and injured/deceased persons;
      6.   Force entry into buildings;
      7.   Climb flights of stairs/ladders;
      8.   Walk, stand, or sit for long periods of time (including driving);
      9.   Endure exposure to extreme weather and disease;
      10.   Perform lifesaving procedures (CPR, first aid, etc.);
      11.   Communicate effectively, verbally and nonverbally;
      12.   Perform job tasks and functions; and
      13.   Provide assistance to citizens and coworkers in distress,
including, but not limited to, manually pushing stalled motor vehicles.
   B.   The officer must have audio-visual discrimination and perception
required to:
      1.   Make observations;
      2.   Read and write; and
      3.   Drive and operate equipment safely.
   C.   The officer must have the ability required to:
      1.   Observe analytically and objectively, analyze situations quickly,
determine and take prompt, effective action;
      2.   Understand, interpret and apply applicable Federal and State
statutes, local ordinances, court decisions, Police Department and Village
rules and policies;
      3.   Understand and respond quickly and accurately to written and oral
directions, instructions, inquiries and requests;
      4.   Work independently and effectively within the confines of standard
operating procedures;
      5.   Initiate appropriate interpersonal and intra- and interagency
communications establishing a rapport with all members and segments of the
community to enhance the police professional image and instill a respect for
law and order;
      6.   Act quickly, calmly, and decisively in emergencies and under stress;
      7.   Handle situations firmly, courteously, tactfully, and impartially;
      8.   Express oneself clearly and concisely, orally and in writing;
      9.   Record information clearly and completely;
      10.   Facilitate effective conflict arbitration/resolution;
      11.   Maintain confidentiality in the performance of duties; and
      12.   Assimilate, retain and effectively use geographic knowledge
concerning the Village and surrounding vicinity. (Ord. 0-97-518, 6-12-1997)
5-5-6: WORK ENVIRONMENT:
The position of part time police officer involves exposure to, and requires the
employee to function in the presence of:
   A.   All weather conditions, including extreme weather conditions;
   B.   All lighting conditions, including extreme lighting conditions,
daylight and night light;
   C.   Fire, smoke, and chemical leaks/spills in close proximity as necessary
to provide emergency services; and
   D.   Personal danger, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Armed and/or dangerous persons/animals;
      2.   Persons and/or articles with contagious/communicable disease;
      3.   Hazards associated with emergency driving, traffic control and
working in and around traffic; and
      4.   Hazards associated with natural and manmade disasters. (Ord. 0-97-
518, 6-12-1997)
5-5-7: SELECTION GUIDELINES:
The job description of a part time police officer does not constitute an
employment agreement between the employer and employee and is subject to change
by the employer as the needs of the employer and requirements of the job
change.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties
does not exclude them from the position if the work is similar, related, or a
logical assignment to the position. (Ord. 2008-852, 4-10-2008)
5-5-8: SUPERVISION RECEIVED:
The part time police officer shall work under the supervision of a police
sergeant or senior full time police officer. (Ord. 0-97-518, 6-12-1997)
5-5-9: SUPERVISION EXERCISED:
The part time police officer shall exercise no supervision over any other
police officer. The chief of police may appoint a part time police officer to
act as the coordinator of the contingent of part time officers. No additional
compensation shall be applied to this responsibility. (Ord. 0-97-518, 6-12-
1997)
5-5-10: ESSENTIAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The primary duty and responsibility of the part time police officer is to
complement the full time police officer in meeting the following
responsibilities:
   A.   Crime Prevention:
      1.   Patrolling assigned areas for observing criminal activity, traffic
violations, persons needing assistance and safety hazards including, but not
limited to, leaking water pipes, gas mains or sewers, all street and traffic
lights that are defective, all traffic signs, power and telephone lines that
are in need of repair, and making notification to the appropriate authority
concerning health and safety hazards;
      2.   Being thoroughly familiar with the streets and boundaries of the
village, as well as neighborhoods and potential problem areas;
      3.   Conducting security checks of businesses and homes, and making
recommendations on security issues when practical; and
      4.   Making presentations to groups and individuals on subjects related
to the job's tasks and functions.
   B.   Criminal Investigations And Apprehension: The part time police officer
shall:
      1.   Handle complaints filed by citizens;
      2.   Watch for, detect, and investigate violations of laws and
ordinances, as well as document and investigate reported violations;
      3.   Conduct interviews and interrogations of victims, witnesses,
suspects, offenders, and other persons;
      4.   Conduct preliminary and follow up investigations;
      5.   Identify, collect, process, package, and log items of physical
evidence;
      6.   Collect information and either act upon it, if within the scope of
his or her authority, or route it to the proper authority or agency;
      7.   Search persons, vehicles, places, and other items;
      8.   Identify and arrest offenders, including subduing resistive
arrestees;
      9.   Book, guard, and escort prisoners;
      10.   Prepare and serve criminal complaints, arrest warrants, and other
court documents;
      11.   Prepare cases for trial; and
      12.   Appear and testify in court, at coroner's inquests, at disposition
sessions, and similar proceedings.
   C.   Traffic: The part-time police officer:
      1.   Engages in traffic and parking law enforcement;
      2.   Controls, regulates, and directs traffic, vehicular and pedestrian;
and
      3.   Investigates traffic accidents, including protecting the scene,
aiding the injured, controlling traffic, clearing the scene, determining the
cause, preparing reports and diagrams.
   D.   Juveniles: The part-time police officer deals with all ages of children
in a variety of circumstances such as delinquents; minors requiring
authoritative intervention; children who have been neglected and/or abused;
children who are runaways or who are lost (or found); children who are the
victims of crimes; children who are participating in public relations or
instructional functions; and children who are informants.
   E.   Miscellaneous Order Maintenance: The part-time police officer should:
      1.   Be responsive to and diligent with respect to all verbal and written
orders issued by supervisors and to all work assignments transmitted to them by
authorized individuals;
      2.   Watch for, correct and/or report any public hazards, dangerous
conditions, streets, sidewalks, Village or other property likely to prove
dangerous to the public, as well as the presence of any litter, garbage, ashes,
dead animals or other offensive matters;
      3.   Deal with domestic disputes and other interpersonal and business
conflicts;
      4.   Administer first aid, including CPR, to sick and injured persons;
      5.   Investigate incidents involving dead persons resulting from
criminal, accidental, suicidal, and natural causes, including a determination
of the circumstances and handling/removal of the body, and dealing with the
family, relatives, friends, witnesses, etc.;
      6.   Investigate reports of lost and found property;
      7.   Investigate reports of missing and found persons;
      8.   Investigate animal complaints, including the apprehension and
transport of stray or vicious animals;
      9.   Be responsible for complying with all written safety rules and
regulations of the Police Department and Village;
      10.   Be responsible for performing duties and responsibilities
exhibiting due concern for the officer's personal safety, as well as the safety
of coworkers and the public;
      11.   Direct and/or supervise others, civilians, and public employees, at
the scenes of crimes, accidents, disasters, assemblies, etc.; and
      12.   Generally render assistance to persons in distress.
   F.   Organizational Support:
      1.   May perform desk duties including: telecommunications (telephone,
computer terminal, and radio); assisting persons at the counter; processing and
filing reports;
      2.   Conduct background investigations;
      3.   Attend training as assigned;
      4.   Develop and maintain required skills and licenses/permits/
certifications associated with areas of special instruction, expertise, etc.
(firearms qualifications; breath operator certification; CPR; evidence
technician; accident investigator; juvenile law; criminal investigation);
      5.   Train new officers, part-time officers and other employees in areas
of special skills or expertise; and
      6.   Prepare clear, accurate and complete reports, logs, MDT entries and
documents on any and all activities engaged in. The position of part-time
police officer involves regular and irregular shift work and shift rotation
necessary to supplement the full-time staff to provide police services twenty
four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, fifty two (52) weeks a year,
including weekends and holidays. Work hours will vary, but will not exceed
thirty two (32) hours in any one week. The hour limitation may be lifted in the
event of an emergency, disaster or extreme work load by the Chief of Police.
      7.   Shall perform any other task/assignment so ordered by the Chief of
Police or his designate. (Ord. 0-97-518, 6-12-1997)
CHAPTER 6
9-1-1 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM
SECTION:
5-6-1: Created
5-6-2: Surcharge
5-6-3: Definitions
5-6-4: Exemption From Surcharge
5-6-5: Deductions By Telecommunications Carriers
5-6-6: Remittance Of Surcharge
5-6-7: Remittance Return
5-6-8: Adjustments To Surcharge
5-6-9: Emergency Telephone System Board
5-6-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created and established a "9-1-1" emergency telephone system.
(Ord. 2000-616, 11-9-2000)
5-6-2: SURCHARGE:
A surcharge at a rate of two dollars ($2.00) per month per network connection
is hereby imposed upon the monthly billing subscribers of telecommunication
carriers within the village for the funding of the "9-1-1" emergency telephone
system as authorized by referendum on March 20, 1990. (Ord. 2000-616, 11-9-
2000)
5-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
MONTHLY BILLING SUBSCRIBER: A person or entity subscribing for telephone
service through telecommunication carriers. A monthly billed subscriber shall
be deemed to reside within the village if the "service address", as hereinafter
defined, is located within the village.
NETWORK CONNECTION: The number of voice grade communication channels directly
between a subscriber and a telecommunications carrier's public switched network
without the intervention of any other telecommunications carrier's switched
network which would be required to carry the subscriber's interpremises
traffic.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of the subscriber's telecommunications facilities
accessing the network connection or connections that are subject to the
surcharge. If this is not a defined location, service address shall mean the
location of a subscriber's primary use of the network connection as defined by
telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are
sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation,
municipal corporation, or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator, or other representative appointed by order of any court
engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity. (Ord.
2000-616, 11-9-2000)
5-6-4: EXEMPTION FROM SURCHARGE:
The village clerk shall provide any telecommunication carrier collecting the
surcharge with a certified list of those network connections assigned to the
village to be exempt from imposition of the surcharge. The certified list may
be revised by the village on sixty (60) days' prior written notice provided to
the telecommunications carriers. (Ord. 2000-616, 11-9-2000)
5-6-5: DEDUCTIONS BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS:
Each telecommunication carrier is hereby authorized and instructed to deduct
three percent (3%) from the gross amount of surcharge collected prior to
remittance to the village of this chapter in reimbursement for the expense of
accounting and collecting the surcharge. (Ord. 2000-616, 11-9-2000)
5-6-6: REMITTANCE OF SURCHARGE:
Every telecommunication carrier shall remit to the village treasurer the amount
of surcharge collected for each calendar month within thirty (30) days
following expiration of each month to which the surcharge applies, net of any
network or other "9-1-1" system charge then due to the particular
telecommunication carrier as shown on an itemized bill and the three percent
(3%) accounting and collection charge described in section
5-6-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-616, 11-9-2000)
5-6-7: REMITTANCE RETURN:
Simultaneously with the remittance described in section
5-6-6 of this chapter, each telecommunication carrier shall make a return to
the village treasurer for the period to which the remittance applies stating as
follows:
   A.   The name of the telecommunication carrier.
   B.   The telecommunication carrier's principal place of business.
   C.   The number of network connections to which the surcharge applies.
   D.   The amount of surcharge collected.
   E.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require. (Ord. 2000-616, 11-9-2000)
5-6-8: ADJUSTMENTS TO SURCHARGE:
   A.   Credits: If it shall appear that an amount of surcharge has been paid
which was not due under the provisions of this chapter, whether as the result
of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any surcharge due, or to become due, under this chapter; provided that
no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a
claim therefor shall be so credited. Ninety (90) days' prior notice shall be
given to the emergency telephone system board on any credit against a
surcharge.
   B.   Recovery Of Surcharge: No action to recover any amount of surcharge due
under the provisions of this chapter shall be commenced more than three (3)
years after the due date of such amount. (Ord. 2000-616, 11-9-2000)
5-6-9: EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD:
The public safety committee of the village board and the police chief of the
village are hereby appointed as the emergency telephone system board and shall
have all the powers and responsibilities of the emergency telephone system
board as empowered by the act and hereunder. (Ord. 2000-616, 11-9-2000)
CHAPTER 7
AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS
SECTION:
5-7-1: Purpose
5-7-2: Position Established
5-7-3: Appointment
5-7-4: Residency
5-7-5: Serves At Discretion Of President Under Direction Of Chief
5-7-6: Compensation
5-7-7: Fingerprint Check Required
5-7-8: Ineligible Persons
5-7-9: Not Member Of The Regular Police Force
5-7-10: General Powers And Duties
5-7-11: Oath
5-7-12: Carrying Of Weapons
5-7-13: Conservators Of The Peace
5-7-14: Training
5-7-15: Supervision
5-7-16: Uniform And Identification Symbols
5-7-17: Termination With Or Without Cause
5-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to free the sworn officers from the village of
South Barrington to perform regular patrol duties during events occurring
within the village of South Barrington and thus allowing the police to continue
their normal and traditional patrol duties; while utilizing auxiliary police
officers to control vehicular and pedestrian traffic in and around those areas
where the events are occurring. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-2: POSITION ESTABLISHED:
The position of auxiliary police officer is hereby established by the village.
(Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-3: APPOINTMENT:
   A.   The president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, is
hereby authorized to appoint such number of auxiliary police officers, who
shall have attained the age of twenty one (21) years or older, as may from time
to time be requested from the chief of police. Appointments to the police
auxiliary shall be made annually and shall terminate on January 31 of each year
or at such later time as the president and board of trustees approve new yearly
appointments.
   B.   Any appointment made to the police auxiliary shall be for one year
unless sooner terminated with or without cause. Any person whose appointment
has been terminated shall immediately return to the chief of police any
uniforms, badges, cap pieces, and other department property held by him or her.
   C.   The chief of police shall create hiring standards for auxiliary
officers in accordance with professional police practices. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-
2006)
5-7-4: RESIDENCY:
An auxiliary police officer need not be a resident of the village. (Ord. 2006-
757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-5: SERVES AT DISCRETION OF PRESIDENT UNDER DIRECTION OF CHIEF:
The position of auxiliary police officer is not a full time position with the
village, and the auxiliary police officer serves at the discretion of the
president and trustees of the village of South Barrington, under the direction
of the chief of police. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-6: COMPENSATION:
Auxiliary police officers shall be paid an hourly rate as established by the
president and board of trustees from time to time for each hour of service
performed, including court attendance; provided, service is performed at the
direction of the chief of police, or his designee. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-7: FINGERPRINT CHECK REQUIRED:
Prior to appointment, all proposed auxiliary police officers shall be
fingerprinted and their fingerprints shall be checked with the federal bureau
of investigation, Washington, D.C., in addition to any county, state and local
law enforcement agencies, for any possible criminal record. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-
6-2006)
5-7-8: INELIGIBLE PERSONS:
No person shall be appointed as an auxiliary police officer if he/she has been
convicted of a felony of this state or any other state or convicted of other
crimes involving moral turpitude. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-9: NOT MEMBER OF THE REGULAR POLICE FORCE:
Auxiliary police officers shall not be members of the regular police force of
the village of South Barrington. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-10: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
Auxiliary police officers shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   To aid or direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic within the village.
   B.   To aid in control of natural or manmade disasters.
   C.   To aid in case of civil disorder as directed by the chief of police.
   D.   To aid in other duties allowed by statute and assigned by the chief of
police. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-11: OATH:
An auxiliary police officer shall take an oath like that of a sworn member of
the police force. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-12: CARRYING OF WEAPONS:
Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms or any other nonprescribed
weapons on or off duty. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-13: CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE:
Auxiliary police officers of the village of South Barrington shall not be
conservators of the peace and shall not have the powers specified in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-15-25. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-14: TRAINING:
Auxiliary police officers before entering upon their duties, shall receive a
course of training in traffic direction and other police procedures appropriate
for the exercise of the powers conferred upon them under this chapter. The
training and course of study shall be determined and provided by the village of
South Barrington. Auxiliary police officers will from time to time be required
to attend additional training, as directed by the chief of police. (Ord. 2006-
757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-15: SUPERVISION:
All auxiliary police officers shall, at all times during the performance of
their duties, be subject to the direction and control of the chief of police
and/or his designee. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-16: UNIFORM AND IDENTIFICATION SYMBOLS:
Uniforms and identification symbols worn by auxiliary police officers shall be
different and distinct from those used by members of the regular police
department. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-2006)
5-7-17: TERMINATION WITH OR WITHOUT CAUSE:
Termination with or without cause of an auxiliary police officer shall be at
the discretion of the president with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees. (Ord. 2006-757, 2-6-2006)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
VEHICLE LICENSES
(Rep. by Ord. 0-2002-663, 9-12-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC CODE
SECTION:
6-2-1: Adoption Of The Illinois Vehicle Code
6-2-2: Exceptions And Additions To Code
6-2-3: Vehicle Size, Weight And Load
6-2-3-1: Temporary Prohibition Of Certain Classes Of Vehicles
6-2-3-2: Vehicles Exceeding Limits; Police Escorts And Special Permits
6-2-3-3: Exceptions
6-2-3-4: Enforcement And Penalties
6-2-3-5: Valid Certificate Of Safety
6-2-4: Penalties
6-2-1: ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village of South Barrington and made a part of
this code and incorporated herein by specific reference for the purpose of
regulating and controlling traffic on the streets, within the village, the
Illinois vehicle code being 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq.,
together with all amendments thereto that may, from time to time, be adopted.
(Ord. 2008-858, 6-12-2008)
6-2-2: EXCEPTIONS AND ADDITIONS TO CODE:
The following are exceptions and additions to the Illinois vehicle code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq.:
Exceptions: Paragraph 1-114 (Commercial Vehicle).
Additions:
Commercial Vehicle. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or
property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise or other
non-personal use, for-hire, not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a
ridersharing arrangement, or a recreational vehicle not being used
commercially.
Operator. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
Property Line. The line marking the boundary between any public way and the
private property abutting thereon.
Public Way. Any sidewalk, roadway, alley or other public thoroughfare open to
the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of travel.
Supervision. A disposition of conditional and revocable release without
probationary supervision, but under such conditions and reporting requirements
as are imposed by the court, at the successful conclusion of which disposition
the defendant is discharged and a judgment dismissing the charges is entered.
Through Traffic. A vehicle taking a route over any road or highway, or portion
thereof, under the maintenance jurisdiction of the village, without trip
origination or destination without the village or to or from a location whose
only means of ingress and egress is along said road or highway. (Ord. 0-85-218,
2-14-1985)
6-2-3: VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD:
6-2-3-1: TEMPORARY PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN CLASSES OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Whenever any highway or road, or parts thereof, under the jurisdiction
of this village, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic
conditions, will be seriously damaged or destroyed by the use of trucks or
other commercial vehicles, the operation of said vehicles thereon shall be
prohibited.
   B.   The chairman of the village road committee or the chief of police is
hereby authorized to determine and designate the time and the highways or
roads, or parts thereof, which shall be so seriously damaged or destroyed as
above provided, and shall so advise the village board of trustees. The board of
trustees, by resolution, may prohibit the operation of trucks or other
commercial vehicles over and upon such roads or highways, or parts thereof, so
designated; provided, that said prohibition shall not exceed ninety (90) days
in any one calendar year.
   C.   Upon enacting such resolution, the board of trustees shall cause to be
erected and maintained regulatory signs designating the provision of the
resolution at each end of that portion of any highway or road, or parts
thereof, affected thereby, and the resolution shall not be effective unless and
until such signs are erected and maintained.
   D.   If the village president (or in his absence, the president pro tem)
shall determine that any roads or highways, or parts thereof, might suffer
serious damage prior to the time in which the board of trustees could meet for
the purpose of taking remedial action as provided in subsections B and C of
this section, then in such emergency the president (or in his absence, the
president pro tem) may act alone in prohibiting the operation of trucks or
other commercial vehicles over and upon such roads or highways, or parts
thereof, and may direct the erection of regulatory signs at each end of such
road or highway, or parts thereof, affected thereby.
   E.   The board of trustees, at its next regular meeting called after action
taken by the president or president pro tem, as provided above, shall either
confirm said action by resolution or extend said prohibition for a period not
to exceed ninety (90) days or, by resolution, direct that the signs be removed
and declare that no emergency exists. (Ord. 0-86-242, 4-10-1986)
6-2-3-2: VEHICLES EXCEEDING LIMITS; POLICE ESCORTS AND SPECIAL PERMITS:
   A.   Police Escorts And Special Permit Required: Each vehicle exceeding the
size, weight and load limitations of this chapter may be operated on the roads
and streets under the jurisdiction of the village only with a police escort and
a special written permit issued from the office of the village clerk.
   B.   Application For Special Permit: Application for a special permit shall
be made in writing to the village clerk, and shall:
      1.   State if the applicant is an authorized carrier under the Illinois
motor carrier of property act; if so, provide the certificate, registration or
permit number issued by the Illinois commerce commission;
      2.   Specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles and the load to be
operated or moved, and indicate that such permit is requested for a single
trip;
      3.   State the points of origin and destination of the vehicle or
vehicles to be operated under the special permit;
      4.   State if the vehicles or loads will be transported for hire;
      5.   State the gross weight, axle weight, height, width and length of the
vehicle.
   C.   Conditions Of Permit: The village clerk is authorized to issue permits
hereunder, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   No permit shall issue until the applicant shall have supplied the
village clerk with a surety bond in the amount of twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) to compensate for any damage to any road or road structure.
      2.   In establishing the routes to be traveled, the chief of police shall
establish the most direct and shortest route consistent with the public safety,
and taking into consideration existing traffic, the character of the road or
roads, and the configuration of the terrain.
      3.   Every permit shall be in writing and shall be carried in the driving
compartment of the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers, and
shall be open to inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of the
village.
      4.   The fees for such permits shall be as follows:
Single round trip permit (each trip shall require a separate permit): One
hundred dollars ($100.00).
In addition, the fee for police escort shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for a single round trip.
      5.   Payment of fees authorized by this section shall be made to the
village clerk. No permit shall be issued until such fees have been paid. All
money received under the terms of this section shall be deposited in the
general corporate fund. No refund shall be made to applicant following the
issuance of a permit if the move is not completed.
      6.   The village clerk may refuse to issue such a permit if in the
opinion of the village engineer, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or
other climatic conditions, any roads or road structure or part thereof under
the jurisdiction of the village may suffer damage in excess of the amount of
the aforesaid surety bond. (Ord. 2016-1128, 7-14-2016)
6-2-3-3: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter governing size, weight and load shall
not apply to:
      1.   Fire apparatus;
      2.   Equipment for snow and ice removal operations owned or operated by
any governmental body, or required or directed by the village;
      3.   Implements of husbandry temporarily operated or towed in a
combination upon a road, street or highway in this village, provided that such
combination does not consist of more than three (3) vehicles or, in the case of
having fresh, perishable fruits or vegetables from farm to the point of first
processing, not more than three (3) wagons being towed by an implement of
husbandry 1 ;
      4.   School buses as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-182.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter governing weight shall not apply to:
      1.   Vehicles (including loads) operated by a public utility when
transporting equipment required for emergency repair of public utility
facilities or properties, or vehicles transporting equipment required for the
emergency repair of water wells or septic systems;
      2.   Trucks used exclusively for garbage or refuse disposal equipped with
self-compactors but not containing industrial roll-off hoists and roll-off
containers, provided that such vehicles do not exceed the following weight
limitations:
         22,000 pounds per single axle
         40,000 pounds per tandem axle
         54,000 gross vehicle
      3.   A tow truck under instructions from a police officer to legally
clear, remove or impound a vehicle. (Ord. 2016-1128, 7-14-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. As defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-130.
6-2-3-4: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of section
6-2-3-1 and/or
6-2-3-2 of this chapter, of a regulatory sign, or overweight on registration,
the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation
and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such
violation. Any person convicted of any violation of section
6-2-3-1 and/or
6-2-3-2 of this chapter including, but not limited to, a maximum axle or gross
limit specified on a regulatory sign, shall be fined according to the following
schedule:
Number Of Pounds Overweight Fine
Number Of Pounds Overweight  Fine
   Up to and including 2,0$100.00 unless the overweight can be shifted or
                             removed to conform to all legal weights
   From 2,001 through 2,50$270.00
   From 2,501 through 3,00330.00
   From 3,001 through 3,50520.00
   From 3,501 through 4,00600.00
   From 4,001 through 4,50850.00
   From 4,501 through 5,00950.00
                             The fine shall be computed at the rate of $150.00
   From 5,001 or more     for each increment of 500 pounds overweight or
                             fractions thereof
 
In addition, any person, firm or corporation convicted of four (4) or more
violations of any of section
6-2-3-1 and/or
6-2-3-2 of this chapter within any twelve (12) month period shall be fined an
additional amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for the
fourth and each subsequent conviction within the twelve (12) month period;
provided, however, that with regard to a firm or corporation, a fourth or
subsequent conviction shall mean a fourth or subsequent conviction attributable
to any employee-driver. (Ord. 2016-1128, 7-14-2016)
6-2-3-5: VALID CERTIFICATE OF SAFETY:
   A.   No owner or operator of a motor vehicle subject to safety testing under
625 ILCS 5/13-111 shall operate or permit the operation of such vehicle within
the Village unless a valid certificate of safety is in effect as required by
state law.
   B.   Proof of compliance shall be carried in the vehicle at all times and
presented to any law enforcement officer upon request.
   C.   The Police Department is authorized to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Failure to comply shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   D.   Any person, firm, or corporation found to have violated the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not more than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. (Ord. 2025-1448, 10-9-2025)
6-2-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person violating any
provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine as provided by reference
to the applicable provisions of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/15-100 et seq., as provided by reference to applicable
provisions of the Illinois vehicle code. Each day any violation of any
provision of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, any court of competent
jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter an order of supervision or
conditional discharge as provided by the Illinois unified code of corrections,
730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-1 et seq., for any violation of any
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Failure to obtain a permit as required by this section may be
prosecuted administratively or through the circuit court. The penalty shall be
no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2016-1128, 7-14-2016)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Street Defined
6-3-2: Speed Restrictions On Streets Under The Exclusive Jurisdiction Of The
Village
6-3-2-1: Speed Limit On Certain Streets (Rep. by Ord. 2008-858, 6-12-2008)
6-3-3: Stop Streets
6-3-4: Traffic On Parkways (Rep. by Ord. 2008-858, 6-12-2008)
6-3-5: U-Turns Prohibited
6-3-6: Through Traffic Prohibited
6-3-7: Yield Right Of Way Streets
6-3-1: STREET DEFINED:
For purposes of applying any and all traffic regulations in the village,
"street" shall be defined as the entire width between boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel, and shall include those ways dedicated but
not yet accepted by the village pursuant to its subdivision regulations 1 .
(Ord. 0-79-143, 11-8-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 11 of this code.
6-3-2: SPEED RESTRICTIONS ON STREETS UNDER THE EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION OF THE
VILLAGE:
   A.   Speed Restrictions Generally: The village president and board of
trustees of the village hereby find that the safe maximum reasonable speed
limit for the streets and highways under the exclusive jurisdiction of the
village is twenty five (25) miles per hour unless otherwise provided herein.
   B.   Speed Restrictions In School Zones: School zones include both sides of
that part of the public highway in front of any public elementary, middle or
high school or parochial school, and extending not less than three hundred feet
(300') in either direction from such school property. Such area shall be marked
as a school zone by official traffic signs and the safe maximum reasonable
speed limit for the streets and highways in said school zone is twenty (20)
miles per hour. Proper signs indicating the maximum speed limit applicable to
those streets under the exclusive jurisdiction of the village shall be posted
as provided by law. The following school zones are hereby established:
      Barbara Rose School: Penny Road and Bartlett Road subject to Cook County
jurisdiction
   C.   Speed Restriction In Park Zones: Park zones include both sides of that
part of the public highway adjacent to any public park, and extending not less
than three hundred feet (300') in either direction from such park property.
Such area shall be marked as a park zone by official traffic signs and the safe
maximum reasonable speed limit for the streets and highways in said park zone
is twenty (20) miles per hour. Proper signs indicating the maximum speed limit
applicable to those streets under the exclusive jurisdiction of the village
shall be posted as provided by law. The following park zones are hereby
established:
      Bridges Drive from Bartlett Road west to Regency entrance
      Witt Road from Penny Road south to Dalton Court
   D.   Signs Posted: Proper signs indicating the maximum speed limit
applicable to those streets under the exclusive jurisdiction of the village
shall be posted as provided by law. (Ord. 2008-858, 6-12-2008)
6-3-2-1: SPEED LIMIT ON CERTAIN STREETS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-858, 6-12-2008)
6-3-3: STOP STREETS:
   A.   Purpose: Traffic investigations have been made concerning the
intersections referred to in this section, and as a result of such traffic
investigations, the village president and board of trustees hereby find that
the establishment of the stop entrances to the intersections described in this
section are necessary and reasonable for the safety of the persons using the
public streets within the village.
   B.   Operation Of Vehicle At Stop Intersections: The driver of a vehicle
shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is
erected pursuant to this section, and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the
vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or
approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at
such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the
directions of the police officer shall be complied with.
   C.   Stop Streets Designated: The following are hereby designated as stop
entrances:
STOP SIGN STREETS - FOUR-LEGGED
Street                Type Of Intersection Direction Which Stop Is To Be Made
East/West North/South
Street                                                    Direction Which Stop
East/West          North/South       Type Of Intersection Is To Be Made

Arches Court       Regency Boulevard 4-legged             All directions
Aztec Court        Regency Boulevard 4-legged             East and west bound
Bighorn Court      Regency Boulevard 4-legged             All directions
Bryce Court        Regency Boulevard 4-legged             East and west bound
Canyon Court       Regency Boulevard 4-legged             East and west bound
Chaco Court        Regency Boulevard 4-legged             East and west bound
Covered Bridge     Witt Road         4-legged             All directions
Road/Watergate
Denali Court       Regency Boulevard 4-legged             East and west bound
Joshua Court       Regency Boulevard 4-legged             East and west bound
Regency Boulevard/ Wood Oaks Drive   4-legged             East and west bound
Glacier Circle
 
STOP SIGN STREETS - T INTERSECTION - ALL DIRECTIONS STOP
Street                Type Of Intersection Direction Which Stop Is To Be Made
East/West North/South
Street                                                    Direction Which Stop
East/West         North/South        Type Of Intersection Is To Be Made

Back Bay          Witt Road          T intersection       All directions
Bridges Drive     Bridges Drive      T intersection       All directions
Bridges Drive     Regency Boulevard  T intersection       All directions
Falcon Court/Dove Falcon Lakes Drive T intersection       All directions
Court
Knoll Court       Forest Lane        T intersection       All directions
Liberty Drive     Champlain Road     T intersection       All directions
Rose Boulevard    Ambrose Lane       T intersection       All directions
Rose Boulevard    Lake Adalyn Drive  T intersection       All directions
Rose Boulevard    Wescott Drive      T intersection       All directions
Trenton Court     Revere Drive       T intersection       All directions
Turning Shore     Watergate          T intersection       All directions
Wood Oaks Drive   Wood Oaks Drive    T intersection       All directions
 
STOP SIGN STREETS - T INTERSECTION
Street                Type Of Intersection Direction Which Stop Is To Be Made
East/West North/South
Street                                  Type Of        Direction Which Stop
East/West           North/South         Intersection   Is To Be Made

Arboretum Drive     Regency Boulevard   T intersection Southbound
Brandywine Road     Revere Drive        T intersection Eastbound
Buckthorn Road      Covered Bridge Road T intersection Southbound
Dalton Court        Witt Road           T intersection Westbound
East Cove           Witt Road           T intersection Eastbound
Glacier Circle      Olympic Drive       T intersection Southbound
Kingbird Court      Falcon Lakes Drive  T intersection Eastbound
Mesa Drive          Olympic Drive       T intersection Northbound
Overbrook Road      Witt Road           T intersection Westbound
Rose Boulevard      Blanchard Circle    T intersection Southbound
Rose Boulevard      Corey Lane          T intersection Southbound
Rose Boulevard      Gregory Lane        T intersection Southbound
Rose Boulevard      McGlashen Drive     T intersection Southbound
South Cove          Witt Road           T intersection Eastbound
Wood Oaks Drive
(entrance road from Wood Oaks Drive     T intersection Westbound
Bartlett)
Yosemite Court      Olympic Drive       T intersection Southbound
 
STOP ENTRANCES AT COOK COUNTY HIGHWAY JURISDICTION ROADS
Streets                                       Direction Which Stop Is To Be
Entrance Street Stops At Type Of Intersection Made
Streets                                                   Direction Which Stop
Entrance Street        Stops At      Type Of Intersection Is To Be Made

Beacon Hill Drive      Bartlett Road T intersection       Westbound
Beechnut Drive         Penny Road    4-legged             Southbound
Bridges Drive          Bartlett Road T intersection       Westbound
Champlain Road         Mundhank Road T intersection       Southbound
Cutters Run            Bartlett Road T intersection       Westbound
DeVeaux Court          Penny Road    T intersection       Northbound
Heath Way              Penny Road    4-legged             Southbound
Hidden Lakes Boulevard Bartlett Road T intersection       Westbound
Lake Adalyn Drive      Mundhank Road T intersection       Northbound
Liberty Drive (north   Bartlett Road T intersection       Westbound
leg)
Liberty Drive (south   Bartlett Road T intersection       Westbound
leg)
Mesa Drive             Penny Road    4-legged             Northbound
Mohawk Drive           Mundhank Road T intersection       Northbound
Morgan Lane            Bartlett Road T intersection       Westbound
North Meadow Court     Mundhank Road 4-legged             Northbound
Pentwater Drive        Mundhank Road T intersection       Eastbound
Polo Drive             Mundhank Road T intersection       Southbound
Red Hill Lane          Mundhank Road T intersection       Northbound
Revere Drive           Mundhank Road 4-legged             Southbound
Revere Drive           Penny Road    T intersection       Northbound
Shenandoah Circle      Penny Road    4-legged             Southbound
Shoreside Drive        Penny Road    T intersection       Southbound
South Meadow Court     Mundhank Road T intersection       Westbound
Spring Creek Drive     Penny Road    T intersection       Southbound
Star Lane              Mundhank Road T intersection       Westbound
Stoneridge Drive (east Penny Road    T intersection       Southbound
entrance)
Stoneridge Drive (west Penny Road    T intersection       Southbound
entrance)
Watergate Drive        Penny Road    4-legged             Northbound
Willow Bay Drive       Mundhank Road T intersection       Northbound
Windsor Court          Penny Road    4-legged             Northbound
Witt Road              Mundhank Road T intersection       Southbound
Witt Road              Penny Road    T intersection       Northbound
Woodhaven Drive        Mundhank Road T intersection       Eastbound
 
STOP ENTRANCES AT ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION JURISDICTION ROADS
Streets                                       Direction Which Stop Is To Be
Entrance Street Stops At Type Of Intersection Made
Streets                                 Type Of        Direction Which Stop
Entrance Street     Stops At            Intersection   Is To Be Made

Bridlewood Trail    Algonquin Road      T intersection Northbound
Chipping Campden    Palatine Road       T intersection Eastbound
Drive
Covered Bridge Road Barrington Road     T intersection Northbound
Eastings Way        Algonquin Road      T intersection Northbound
Executive Center    Barrington Road     T intersection Westbound
Drive
Falcon Lakes Drive  Barrington Road     T intersection Eastbound
Farmington Drive    Barrington Road     T intersection Eastbound
Forest Lane         Algonquin Road      T intersection Southbound
Terra Vita Drive    Barrington Road     T intersection Eastbound
Windemere Lane      Algonquin Road      T intersection Southbound
Wood Oaks Drive     Sutton Road         T intersection Eastbound
                    (Illinois Route 59)
 
   D.   Signs Posted: Proper signs indicating the maximum speed limit
applicable to those streets under the exclusive jurisdiction of the village
shall be posted as provided by law. (Ord. 2008-858, 6-12-2008)
6-3-4: TRAFFIC ON PARKWAYS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-858, 6-12-2008)
6-3-5: U-TURNS PROHIBITED:
   A.   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction at the following locations:
Barrington Road: Studio Drive north to Tennis Club Lane
   B.   Proper signage shall be posted at all locations within the village
where U-turns are prohibited. (Ord. 2008-858, 6-12-2008)
6-3-6: THROUGH TRAFFIC PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to use Revere
Drive as a through street to travel continuously from its intersection with
Penny Road through its entire length through its intersection with Mundhank
Road.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to use North
Liberty Drive or South Liberty Drive as a through street to travel continuously
from their respective intersections with Bartlett Road through their entire
length through their respective intersections with Champlain Road.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to use Spring
Creek Drive as a through street to travel continuously from its intersection
with Penny Road to its intersection with Beacon Hill Drive and thereafter west
to its intersection with Bartlett Road.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to use Beacon
Hill Drive as a through street to travel continuously from its intersection
with Bartlett Road through its intersection with Spring Creek Drive and
thereafter south through its intersection with Penny Road.
   E.   The chief of police or his designee is hereby directed to cause the
installation of appropriate regulatory signage identifying North Liberty Drive,
South Liberty Drive, Revere Drive, Spring Creek Drive and Beacon Hill Drive as
"local traffic only". (Ord. 0-98-556, 11-12-1998)
6-3-7: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY STREETS:
On the basis of traffic investigations at the below named intersections, it is
found that conditions warrant preference to traffic as designated and
enumerated intersections should be designated as "yield right of way"
intersections, as follows:
   Brandywine at Liberty
   Brandywine at Revere
   Buckthorn at Covered Bridge
   Kitson at Lake Adalyn
   Lexington at Liberty
   Lexington at Revere
   Old Coach at Overbrook
   Overbrook at Covered Bridge
   Pembury at Willowmere
   Pentwater at Pentwater
   Shoreside at Lakeside (Ord. 0-2015-1076, 7-9-2015)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-4-1: General
6-4-2: Unauthorized Use Of Parking Places For Persons With Disabilities
6-4-3: Recreational Vehicles
6-4-4: Exceptions, Parking Enforcement
6-4-5: Penalty Provisions
6-4-1: GENERAL:
   A.   Parking On Village Streets: It shall be unlawful to stand or park any
vehicle on any public street of the village between the hours of one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   B.   Parking With Left Wheels To Curb: It shall be unlawful to stand or park
any vehicle on any public street of the village when the vehicle's left wheels
are to the parkway or curb.
   C.   Parking In A Designated Fire Lane: It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle in any area designated by sign or otherwise as a fire lane.
   D.   Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places:
      1.   Prohibited Places: It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park a
vehicle:
         a.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         b.   On a sidewalk;
         c.   Within an intersection;
         d.   On a crosswalk;
         e.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;
         f.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
         g.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
         h.   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers;
         i.   In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a
current annual registration sticker or current temporary permit pending
registration;
         j.   That is an intercity vehicle that does not have prior approval as
set forth subsection E. of this section.
      2.   Excepted Locations: It shall be unlawful to stand or park a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
         a.   In front of a public or private driveway;
         b.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant, including a dry
hydrant;
         c.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         d.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of
a roadway;
         e.   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      3.   Additional Exception: This exception shall not apply to intercity
vehicles unless prior approval has been granted by the chief of police of the
village or his or her designee. It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers at any place where
official signs prohibit parking.
      4.   Temporary Parking Restrictions:
         a.   At any place within the village where official temporary signs
prohibit the stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles. Temporary
stopping, standing and parking restrictions shall become effective upon the
chief of police declaring that parking is prohibited by order of the South
Barrington police department and the placement of temporary signage stating "No
Parking Any Time". Temporary stopping, standing and parking restrictions shall
remain in effect until the temporary signage is removed by the police chief or
his designee.
         b.   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the chief of
police or his designee to place or remove any signage that restricts or
prohibits the temporary stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles.
   E.   Intercity Vehicles.
      1.   Definitions, The following words, terms and phrases, when used in
this subsection shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the village or his or her designee.
INTERCITY VEHICLE: Any bus, recreational vehicle or other vehicle used for
transporting more than three (3) individuals between the village and locations
outside of the village, but shall not include vehicles owned or leased by the
village and buses of the Chicago Transit Authority or another component of the
Regional Transportation Authority including, but not limited to. the suburban
bus commonly known as “Pace.”
      2.   Additional Requirements for Intercity Vehicles.
         a.   No owner or operator of any intercity vehicle shall use any
designated bus stop, bus stand, passenger loading’unloading zone or any other
location for loading or unloading of passengers, luggage or other goods without
first obtaining the approval of the chief of police. The prohibition in this
subsection shall not apply to: (i) intercity buses or shuttle buses that are
exclusively used to transfer passengers to trains operated by the National
Railroad Passenger Corporation, commonly known as “Amtrak” and/or the Northeast
Illinois Rail Corporation, commonly known as “Metra”; (ii) school buses while
on authorized school business/ activities; (iii) taxicabs, limousines,
ridesharing vehicles, including Ubers and Lyfts, or similar vehicles used for
private hire by persons working or residing within the village or by persons
visiting a specific residence or place of business located within the village
when allowed or authorized by the owner of the property; (iv) non-commercial
vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating that is less than 16,000 pounds
that are owned, leased or used by a resident or local business in carry ing out
ordinary business or customary activities of said business or resident; or (v)
any commercial vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating that exceeds 16.000
pounds if that vehicle is transporting persons as part of a past practice that
has been occurring prior to January 1,2020.
         b.   Application for such approval shall be made to the chief of
police and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the location of
the proposed bus stop, bus stand, passenger loading/unloading zone or other
location where such loading or unloading of passengers, luggage or other goods
shall take place, the time of day and length of time any such intercity vehicle
shall stand in the proposed bus stop, bus stand, passenger loading/unloading
zone or other location, and the number of intercity vehicles that shall leave
from and come to the proposed bus stop, bus stand, passenger loading unloading
zone or other location per day. The application shall be signed by the
applicant. The chief of police shall approve or deny the application no later
than thirty (30) days after the application was filed with the village.
         c.   The chief of police’s review of the application shall take into
consideration administrative efficiency and available resources, public safety
and orderly traffic flow, and an approval shall be subject to such conditions
and restrictions that the chief of police may impose in his or her sole
discretion (including, without limitation, those addressing day/time
availability of any such location(s), number of daily arrivals/departures to/
from any such location(s), and advance notification requirements by the
applicant). The chief of police may also require certified medical
documentation that passengers are not presently, and have not within the last
thirty (30) days prior to the date of unloading, been diagnosed or have
contracted any contagious disease such as malaria, tuberculosis or such other
contagious disease that, if spread to others, would adversely affect others
health, safety or welfare; provided, however, that such certification shall not
be required of domiciled residents of the United States who have not, within
the last thirty (30) days prior to unloading, traveled to a country
experiencing an outbreak of any such contagious disease.
         d.   If the chief of police denies the application, it shall be based
upon a determination that the loading unloading of passengers, luggage or other
goods at that time, or in that particular designated bus stop, bus stand,
passenger loading/unloading zone or other location presents an unreasonable
threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public or impedes the safe and
efficient flow of traffic or imposes an unreasonable burden on available
resources. If the chief of police denies the application, the chief of police
shall send by e-mail or U.S. mail a notification to the applicant in writing
specifying the reasons for the decision. Any applicant may seek review of the
decision of the chief of police denying such application in the manner provided
by law. (Ord. 0-97-521, 10-9-1997; amd. Ord. 2007-806, 4-12-2007; Ord. 2023-
1390, 12-28-2023)
6-4-2: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING PLACES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or leave standing any motor
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, which is not bearing registration
plates or decals issued to a person with disabilities in any parking place,
including any private or public off street parking facilities, specifically
reserved, by the posting of an official sign as designated, under section 11-
301 of the Illinois motor vehicle code 1 , for motor vehicles bearing such
registration plates or decals. It shall be further unlawful to park, stop or
leave standing any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in a
designated access aisle adjacent to any parking place specifically reserved for
persons with disabilities, by the posting of an official sign as designated,
under section 11-301 of the Illinois vehicle code 2 , for motor vehicles
bearing such registration plates or decals. (Ord. 2008-858, 6-12-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-301.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/11-301.
6-4-3: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and
phrases shall be construed to have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is
intended:
      1.   Day: any twenty-four (24) hour period.
      2.   Recreational Vehicle or RV: every camping trailer, boat, or similar
water vehicle, motor home, mini-motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or van
camper or other similar vehicle used primarily for recreational purposes. See,
e.g. 625 ILCS 5/1-169.
      3.   Resident: a person who physically resides within the village or who
maintains a legal place of residence or who owns land within the village. It
shall not mean a person who maintains an address at a mailbox drop or who rents
a room that is not his or her primary place of residence nor shall it mean a
person who maintains only a post office box, unless that person also provides
evidence of residence at a street address within the village.
   B.   Permission required. No person shall park, stop, or leave standing any
recreational vehicle on any residential driveway, except after providing a
written or telephonic request to the department of police of the village. The
request shall note the affected address of the property in question. The person
parking, stopping, or leaving the recreational vehicle, and if a separate
individual is the resident where the RV is to be parked, shall each jointly and
severally assume and bear responsibility for the making of said request. The
request shall be deemed approved unless the requestor or a resident where the
RV is to be parked is otherwise notified by the village.
   C.   Temporary RV Parking. The purpose of the temporary RV parking is to
allow users of recreational vehicles to park in the driveway of a residence to
load, unload, clean and maintain their recreational vehicles for a limited
period of time, not to exceed a day. A separate incidence of RV parking shall
mean any portion of a day. By way of example, if a resident parks a
recreational vehicle for a period of fifteen (15 ) minutes, a day shall be
counted.
      1.   Residential Zones. Temporary RV parking shall only be permitted in
residential zones of the village. No more than one (1) recreational vehicle
shall be permitted to park at any residential address at any given time, unless
the RV is towing another recreational vehicle.
      2.   Parking Restrictions. There shall be no more than fourteen (14)
separate days when a resident may have an RV parked in their residential
driveway during any calendar year. Each day or portion of a day must be
separate and distinct, and no user of a recreational vehicle may combine or
bank days. Any part of a day shall count as a whole day.
   D.   Prohibited Activities. No person shall:
      1.   Use slide outs, pop outs or other appurtenances on a recreational
vehicle that encroach on or into the roadway, parkway and/or sidewalk in such a
manner as to interfere with the path of safe travel of vehicles or pedestrians;
      2.   Open or partially open any awnings on a recreational vehicle in such
a manner as to interfere with the path of safe travel of vehicles and/or
pedestrians:
      3.   Cause or permit any utility connections, electrical cords, extension
cords, hoses or cables to cross over, above, on or across any street or
sidewalk to or from a recreational vehicle with the uses limited to loading,
unloading, and maintaining the RV:
      4.   Use power generators or other noise-generating equipment between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within or adjacent to a recreational vehicle;
      5.   Conduct any commercial activity with an RV, including renting or
leasing an RV, while parked in a residential district;
      6.   Connect a recreational vehicle to the public sewer system or dump
waste onto public or private land or into streets, gutters, or storm drains,
other than lawfully at a designated, licensed and permitted recreational
vehicle sanitary wastewater dump station; or
      7.   Knowingly allow any ty pe of grease, oil, fuel or other harmful
substance to leak or be emitted onto any public right of way.
   E.   Revocation.
      1.   The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke temporary RV
parking permission if the chief of police makes any one of the following
findings:
         a.   The recreational vehicle has fallen into a state of disrepair and
has become a public nuisance, or a danger to pedestrians or other vehicles:
         b.   The recreational vehicle has become inoperable; and/or
         c.   There has been a violation of this section.
   F.   To revoke RV parking permission, the chief of police shall issue a
notice of revocation in writing to the grantee specifying the basis for and the
effective date of the revocation. To the extent permission expires pursuant to
its own terms before the effective date of such revocation, the chief of police
may use such revocation as a basis to deny a future request from the same
requester. The chief of police's determination to revoke temporary RV parking
permission shall be final. (Ord. 2023-1357, 3-22-2023)
6-4-4: EXCEPTIONS, PARKING ENFORCEMENT:
Except as specifically set forth in this code, a written or telephonic request
may be submitted to the chief of police of the village for the purpose of
regulating vehicle parking and traffic upon private property, which includes
the parking and storage of vehicles set forth in chapter 9 of the Zoning
Ordinance titled "Vehicle Storage and Parking Regulations." The request must be
submitted by the owner(s) of the property or the person(s) having a legal right
to manage or control the property. After such written request has been approved
by the village, such property shall be subject to all of the provisions of this
chapter or chapter 9 of the Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 0-97-521, 10-9-1997; amd.
Ord. 2023-1357, 3-22-2023)
6-4-5: PENALTY PROVISIONS:
   A.   Penalties: The penalty for any violation of this chapter, other than
the disability provisions of section
6-4-2 and the recreational vehicles provision of section
6-4-3 of this chapter, shall be not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); provided, however, that in the
event that the owner or operator does not make payment to the village within
fourteen (14) calendar days after the date of the personal issuance of a ticket
or the issuance of a hang-on ticket as specified in a final notice, the penalty
shall be forty dollars ($40.00) for such violation. The penalty for any
violation of section
6-4-2, "Unauthorized Use Of Parking Places For Persons With Disabilities" of
this chapter shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00). The penalty for any
violation of section
6-4-3. "Recreational Vehicles" of this chapter, shall not be more than five
hundred dollars $500.00). The penalty for any violation of subsection
6-4-1 E. “Intercity Vehicles” of this chapter shall not be more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) and the seizure and impoundment of the intercity
vehicle in accordance with applicable laws. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed of each day any violation under this chapter occurs or continues.
   B.   Procedure On Nonpayment Of Penalty Fee: In the event that the person to
whom a citation is issued pursuant to this section fails to settle and pay said
violation within the prescribed time, or within a period of time specified in a
final notice, then the police officer or the designated village employee or
entity is authorized to cause a notice to appear to be served upon said alleged
violator by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, and
is authorized to file a complaint and to prosecute the same in the circuit
court of the appropriate county. (Ord. 0-2006-796, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 2023-
1357, 3-22-2023; Ord. 2023-1390, 12-28-2023)
CHAPTER 5
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
6-5-1: Enforcement Of Traffic Code In Certain Subdivisions
6-5-1: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC CODE IN CERTAIN SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Subject to the provisions set forth in subsection B below, the
provisions of Chapters 2 and 3 of this Title shall be enforceable in
subdivisions where the streets and public improvements have not yet been
accepted by the Village Board of Trustees; provided, however, that the
enforcement of the traffic laws of this Village in such subdivisions shall in
no event be deemed to constitute an acceptance of the streets or public
improvements in such subdivision.
   B.   In the event any person or board of directors owning, operating, or
representing a residential subdivision as described above files a written
request with the Village Clerk pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-209.1, the Village shall,
upon the adoption of an ordinance, enforce the traffic laws on private streets
and roads in such subdivision. (Ord. 0-96-482, 3-14-1996)
CHAPTER 6
SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN THE COMMISSION OF OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Vehicle Seizure And Impoundment
6-6-2: Existing Regulations Not Abrogated
6-6-3: Exceptions
6-6-4: Notice
6-6-5: Hearings
6-6-6: Administrative Penalty
6-6-7: Vehicle Possession
6-6-8: Hearing Officer
6-6-9: Decision Review
6-6-1: VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Seizure And Impoundment By Village: Any motor vehicle operated or used,
with the express or implied permission of the registered owner of record (as
registered with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois, or the
appropriate authority of another State) during the commission of or in
furtherance of any offense or violation set forth in subsection B of this
section, shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the Village, and the
owner of record of said vehicle may be liable to the Village for a civil
penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), in addition to any
towing and storage fees as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Violations Or Offenses Subject To Seizure And Impoundment:
      1.   Operating or in physical control of a motor vehicle while driver’s
license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or
revoked (625 ILCS 5/6-303); or a similar Local Ordinance, except that vehicles
shall not be subjected to seizure and impoundment if the suspension is for
violation of the Vehicle Emissions Inspection Law of 2005 625 ILCS 5/13c-1 et
seq., or for an unpaid citation (parking or moving); or
      2.   Operating or in physical control of a motor vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds,
or any combination thereof 1 ; or
      3.   Unlawful use of a firearm (UUW) 2 ; or
      4.   Operation of a motor vehicle during the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of Cannabis Control Act 3 ; or
      5.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or attempted
commission of any offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and forfeited
pursuant to section 36-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012; or
      6.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant for arrest has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing
to appear in court and answer charges that the driver violated section 6-303 or
11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
      7.   Operation or use of an intercity vehicle in violation of subsection
6-4-1 E. “Intercity Vehicles” of the village code. (Ord. 2014-1019, 5-8-2014;
amd. Ord. 2019-1220, 12-12-2019; Ord. 2020-1257, 12-10-2020; Ord. 2023-1382,
10-12-2023; Ord. 2023-1390, 12-28-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-501.
2 2. 720 ILCS 5/24-1.
3 3. 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
6-6-2: EXISTING REGULATIONS NOT ABROGATED:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to and shall not
replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or federal law or village
ordinance that relates to the seizure and/or impoundment of motor vehicles, and
any penalty provided herein shall be in addition to any and all penalties that
may be assessed or imposed by a court for violation of any criminal offense or
local ordinance violation offense.
   B.   Any and all fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this chapter
shall be those approved by the Chief of Police for all towing companies
authorized to tow for the Village. (Ord. 2014-1019, 5-8-2014; amd. Ord. 2023-
1382, 10-12-2023)
6-6-3: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter are inapplicable if at the time of the offense
the vehicle used in the violation was stolen and the theft was reported to the
appropriate police authority within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was
discovered, or the vehicle was otherwise operated without the knowledge and
express or implied consent of the registered owner. (Ord. 2014-1019, 5-8-2014;
amd. Ord. 2023-1382, 10-12-2023)
6-6-4: NOTICE:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, and the police
officer has effected an arrest for any of the offenses set forth in subsection
6-6-1-B of this chapter, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the
vehicle to a facility authorized by the Village. Prior to or at the time the
vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify or make a reasonable attempt
to notify the owner or any person identifying himself as the owner of the
vehicle, or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time
of the alleged offense, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner’s
right to request a preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing and hearing to be
conducted in accordance with section
6-6-5 of this chapter. The vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of
the hearing(s) provided for in subsections
6-6-5-A and B of this chapter, unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the
Village a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and pays
the towing and storage charges. (Ord. 2014-1019, 5-8-2014; amd. Ord. 2023-1382,
10-12-2023)
6-6-5: HEARINGS:
   A.   Preliminary Hearing: If the owner or lessee of record of a vehicle
seized and impounded desires to contest the seizure and impoundment of the
vehicle he or she must make a request for a preliminary hearing within twenty-
four (24) hours of the seizure. The request shall be deemed filed upon delivery
to the Chief of Police in care of the South Barrington Police Department. The
preliminary hearing request shall be in writing and the Chief of Police or his/
her designee shall conduct the preliminary hearing within twenty-four (24)
hours after receipt of the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or Village
holidays, in which case the preliminary hearing shall be heard on the next
business day after the request. All interested parties shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing. The formal rules
of evidence shall not apply at the preliminary hearing, and hearsay evidence
shall be admissible only if it is of the type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after the
preliminary hearing, the Chief of Police or his/her designee determines there
is probable cause to believe that the vehicle is subject to seizure and
impoundment, he/she shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as
herein provided, unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the Village a cash
bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and pays any applicable
towing and storage fees. If the Chief of Police or his/her designee determines
that there is no such probable cause to believe the vehicle was used or
operated during the commission or attempted commission of the offenses set
forth in subsection
6-6-1-B of this chapter, then the vehicle shall be returned to the registered
owner without penalty or other fees.
   B.   Administrative Hearing: Unless a vehicle has been released for no
probable cause at a preliminary hearing or the owner, lessee or lienholder has
posted cash bond and agreed in writing to waive an administrative hearing, the
Village shall, within ten (10) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded,
notify the registered owner, lessee and any lienholder of record by personal
service or first class mail, postage prepaid, of the date, time, and location
of a hearing that will be conducted. The notice of hearing shall be sent to the
interested party’s address as registered with the. Secretary of State of the
State of Illinois, or the appropriate authority of another state. An initial
hearing shall be scheduled and held no later than forty-five (45) days after
mailing the notice of hearing or personal service of the notice of hearing.
Continuances shall only be granted for good cause shown. All interested persons
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. At any time
prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer may, at the request of any
party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. Subpoenas
for the production of witnesses and records may be issued upon request and for
good cause. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is of the type commonly relied
upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after
the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence
that the vehicle was used or operated in connection with or during the
commission or attempted commission of any of those offenses set forth in
subsection
6-6-1-B of this chapter, or that the police officer had reasonable cause to
believe the motor vehicle was subject to seizure and impoundment, the hearing
officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the vehicle civilly
liable to the Village for a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00), and requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded until the
owner pays the civil penalty to the Village plus any and all fees to the tower
and/or Village for the towing and storage of the vehicle as the case may be.
If, after proper service of notice, the owner of record fails to appear at the
hearing, the hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in absentia and, if
appropriate, enter an order finding in favor of the Village, a copy of which
order shall be sent to the registered owner, lessee and/or lienholder of record
by first class mail, postage prepaid. If at the hearing the hearing officer
finds that no such violation occurred, or reasonable cause did not exist, the
hearing officer shall order the immediate return of the vehicle and any bond
posted to the owner without assessing any fees or penalty. (Ord. 2014-1019, 5-
8-2014; amd. Ord. 2020-1257, 12-10-2020; Ord. 2023-1382, 10-12-2023)
6-6-6: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY:
If a civil penalty is imposed, the penalty shall constitute a debt due and
owing to the Village of South Barrington. If a cash bond has been posted the
bond shall be applied to the penalty. If a vehicle remains impounded when a
penalty is imposed, the Village may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and
enforce such judgment against the vehicle as provided by law. Except as may
otherwise be provided in this chapter, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded
until the civil penalty is paid to the Village and any applicable towing and
storage fees are paid to the tower and/or Village, as the case may be, in which
case possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally
entitled to possess the vehicle, or the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed
of to satisfy a judgment and lien as provided by law. If the civil penalty and
applicable towing and storage fees are not paid within thirty (30) days after
the expiration of time in which administrative review of the hearing officer’s
determination may be sought, or within thirty (30) days after an action seeking
administrative review has been resolved in favor of the Village, whichever is
applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in
the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under the
Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 2014-1019, 5-8-2014; amd. Ord. 2020-1257, 12-10-
2020; Ord. 2023-1382, 10-12-2023)
6-6-7: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
Except as may otherwise be provided by law or by order of the hearing officer,
no owner, lessee, lienholder, or other person shall be legally entitled to take
possession of a seized and impounded vehicle until the civil penalty and towing
and storage fees have been paid. However, whenever a person or other entity
with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure
proceedings prior to the date of the motor vehicle seizure or impoundment,
possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person or entity if the
lienholder of record agrees in writing to refund to the Village the amount of
the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required to pay all
lienholders of record, not to exceed the civil penalty, plus the applicable
towing and storage fees. (Ord. 2014-1019, 5-8-2014; amd. Ord. 2020-1257, 12-10-
2020; Ord. 2023-1382, 10-12-2023)
6-6-8: HEARING OFFICER:
The hearing officer shall be appointed by the Village President of the Village
of South Barrington, and he or she shall be an attorney licensed to practice
law in the State of Illinois for a minimum of three (3) years next preceding
the date of his/her appointment. (Ord. 2014-1019, 5-8-2014; amd. Ord. 2023-
1382, 10-12-2023)
6-6-9: DECISION REVIEW:
Any party may appeal a final decision of the hearing officer pursuant to the
provision of the Illinois Administrative Review Law 1 . (Ord. 2014-1019, 5-8-
2014; amd. Ord. 2023-1382, 10-12-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Roadway And Driveway Specifications In Industrial And Commercial Areas
7-1-2: Maintenance Of Swales And Drainage Ditches
7-1-3: Wage Rates For Public Works Employees
7-1-4: Road Improvement Projects
7-1-4-1: FA Route 173
7-1-4-2: Barrington Road
7-1-4-3: Algonquin Road
7-1-1: ROADWAY AND DRIVEWAY SPECIFICATIONS IN INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL AREAS:
   A.   Subgrade Preparation For Industrial And Commercial Roadways:
      1.   All topsoil and other unsuitable material shall be removed from
areas to be paved, whether in cut or fill. Fill material shall be of clay or
granular material compacted to ninety five percent (95%) of density. (Ord. 0-
72-20, 10-12-1972)
      2.   No culvert pipe shall be less than twelve inches (12") in diameter
and shall be fitted with preformed end sections. Only concrete, aluminized
corrugated metal, and plastic pipe are allowed. The length of the pipe shall be
the width of the driveway plus the radius; all plastic pipe shall be HDPE
corrugated pipe; all concrete and aluminized corrugated pipe shall meet IDOT
specifications. All culvert pipe used shall be of sufficient diameter to
provide a means for adequate drainage as determined by a licensed professional
engineer appointed by the village board. (Ord. 2016-1132, 10-10-2016)
   B.   Roadway Specifications:
      1.   Industrial Areas: Public roadways within industrial areas shall be
of minimum width of thirty feet (30'), have gravel shoulders of six feet (6'),
and have a four inch (4") crown, and shall be constructed within the minimum
standards as herein set forth.
The minimum base course for all industrial roadways shall consist of ten inch
(10") no. 9 road gravel put down in two (2) lifts of five inches (5") each,
primed with MC-O liquid asphalt at the rate of one-third (1/3) gallon per
square yard. The surface course shall consist of bituminous concrete pavement
of two inches (2") compacted thickness of bituminous concrete binder course I-
11 hot plant mix asphalt, and a one inch (1") compacted thickness of bituminous
concrete surface course I-11 hot plant mix asphalt; all constructed as per
state of Illinois highway specifications.
      2.   Commercial Areas: Public roadways within commercial areas shall be
of minimum width of twenty feet (20'), have gravel shoulders of six feet (6'),
and have a three inch (3") crown, and shall be constructed within the minimum
standards as herein set forth.
The minimum base course for all commercial roadways shall consist of eight inch
(8") no. 9 road gravel put down in two (2) lifts of four inches (4") each,
primed with MC-O liquid asphalt at the rate of one-third (1/3) gallon per
square yard. The surface course shall consist of bituminous concrete pavement
of one and one-half inches (11/2") compacted thickness of bituminous concrete
binder course I-11 hot plant mix asphalt, and a one inch (1") compacted
thickness of bituminous concrete surface course I-11 hot plant mix asphalt; all
constructed as per state of Illinois highway specifications.
   C.   Driveways:
      1.   Industrial Areas: The minimum width of driveways leading from
industrial areas onto public roadways shall be twenty feet (20') at the
property line with a ten foot (10') radius.
      2.   Commercial Areas: The minimum width of driveways leading from
commercial areas onto public roadways shall be twenty feet (20') at the
property line with a five foot (5') radius. (Ord. 0-72-20, 10-12-1972)
      3.   Hard Surface: All driveways must be constructed with a hard surface
consisting of asphalt, concrete or pavers. No gravel surface driveways are
permitted in the village. (Ord. 2016-1132, 10-10-2016)
   D.   Penalties: Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day such violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-72-
20, 10-12-1972)
7-1-2: MAINTENANCE OF SWALES AND DRAINAGE DITCHES:
   A.   Definition: The term "obstruction" as used herein is defined as any
condition which inhibits, restricts or obstructs, in whole or in part, the
water drainage for which any swale, ditch, storm sewer structure, and drainage
easement was designed. An obstruction includes, but is not limited to, erosion,
fill, plant growth, trees, bushes, shrubs and structures of any kind or nature
whatsoever.
   B.   Application Of Provisions: This section shall be applicable to only
those swales, drainage ditches, and drainage easements that have been approved
or accepted by the village. Furthermore, this section shall apply to all swales
drainage ditches, and storm sewer pipes and structures located in the public
right of way or to which an easement has been granted for drainage purposes.
(Ord. 81-166, 10-8-1981)
   C.   Maintenance Required; Obstructions Prohibited: It shall hereafter be
the duty of the property owners or occupants of the premises in the village to
not plant any trees, bushes and shrubs, or place any obstructions, and to
maintain the swales, drainage ditches, and drainage easements with storm sewer
structures located adjacent to and in the street right of way fronting upon
such property and located within any easement upon such property and it shall
be unlawful for any such property owner or occupant of the premises to allow
any obstruction to occur or continue in any such swale or drainage ditch. (See
chapter 3 of this title for permit information.) (Ord. 2016-1132, 10-10-2016)
   D.   Notice Of Violation:
      1.   The property owner or occupant of premises upon which an obstruction
is located, or adjacent to such obstruction, which is in violation of the
provisions of this section may be notified in writing by the building official
or the designated representative of the village of the existence of the
nuisance. Such notice shall be in substantially the following form:
TO: OWNER OR OCCUPIER OF PREMISES
ADDRESS:
YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED that the Corporate Authorities of the Village of South
Barrington have determined that a nuisance exists on your premises,
specifically,                                                  . This
obstruction prevents the drainage ditch or swale located on or adjacent to your
property from draining in a manner consistent with the swale or drainage
ditch's original design. Unless this condition is corrected within thirty (30)
days completely eliminating the obstruction, the Village of South Barrington
will initiate action to eliminate such obstruction, and, furthermore, may file
a civil suit to recover the costs of such corrective action, may file a lien
against the premises, or assess penalties as provided in Section
7-1-2 of the South Barrington Village Code.
         Building Official
         Village of South Barrington
      2.   Where no person is in actual physical possession of the premises and
where no address is available to locate the owner of the premises, the building
official shall post on the premises, in a conspicuous place, the notice of the
corporate authorities to eliminate the obstruction.
   E.   Removal Of Obstruction: Any person receiving a notice served pursuant
to this section, or upon whose property such a notice is posted, shall within
thirty (30) days remove such obstruction; provided, however, that such period
will be computed from the first day weather permits such removal. If such
person fails to remove the obstruction, then the village may enter upon the
premises and remove the obstruction.
   F.   Removal Costs: Within thirty (30) days after the village has incurred
costs in removing the obstruction, the village or a person representing the
village may institute a civil suit in the circuit court of Cook County against
the owner or occupant of the premises for all costs incurred in taking such
corrective action, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees and
all administrative costs attendant to the corrective action and the lawsuit. In
addition, the village may file a lien in the office of the recorder of deeds
for any costs not recovered. The village may also cause the village prosecutor
to prosecute the property owner or occupant pursuant to this subsection.
   G.   Penalties: A violation of this section is punishable by a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part
thereof on which a violation occurs, continues, or is permitted to occur or
continue. (Ord. 0-81-166, 10-8-1981; amd. Ord. 2019-1207, 6-13-2019)
7-1-3: WAGE RATES FOR PUBLIC WORKS EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Wage Rates Provided: To the extent and as required by "an act
regulating wages of laborers, mechanics and other workmen employed in any
public works by the state, county, city or any public body or any political
subdivision or by anyone under contract for public works", approved June 26,
1941, as amended, the general prevailing rate of wages in this locality for
laborers, mechanics and other workmen engaged in the construction of public
works coming under the jurisdiction of this village is hereby ascertained to be
the same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the Cook
County area as determined by the department of labor of the state of Illinois
as of May 1978, a copy of that determination being attached to the ordinance
codified herein and incorporated by reference. The definitions of any terms
appearing in this section which are also used in the aforesaid act shall be the
same as in said act.
   B.   Applied To Public Works Employment: Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to apply said general prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained
to any work or employment except public works construction of this village to
the extent required by the aforesaid act.
   C.   Rates To Be Posted: The village clerk shall publicly post or keep
available for inspection by any interested party in the main office of this
village this determination of such prevailing rate of wage.
   D.   Rates To Be Furnished To Employees: The village clerk shall mail a copy
of this determination to any employer, and to any association of employers, and
to any person or association of employees who have filed, or file their names
and addresses requesting copies of any determination stating the particular
rates and the particular class of workmen whose wages will be affected by such
rates. (Ord. 0-78-106, 8-10-1978)
7-1-4: ROAD IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS:
7-1-4-1: FA ROUTE 173:
   A.   Discharge Of Wastewaters Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to permit the
discharge of sanitary or industrial wastewater into any highway drainage
facility constructed as a part of that portion of FA Route 173, SBI Route 63,
Illinois Route 72 (Higgins Road), within the limits of the village. (Ord. 2016-
1132, 10-10-2016)
   B.   Encroachments Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect
or cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, any encroachment
within the limits of the project right of way or roadway right of way as
described in subsection A of this section where no project right of way lines
have been established. (Ord. 0-70-7, 7-9-1970)
   C.   Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand
or to park any vehicle along both sides of that portion of Higgins Road or the
proposed FA Route 173, SBI Route 63, Illinois Route 72, which is within the
limits of the village, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with a policeman or traffic control device.
   D.   Penalties: Any person violating this section shall be fined not less
than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every
day during which said violation continues or exists. (Ord. 0-70-8, 7-9-1970)
7-1-4-2: BARRINGTON ROAD:
   A.   Parking Prohibited: Parking shall not be permitted along Barrington
Road within the village limits.
   B.   Discharge Of Wastewaters Prohibited: No person shall discharge any
sanitary waste or industrial wastewater into any storm sewer or drainage
facility constructed as part of the Barrington Road - Central Road improvement,
said limits of improvement being between Central Road relocated and Algonquin
Road and a portion of which passes through the village.
The village clerk is authorized and directed to attach a copy of this
subsection to the agreement dated October 27, 1988, by and between the state of
Illinois and the village of South Barrington relative to the Barrington Road
improvement. (Ord. 2016-1132, 10-10-2016)
   C.   Encroachment Prohibited: No person shall install, place, maintain or
construct any structure that encroaches upon the state right of way on the
Barrington Road improvement within the limits of the village.
The village clerk is hereby authorized and directed to attach a copy of this
subsection to the agreement dated October 27, 1988, by and between the state of
Illinois and the village of South Barrington relative to the improvement of the
Barrington Road. (Ord. 0-88-315, 11-10-1988)
7-1-4-3: ALGONQUIN ROAD:
   A.   Discharge Of Wastewaters Prohibited: No person, firm, corporation or
other entity shall discharge any sanitary waste or industrial wastewater into
any storm sewer or drainage facility constructed as part of the Algonquin Road
improvement, said limits of improvement being between Illinois Route 59 and
Penny Road, and a portion of which passes through the village. (Ord. 0-97-506,
1-9-1997)
   B.   Encroachment Prohibited: No person shall install, place, maintain or
construct any structure that encroaches upon the state right of way on
Algonquin Road within the limits of the village. (Ord. 0-97-507, 1-9-1997)
   C.   Parking Prohibited: Parking shall not be permitted along Algonquin Road
from Illinois Route 59 to Penny Road within the village limits.
The village board will prohibit future parking at such locations on or
immediately adjacent to Algonquin Road as may be determined and directed by the
state to be necessary to ensure the free flow of traffic and safety to the
motoring public. (Ord. 0-97-508, 1-9-1997)
CHAPTER 2
LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS BY SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
SECTION:
7-2-1: Authority
7-2-2: Purposes
7-2-3: Procedures Prior To Authorization Of Improvements
7-2-4: Authorization Of Improvements
7-2-5: Enforcement
7-2-1: AUTHORITY:
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the Village's home rule power to provide
and implement procedures for making local improvements by special assessment,
as set forth in article VII, section 6L of the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, in force as of July 1, 1971. (Ord. 0-83-189, 11-10-1983)
7-2-2: PURPOSES:
In the exercise of the Village's powers and the performance of its functions
pertaining to the making of local improvements by special assessment, this
Chapter has been enacted for the following specific purposes:
   A.   To encourage the orderly development and implementation of a special
construction project of benefit to a specific area in the Municipality.
   B.   To provide for collection of funds in amounts reasonably related to the
benefits derived from such construction. (Ord. 0-83-189, 11-10-1983)
7-2-3: PROCEDURES PRIOR TO AUTHORIZATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
No ordinance authorizing any local improvement by special assessment shall be
considered or passed by the Board unless and until the following actions have
been taken:
   A.   Ordinance for Local Improvement: An ordinance shall be adopted by the
Village President and Board of Trustees proposing the improvements by special
assessment. Said ordinance shall include 1) a description of the improvement to
be made and an estimate of cost and proposed division of cost, 2) a statement
of the place where the description and estimate of cost are available for
public inspection, 3) a statement of time and place set for public hearing, 4)
a statement of the notice to be given, and 5) a form of the notice.
   B.   Public Hearing; Notice: A public hearing shall be held by the Village
Board for consideration of the proposed local improvement. At this hearing, the
representation of any person desiring to be heard on the subject of the
necessity of the proposed local improvement, the nature thereof or the cost as
estimated shall be heard.
Notice of public hearing shall be published at least once not less than ten
(10) days prior to public hearing in one or more newspapers of general
circulation in the Village. In addition, notice by mailing shall be given by
depositing said notice in the United States mails, addressed to the person or
persons in whose name the general taxes for the last preceding year were paid
on each lot, block, tract or parcel of land described as being adjacent to the
proposed improvement. Said notice shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days
prior to the time set for the public hearing. Said notice shall contain 1) the
substance of the ordinance proposing improvement adopted by the Board, 2) the
estimate of cost, and 3) a notification that the extent, nature, kind,
character and estimated cost of the proposed improvement are subject to change
by the Board at the public hearing.
   C.   Information on File: An accurate map of the specific territory to be
benefited by the proposed improvement together with a description of the
extent, nature and character of the proposed improvement and the estimate of
cost shall be on file in the office of the Village Clerk and available for
public inspection at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the public
hearing. (Ord. 0-83-189, 11-10-83)
7-2-4: AUTHORIZATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Following public hearing, if the proposed improvement is not abandoned, the
Board shall adopt an ordinance authorizing the improvements. The ordinance
shall set forth (1) the nature, character, locality and description of the
improvement, (2) the amount to be assessed per lot, block, tract or parcel of
land, provided that no such land shall be assessed a greater amount than it
will be actually benefited, and (3) the specific terms of the assessment
including but not limited to the number of installments and the provisions for
interest. (Ord. 0-83-189, 11-10-83)
7-2-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The Board, by subsequent ordinance, shall authorize enforcement procedures to
be taken against any landowner who does not pay the amount which has been
assessed against him. These enforcement procedures shall include but shall not
be limited to (1) the filing of a lien upon the property assessed, (2) the
filing of a complaint to foreclose the lien, and (3) the filing of a petition
for the entry of an order authorizing the Village to sell and assign the lien.
(Ord. 0-83-189, 11-10-83)
CHAPTER 3
PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION OF VILLAGE RIGHT OF WAY AS A HAZARD FREE AREA
SECTION:
7-3-1: Permits; Scope
7-3-2: Permit Fees
7-3-3: Standards
7-3-4: Penalty
7-3-1: PERMITS; SCOPE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to do the following within any village right of
way:
      1.   Place or install stones or boulders;
      2.   Construct a masonry, concrete or rigid steel mailbox or delivery
marker;
      3.   Construct any masonry, concrete or rigid steel structure or driveway
monument;
      4.   Install any rigid roadway markers such as pipes, conduit, stakes,
posts, and the like; and
      5.   Construct any walls or landscape features such as islands, berms,
retaining walls, and the like.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to do the following within the village right of
way without first obtaining a permit:
      1.   Plant any shrubs, bushes or trees,
      2.   Remove any trees in the public right of way,
      3.   Install brick and paver driveways.
   C.   The installation of conventional mailbox supports (wood four inch by
four inch (4" x 4") posts) or mailbox supports with materials of a "breakaway"
design and the installation of flexible markers seasonally installed during the
winter months along the edge of pavement and driveways shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
   D.   It shall be unlawful to plant, place, install or construct anything
that obstructs the movement of stormwater through the designed curbs, gutters,
culverts and swales
   E.   The village will require compensation for right of way trees
extensively damaged and for right of way trees removed without authorization
from the building department. The formula developed by the International
Society Of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the
compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees.
   F.   Upon obtaining the required permit to plant or remove a tree in the
public right of way, tree removal must be performed by an insured contractor.
   G.   Upon obtaining the required permit to plant or remove a tree in the
public right of way, the property owner must notify all utility companies that
are a part of the Joint Utility Locating Information For Excavators - JULIE,
Inc., of the responsibility of each utility company to locate its utilities.
The village will not accept any liability or pay any costs in the event any
unknown utilities are uncovered or are damaged by the property owner or
contractor.
   H.   The village will not be responsible for any bricks or pavers that are
damaged in the public right of way due to road repairs or snowplowing.
   I.   The permit expires six (6) months after issuance. (Ord. 2013-993, 7-11-
2013; amd. Ord. 2016-1144, 11-10-2016; Ord. 2019-1208, 6-13-2019; Ord. 2020-
1222, 2-13-2020; Ord. 2025-1447, 10-9-2025)
7-3-2: PERMIT FEES:
A. The permit fee for right of way tree planting and removal, landscaping and
landscaping features shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
B.   The permit fee to install brick and paver driveways shall be a minimum of
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 2016-1144, 11-10-2016; amd. Ord.
2020-1222, 2-13-2020)
7-3-3: STANDARDS:
   A.   Wood mailbox support posts shall be not larger than six inches by six
inches (6" x 6"). All other mailbox support posts must be a break away design,
approved by the village building officer.
      1.   All mailboxes and/or mailbox support posts must display address
identification numerals.
         a.   Street address numerals must be displayed on a single side of the
mailbox and/or on the mailbox support post.
         b.   Fire departments serving South Barrington recommend that all
numerals be Arabic numerals, minimum four inches (4") in height and minimum
one-half inch (1/2") in width; numerals should be contrasting colors to the
surface of the mail box structure to which they are attached, reflective
coatings are ideal for night time identification.
         c.   Vinyl, self-adhesive numerals are acceptable.
      2.   All numerals in the address display must be maintained in a clearly
legible condition.
      3.   Mailbox and its support must be maintained in good condition, able
to withstand weather conditions and snow plowing activity. The village or its
snow plowing contractors shall not be responsible to replace or repair any
mailbox in poor condition that is damaged during normal snow plowing
activities.
   B.   Homeowners shall not plant trees in the village right of way without a
permit and approval of the village.
   C.   All shrubs and bushes shall be set back a minimum distance of fifteen
feet (15') from the edge of pavement unless used as a screen around utility
boxes and mailboxes and is kept at a height of three feet (3') or less.
   D.   All stones placed at the edge of pavement must be flush with the edge
of pavement.
   E.   All driveway abutments, ribbons, riprap and other enhancements shall be
set level with the driveway pavement, edge of roadway and existing grades when
placed in the right of way.
   F.   1.   Rigid markers including metal pipes, conduit, stakes, posts, and
the like, shall not be allowed within any right of way; provided, however, that
flexible markers shall be allowed as seasonal markers for snowplowing along the
edge of pavement when installed after November 15 and removed before April 30.
      2.   Flexible markers may be used to protect newly planted grass at edge
of road pavement.
   G.   No landscaping, landscape features or structures that restrict clear
visibility, measured along the edge of pavement, to less than one hundred feet
(100') shall be allowed within any right of way.
   H.   A three foot (3') wide strip of hard surface made of the same material
as the edging, such as asphalt or concrete, may be placed between the edge of
the road pavement and the bricks or pavers. The village will not be responsible
for any damage done to bricks or pavers within three feet (3') of the road
pavement due to snowplowing and road maintenance.
   I.   All existing masonry mailboxes and monuments located in the village
right of way are in violation of existing village ordinance. Owners must remove
the non-compliant structures and restore the village right of way to grass or
provide the village with the following:
      1.   An indemnification agreement to be provided by the village, holding
the village, its employees, officers, agents and elected officials harmless and
indemnified from any and all property damage, personal injury, costs, including
attorney fees, resulting directly or indirectly from the construction and/or
maintenance of any brick, masonry or concrete mailbox structures located in any
village right of way. The agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Cook
County recorder of deeds. At the time of delivery of the indemnification
agreement, the property owner shall submit a fee of seventy five dollars
($75.00) to the village. This fee shall cover all administrative and recording
costs related to the indemnification agreement and shall be in addition to any
other fees associated with the permit application processes of the village; and
      2.   The property owner served by the mailbox and or driveway monument
shall secure and maintain a liability insurance policy in the amount of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) naming the Village of South Barrington as
additional insured.
   J.   Any existing masonry mailboxes and/or driveway monument structures in
the village right of way that are destroyed for any reason or removed by the
owner cannot be rebuilt in the village right-of-way. (Ord. 2016-1144, 11-10-
2016; amd. Ord. 2020-1222, 2-13-2020; Ord. 2020-1249, 10-8-2020)
7-3-4: PENALTY:
Any person or other entity violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day that the
violation continues to exist. (Ord. 0-92-406, 9-10-1992; amd. Ord. 2020-1222,
2-13-2020)
CHAPTER 4
ROAD REPAIR AND INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE PROGRAM
SECTION:
7-4-1: Fund
7-4-2: Program Established
7-4-1: FUND:
A road repair and infrastructure maintenance fund is established for the
village. Such fund is to be used to maintain, repair or replace roads, swales
and infrastructure within the village. No more than twenty five percent (25%)
of the balance of such fund existing on the first day of any fiscal year may be
expended during such fiscal year for improvements located within any one
subdivision. (Ord. 0-2003-695, 10-9-2003)
7-4-2: PROGRAM ESTABLISHED:
The village shall establish a repair and maintenance program for roads, swales
and infrastructure within the village. Each fiscal year the village shall
appropriate sufficient amounts to be transferred into the road repair and
infrastructure maintenance fund from the general fund and the motor fuel tax
fund to fund the repair and maintenance program for that fiscal year. (Ord. 0-
2003-695, 10-9-2003)
CHAPTER 5
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
7-5-1: Purpose And Scope
7-5-2: Definitions
7-5-3: Annual Registration Required
7-5-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
7-5-5: Action On Permit Applications
7-5-6: Effect Of Permit
7-5-7: As Built Drawings
7-5-8: Insurance
7-5-9: Indemnification
7-5-10: Security
7-5-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
7-5-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
7-5-13: General Construction Standards
7-5-14: Traffic Control
7-5-15: Location Of Facilities
7-5-16: Construction Methods And Materials
7-5-17: Vegetation Control
7-5-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
7-5-19: Cleanup And Restoration
7-5-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
7-5-21: Variances
7-5-22: Penalties
7-5-23: Enforcement
7-5-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village
rights of way and the village as a whole.
   B.   Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights of way in the village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, parkways
and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that
characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights of way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   C.   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of
way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement.
   D.   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village
rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
   E.   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   F.   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   G.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   H.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person, company or utility applying for a permit under this
chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside
Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the village of South Barrington.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a
right of way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
village administrator to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life,
health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility
notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections
7-5-4 and
7-5-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, natural gas or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, parkway, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include
any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures
and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated
in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
7-5-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications"
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end
to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications
act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or
cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable
to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the
federal communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as
now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined
in this chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable
and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201(v).
VILLAGE: The village of South Barrington.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR: The village administrator or his or her designee.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The village engineer, the village's consulting engineer, or
his or her designee.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 2008-848,
3-13-2008)
7-5-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village shall register on
January 1 of each year with the village administrator, providing the utility's
name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of
one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection
with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a
twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of
insurance as required in section
7-5-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. Failure to
register as an occupant of the right of way under this section shall constitute
cause for the village to deny any and all permit applications for further
construction or renovation of facilities in the right of way. (Ord. 2008-848,
3-13-2008)
7-5-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village
right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new
facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first
filing an application with the village administrator and obtaining a permit
from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No
permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the
right of way.
   B.   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made
by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
         a.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
7-5-8 of this chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section
7-5-10 of this chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
7-5-21 of this chapter);
      10.   The applicant shall certify that it has registered as an occupant
of the right of way as required by section
7-5-3 of this chapter;
      11.   If the application is made by a duly authorized representative of
the utility, said representative shall submit documentation that it has the
contractual authority to act on behalf of the represented utility; and
      12.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   D.   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control and other local or state entities with
jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   E.   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the village within thirty (30) days
after the change necessitating the amendment.
   F.   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is
paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act, or pursuant to any existing
franchise, license or other authority. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the village
administrator within a reasonable time after filing and forwarded to the
village engineer for further review and recommendations. If the application
does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules, and regulations, the village engineer shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the village engineer and the village
administrator are satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements
of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
the village engineer shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In
all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the village administrator, that the construction proposed under
the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   B.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The
telecommunications retailer and the village shall reach a mutual agreement as
to which portions of the right of way upon which the facility may be placed,
used and constructed, prior to the commencement of any construction.
      2.   Upon the determination of such mutually agreed upon locations by the
village and utility, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section
7-5-4 of this chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the
village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this
section.
   C.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable
and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village,
provided the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances, and
regulations. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights of way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
   B.   Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   C.   Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant
to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the
permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held
at a date, time and place designated by the village with such village
representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The meeting shall
be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing
special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including,
without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area
and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of
rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by
adjacent property owners. The village engineer at his discretion may waive the
required preconstruction meeting as described in this section.
   D.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-7: AS BUILT DRAWINGS:
Within sixty (60) days after the completion of construction, the permittee
shall furnish the village with one set of as built plans on Mylar, and three
(3) copies thereof on sheets of twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x
36"), drawn at a scale of one inch to twenty feet (1":20') and certified to the
village as accurately depicting the location of all facilities constructed
pursuant to the permit. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-8: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
subsections A1 and A2 of this section:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and
subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors
shall comply with this section.
   B.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may
be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   C.   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
   D.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the Village President and Village Administrator of
such intent to cancel or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no
event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   E.   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections
B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide
to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to
self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
subsection A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private
self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
   F.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   G.   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois.
All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-
2008)
7-5-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-10: SECURITY:
   A.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in
an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   B.   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in
the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the
state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   C.   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the village administrator, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the village
administrator may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
   D.   Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   E.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security
fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection C of this section.
   F.   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection C of this section.
   G.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   H.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-
13-2008)
7-5-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way
to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to
the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time
periods provided in this subsection.
   D.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of
this section.
   E.   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the village or
its designee may, at the option of the village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right of way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right
of way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 2008-848,
3-13-2008)
7-5-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
      1.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm.
code section 545);
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
   B.   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the village engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the village engineer shall state which standard or principle will
apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future.
   C.   Identification: All personnel working at any construction site in the
village on the behalf of a utility shall carry identification cards and copies
of all required permits for the execution of said construction. All
identification cards shall identify the laborer's employer and the utility by
which he or she has been contracted to perform the construction services. (Ord.
2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights of way.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   D.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
7-5-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
   E.   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall
be placed in any location if the village engineer determines that the proposed
location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's
utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
      2.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right of
way.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
      5.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   B.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line
and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right of way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right of way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right of way line or as near as practicable.
   C.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83
Ill. adm. code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
(1989)).
   D.   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   E.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right of way.
      2.   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right of way to be screened from view.
   F.   Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   G.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   H.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
   I.   Alternative Location Determined By Village Engineer: Notwithstanding
any other provision set forth in this section to the contrary, the village
engineer, in his or her professional discretion, may determine alternative
locations for the placement of utility facilities based on sound engineering
principles and judgement, and such other applicable standards set forth in this
section, other than the location(s) requested by an applicant. (Ord. 2008-848,
3-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2021-1265, 3-11-2021)
7-5-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the village
engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be
excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking
operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and
protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced,
and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads
that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction".
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the village engineer.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         c.   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the village engineer, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any
pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and
properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk,
curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the village
engineer.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is
permitted under section
7-5-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the village engineer.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                         Minimum Cover
Electric lines                           30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service    24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by
lines                                    village)
Gas or petroleum products                30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                               Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                         protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer or drainage  Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                     protection
 
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the
national electrical safety code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national
electrical safety code.
         d.   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of
pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 -
transportation of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety
standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the village engineer. With the approval of the
village administrator, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in
place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances
shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the
right of way without the prior written approval of the village administrator.
When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or
other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to
right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and other property. If
material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from
the village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the village administrator when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction
are between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. Central Standard Time and seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M. Central Standard Time.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights
of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or
by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act 1 . (Ord. 2008-
848, 3-13-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
7-5-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the village as permitted by law.
   B.   Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   C.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   D.   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the village administrator that such spraying is the only practicable method
of vegetation control. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or
upon, the rights of way.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within
ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the village
administrator determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not
direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice
of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to
consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by
another utility or person. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way
are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the
utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the village engineer. Such cleanup and repair
may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or
any other requirement to restore the right of way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The
time period provided in this section may be extended by the village
administrator for good cause shown. All pavement repairs shall be done in the
presence of a village inspector. Repairs done without inspection are not
permitted and will require replacement. Plans for restoration and repair of all
sites shall be required at the filing of the permit application for assessment
by the village administrator. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
village administrator or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-21: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the village
administrator as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The village administrator shall decide
whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified
in the variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The village administrator may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   D.   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the village administrator may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or
may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
   E.   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the village
administrator under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to
appeal to the village board, or such other board or commission as it may
designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the
village clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order,
requirement, decision or determination. The village board shall commence its
consideration of the appeal at the board's next regularly scheduled meeting
occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The village
board shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. Persons who violate, disobey, omit,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that the
violation is ongoing shall be considered a new offense and a new citation shall
be issued. The village shall not impose fines in excess of twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) per occurrence. There may be times when the village will
incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility
will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless
the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the village's costs of
damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
7-5-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-848, 3-13-2008)
CHAPTER 6
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY CONSTRUCTION IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
7-6-1: Purposes And Scope
7-6-2: Definitions
7-6-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
7-6-4: Collocation Requirements And Conditions
7-6-5: Application Fees
7-6-6: Exceptions To Applicability
7-6-7: Pre-Existing Agreements
7-6-8: Annual Recurring Rate
7-6-9: Obsolescence, Abandonment, And Removal
7-6-10: Dispute Resolution
7-6-11: Indemnification
7-6-12: Insurance
7-6-13: Stealth, Concealment And Aesthetic Standards
7-6-1: PURPOSES AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purposes: The purposes of this Chapter are to:
      1.   Establish regulations, standards, and procedures for the siting and
collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's
jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village
exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent
with the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (50 ILCS 840/1 et seq.) while
minimizing the visual impacts associated with small wireless facilities; and
      2.   Encourage creative approaches in locating and designing small
wireless facilities that blend in with the surroundings of such facilities;
   B.   Goals: The goals of this Chapter are to:
      1.   Encourage the collocation of small wireless facilities while
minimizing the total number of wireless support structures throughout the
Village;
      2.   Encourage the joint-use of new and existing wireless support
structures;
      3.   Encourage small wireless providers to locate small wireless
facilities, to the extent feasible, at locations where the adverse visual
impact on the neighborhoods of the Village is significantly minimized;
      4.   Encourage small wireless providers to configure small wireless
facilities in ways that minimize the adverse visual impact of the wireless
support structures; and
      5.   Enhance the ability of the small wireless service provider to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently.
   C.   Interpretation: The provisions of this Chapter shall be interpreted and
applied in order to comply with the provisions of the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act, 50 ILCS 840/1, et seq.
   D.   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This Chapter supersedes all ordinances
or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto, that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
   E.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
Chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
Chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal and state laws
or regulations. (Ord. 0-2018-1186, 7-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-1226, 3-11-2020)
7-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
 
                  Communications equipment that transmits or receives
ANTENNA:          electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision
                  of wireless services.
                  Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
APPLICABLE CODES: codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or
                  local amendments to those codes, including the National
                  Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT:        Any person who submits an application and is a wireless
                  provider.
                  A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a
                  permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request
APPLICATION:      that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such
                  collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of
                  such application.
 
COLLOCATE OR   To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities
COLLOCATION:   on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole.
               Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6), as amended; information
COMMUNICATIONS service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as amended; telecommunications
SERVICE:       service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as
               defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than
               mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5), as amended; a provider of
SERVICE        information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as amended; a
PROVIDER:      telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(51), as amended; or
               a wireless provider.
FCC:           The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE:           A one-time charge.
               A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites
               that are either (i) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or
               formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National
               Register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal
HISTORIC       agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National
DISTRICT OR    Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of
HISTORIC       the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C;
LANDMARK:      or (ii) designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or
               historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a
               preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local
               Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where
               such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic
               Preservation Office is pending.
LAW:           A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or
               local ordinance or resolution.
                         A small wireless facility that is no larger in
                         dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length,
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: fifteen inches (15") in width, and twelve inches (12")
                         in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any,
                         no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE:  A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in
                         public rights-of-way.
                         A written authorization required by the Village to
PERMIT:                  perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a
                         project.
                         An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
PERSON:                  partnership, association, trust, or other entity or
                         organization.
                         The functional division of the federal government, the
                         state, a unit of local government, or a special
                         purpose district located in whole or in part within
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY:    this state, that provides or has authority to provide
                         firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
                         emergency services to respond to and manage emergency
                         incidents.
RATE:                    A recurring charge.
                         The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
RIGHT-OF-WAY:            highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility
                         easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way
                         does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
                         A wireless facility that meets both of the following
                         qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an
                         enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume
                         or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
                         elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements
                         could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more
                         than six (6) cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless
                         equipment attached directly to a utility pole
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: associated with the facility is cumulatively no more
                         than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The
                         following types of associated ancillary equipment are
                         not included in the calculation of equipment volume:
                         electric meter, concealment elements,
                         telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based
                         enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
                         switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
                         the connection of power and other services.
 
UTILITY POLE   A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications
(OR POLE):     service provider, and for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a
               similar function.
               Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user
               equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated with
               wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or
               fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment,
WIRELESS       regardless of technological configuration. “Wireless facility” includes small
FACILITY:      wireless facilities. “Wireless facility” does not include: (i) the structure or
               improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii)
               wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between
               wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber-optic cable
               that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an
               antenna.
               Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the state that
WIRELESS       builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless
INFRASTRUCTURE facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a
PROVIDER:      wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a
               wireless services provider for the application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS       A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
PROVIDER:
               Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of
WIRELESS       customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or
SERVICES:      unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using
               wireless facilities.
WIRELESS
SERVICES       A person who provides wireless services.
PROVIDER:
 
           A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-
WIRELESS   supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to
SUPPORT    support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. “Wireless support
STRUCTURE: structure” does not include a utility pole. (Ord. 0-2018-1186, 7-12-2018; amd.
           Ord. 2020-1226, 3-11-2020)
 
7-6-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except for applications
including requested variations from the requirements of this Chapter as
specified herein, and not subject to zoning review or approval if they are
collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or (ii) outside rights-
of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
   B.   Permit Required: No person shall place, construct, reconstruct or
modify a small wireless facility within the Village without a permit. An
applicant shall obtain one (1) or more permits from the Village to collocate a
small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and
permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
      1.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the Village, together with the Village's small
wireless facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit
application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or
wireless support structure:
         a.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, that
includes addressing the acceptability of the site for factors such as pole
loading from existing utility equipment and conductors as well as the small
wireless facility, and that specifically includes evaluations pursuant to
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards relating to heavy loads
and wind;
         b.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This shall include a photo simulated
depiction of the completed facility;
         c.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed, to include dimensional details of small
wireless facilities and mounting hardware used to attach equipment to the
utility pole or small wireless support structure;
         d.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         e.   To the extent commercially available, technologically compatible
with the local network system, and already used in its national or regional
wireless network system, the wireless provider is required to install small
wireless facilities with antenna and other equipment that have the smallest
visual profile;
         f.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
         g.   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions stated in section
7-6-4 of this chapter, to the best of the applicant's knowledge;
         h.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation;
         i.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned the Village, the wireless provider shall be
required to enter into a pole usage agreement pursuant to division B2e;
         j.   Specific designation of any proposed small wireless facility as
an "eligible facility request", as that term is defined in the Federal
Telecommunications Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1455;
         k.   Information on whether a pre-application review was conducted
with Village staff. It is recommended that applicants arrange a review of the
proposed location and design of small wireless facilities and new wireless
support structures with the Village Engineer and other applicable staff prior
to application. Such review does not constitute approval, but is instead
designed to promote administrative efficiency by identifying existing utility
conflicts and other issues that might be readily identified and/or resolved by
communication between the applicant and Village staff;
         l.   A written affidavit signed by a radio frequency engineer
certifying the small wireless facility's compliance with applicable FCC rules
and regulations relative to radio frequency emissions, as well as technical
data such as the frequencies in use, power output levels and antenna
specifications, reasonably necessary to evaluate compliance with maximum
permissible exposure levels set by the FCC, as well as a monitoring plan for
the applicant's facility capable of tracking and recording the daily amounts or
levels of radio frequency emissions produced by the equipment, in order to
verify on an ongoing basis that the small wireless facility will not exceed
applicable FCC rules and regulations;
         m.   Proof of all applicable licenses or other approvals required by
the FCC;
         n.   A written report that analyzes acoustic levels for the small
wireless facility and all associated equipment including, without limitation,
all environmental control units, sump pumps, temporary backup power generators
and, and permanent backup power generators in order to demonstrate compliance
with applicable Village noise regulations, including, but not limited to,
section
7-6-13 of this chapter. The acoustic analysis must be prepared and certified by
an engineer and include an analysis of the manufacturers' specifications for
all noise-emitting equipment and a depiction of the proposed equipment relative
to all adjacent property lines. In lieu of a written report, the applicant may
submit evidence from the equipment manufacturer that the ambient noise emitted
from all the proposed equipment will not, both individually and cumulatively,
exceed the applicable limits;
         o.   Information showing the small wireless facility has received any
required review (for example, environmental assessment and review) by the FCC
pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act ("NEPA"), or is exempt from
such requirements. If the applicant claims the small wireless facility is
exempt, it must state the basis for the exemption and provide proof, including
supporting documents that establish that the facility meets such exemption;
         p.   A written description and/or map identifying the geographic
service area for the small wireless facility;
         q.   A sample of the proposed notice to be mailed pursuant to
subsection C, below, and a list of intended recipients (including content and
mailing envelope);
         r.   For work in the public right-of-way, evidence of posting of the
security fund as required in section
7-5-10;
         s.   Where installation is proposed in right-of-way, as defined in
this Chapter, that consists of an "easement for compatible use", a certified
copy of the original easement documents and other supporting documentation
demonstrating that the applicant has the right to install, mount, maintain and
remove a small wireless facility and associated equipment in or on the easement
for the length of the permit. If the applicant is claiming access to the
easement as an assignee or successor in interest, the applicant shall, in
addition, provide documents demonstrating that its assigned or successor rights
in the easement are sufficient to allow it to install, mount, maintain and
remove the small wireless facility and associated equipment for the length of
the permit;
         t.   Applicants are required to include with any application a master
plan which identifies the location of the proposed small wireless facility in
relation to all existing and potential locations in the Village that are
reasonably anticipated for construction within two (2) years of submittal of
the application; and
         u.   All other documentation and materials identified in section
7-5-4 entitled "Permit required - Applications and fees."
      2.   Application Process: The Village shall process applications as
follows:
         a.   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         b.   (1)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to
approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of
a completed application.
            (2)   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed
application.
            (3)   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the
ninetieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day
after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of
the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this Chapter.
         c.   (1)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or
deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission
of a completed application.
            (2)   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed
application.
            (3)   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the one
hundred twentieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth
day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt
of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the
permit request within the time limits as provided under this Chapter.
         d.   (1)   The Village shall deny an application which does not meet
the requirements of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, sections
7-6-4 and
7-6-13 of this Chapter.
            (2)   If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances,
or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions stated in section
7-6-4 of this Chapter require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
            (3)   The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including
the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
Village denies an application.
            (4)   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the
Village and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after
notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional
application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application
within thirty (30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is
deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30)
days of denial shall require the application to submit a new application with
applicable fees, and recommencement of the Village's review period. The
applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed with
the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with
the revised application.
            (5)   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
         e.   Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an
approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility
pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment
agreement provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a municipal
utility pole by the applicant. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on
a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the Village and the
applicant shall enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment
agreement.
      3.   Completeness Of Application:
         a.   Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the
Village shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the
applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically
identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if
the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30)
days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the
Village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the
Village.
         b.   Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends
the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
      4.   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         a.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
Village; or
         b.   A local, state, or federal disaster declaration, or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      5.   Consolidated Applications:
         a.   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities
within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at the applicant's
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities if the
collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless
facility and substantially the same type of structure.
         b.   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities,
the Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the
application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which
incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for
consolidated treatment or that are denied. The Village may issue separate
permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
      6.   Duration Of Permits:
         a.   The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than
five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless
the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or
modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village codes or any
provision, condition or requirement contained in this Chapter.
         b.   If the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act is repealed as
provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the
applicable Village Code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of
renewal.
      7.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal
delivery at the Village's designated place of business, or by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail.
   C.   Notice: Within three (3) business days of submission of an application
containing all information required by this Chapter and any associated
regulations, an applicant, at its sole cost and expense, shall provide written
notice, by first class United States mail, to the owners and occupants of all
real property at the addresses on file with the United States Postal Office,
and the residential manager for any multi-family dwelling unit that includes
ten (10) or more units at the manager's business mailing address, any part of
which is located within a two hundred and fifty foot (250') radius of the
location of the applicant's proposed small wireless facility. Such notice shall
be in a form provided by the Village, as may be revised from time to time, and
shall be clearly marked as a notification of proposed small wireless facility
installation, identify the applicant and wireless provider(s) who will utilize
the facility, and include a plain language description of the proposed
facility, photo simulations or illustrations depicting the proposed wireless
facility, and the address where comments may be sent to the wireless provider
and Village Administrator within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of the
notice. The applicant shall supplement its application with proof of mailing of
required notices no less than two calendar (2) days after mailing of the
notices. (Ord. 0-2018-1186, 7-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-1226, 3-11-2020)
7-6-4: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, but a reservation of
space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the
Village reasonably determines that the municipal utility pole cannot
accommodate both uses.
   B.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair, and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition,
and good repair and compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
Chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations. The wireless provider shall
maintain each small wireless facility or small wireless support structure under
their control to the standards imposed by the Village under this Chapter at the
time of the granting of its permit. Such maintenance shall include, but shall
not be limited to, maintenance of the paint, structural integrity, and
landscaping. If the small wireless provider fails to maintain the small
wireless facility or small wireless support structure, the Village may
undertake the maintenance at the expense of the small wireless provider, or
terminate the provider's permit at the Village's sole option.
   C.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies:
      1.   The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities
shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for
public safety communications.
      2.   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the
type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public
safety agency's communications equipment.
      3.   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
      4.   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC,
including 47 CFR Parts 22.970 through 22.973 and 47 CFR Parts 90.672 through
90.675.
      5.   The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility
based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with
the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
   D.   1.   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless
facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution
or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole
or the electric supply zone of the pole.
      2.   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
      3.   For purposes of this section, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   E.   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local
code provisions, or regulations that concern public safety.
   F.   The wireless provider shall comply with generally applicable written
stealth, concealment, and aesthetic standards that are set forth in a section
7-6-13 of this Chapter.
   G.   Alternate Placements:
      1.   Except as provided in this section, a wireless provider shall not be
required to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole,
or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna
systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for
the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility
pole, the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on
an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one
hundred feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall
accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms
and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose
technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
      2.   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits, or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
   H.   Height Limitations:
      1.   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support structure on
which the small wireless facility is collocated.
      2.   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on
which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
         b.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
   I.   Height Exceptions: If an applicant proposes a height for a new or
replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the small
wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a
variation in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in
section
11-3 "Variations" of the zoning ordinance.
   J.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   K.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply
with section
7-5-15 entitled "Location of Facilities" concerning the location of ground-
mounted equipment located in the right-of-way. If an applicant proposes a
facility to be located in the public right-of-way which would not comply the
requirements of section
7-5-15, the applicant shall apply for a variation in conformance with
procedures, terms, and conditions set forth in section
11-3 entitled "Variations" of the zoning ordinance.
   L.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
section
7-5-15 entitled "Location of Facilities" concerning the location of facilities
in the right-of-way and prohibiting certain above-ground facilities. If an
applicant proposes an above-ground facility to be located in the public right-
of-way which would not comply the requirements of section
7-5-15, the applicant shall apply for a variation in conformance with
procedures, terms, and conditions set forth in section
11-3 entitled "Variations" of the zoning ordinance.
   M.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Village utility pole
or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   N.   Cooperation With Other Small Wireless Service Providers: As a condition
of any permit for installation of a new pole, small wireless support structure,
or other above-ground facility granted pursuant to this Chapter, permittees
shall be required to cooperate with other small wireless providers in
collocating additional small wireless facilities on poles and small wireless
support structures owned by the permittee, provided that such proposed
additional small wireless provider been issued permits for that location by the
Village as described herein. All permittees shall exercise good faith in
collocating other small wireless providers regarding sharing of the permitted
site, provided that such shared use does not give rise to a substantial
technical level of impairment of the ability to provide the permitted use (for
example, significant interference in broadcast or reception capabilities as
opposed to a competitive conflict or financial burden). Such good faith shall
include sharing technical information to evaluate the feasibility of sharing
utility poles or small wireless infrastructure. In the event that a dispute
arises as to whether a permittee has exercised good faith in accommodating
other users, the Village may require a third-party technical study at the
expense of the applicant, the permittee, or both.
   O.   Radio Frequency Compliance: Wireless providers shall comply with the
FCC's radio frequency emissions standards at all times. Wireless providers are
required to perform on-going monitoring of small wireless facilities to ensure
all equipment continues to operate within allowable FCC radio frequency
emission ranges and shall, on a quarterly basis, provide to the Village a
certification with supporting information confirming whether all of the
wireless provider's small wireless facilities within the Village operated in
compliance with all FCC radio frequency emission limits during the quarterly
reporting period. The certified quarterly report shall be delivered to the
Village Administrator by the thirtieth of the month following the end of the
calendar quarter. A wireless provider shall, upon request of the Village at any
time, perform radio frequency testing of all or specific small wireless
facilities, provide such testing results to the Village, and shall promptly
respond to all Village requests for information and/or cooperation with respect
to any of the foregoing. Village staff may, at the Village's option, accompany
the wireless provider or its agents in the performance of such testing. The
Village has the right, but not the obligation, to employ a qualified radio
frequency engineer to conduct annual random and unannounced testing of
permitted small wireless facilities to determine their compliance with all FCC
radio frequency emission limits. In the event the Village decides to perform
its own testing, the wireless provider shall allow the Village or its designee
to have supervised access to the areas near the small wireless facility for
inspections and field measurements. Any small wireless facility found not to
comply with FCC radio frequency emission standards shall be immediately
reported by the wireless provider to the FCC, with a copy of such report sent
at the same time to the Village Administrator, and shall be powered-down,
adjusted, repaired, and/or replaced, or shut off and/or removed by the wireless
provider within three (3) calendar days of the provider becoming aware of the
violation. Small wireless facilities that exceed the FCC's radio frequency
emissions standards are declared a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated
by the Village. Failure by a wireless provider to cure a shall result in a
revocation of the applicable small wireless facility permit, and/or a citation
for maintaining a public nuisance with a fine in the amount of seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00), with each day of continued operation without cure
being a separate violation. In the event the Village determines a small
wireless facility is not in compliance with any legal requirements or
conditions related to radio frequency, the wireless provider shall, in addition
to the foregoing, be responsible for all costs and expenses incurred by the
Village in connection with the investigation, testing, enforcement and/or
remediation of such noncompliance.
   P.   Annual Certification: Each year on July 1, a wireless provider shall
submit an affidavit to the Village which shall list, by location, all small
wireless facilities it owns within the Village, and shall certify (1) each such
installation remains in use; (2) such in-use facility remains covered by
required insurance; and (3) each such installation which is no longer in use.
Any small wireless facility that is no longer in use shall be removed by the
wireless provider within thirty (30) calendar days of delivery of the
affidavit.
   Q.   Utility Worker Safety: Prior to the commencement of construction of a
small wireless facility, the wireless provider must provide the Village with
any required safety precautions for individuals working on or near the facility
site. If refresher training, personal protective equipment, or tools are
required for safety purposes related to a small wireless facility collocated on
a Village-owned utility pole, then the wireless provider must reimburse the
Village for all of its actual costs of those elements. (Ord. 0-2018-1186, 7-12-
2018; amd. Ord. 2020-1226, 3-11-2020)
7-6-5: APPLICATION FEES:
Application fees are imposed as follows:
   A.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one (1) small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
   B.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole or new replacement pole for
such collocation.
   C.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local ordinance,
applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required
application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
   D.   The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
      1.   Routine maintenance;
      2.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that
are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement
and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment
consistent with section
7-6-3B1d; or
      3.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement
of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
   E.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures. (Ord. 0-2018-1186, 7-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-1226, 3-11-2020)
7-6-6: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:
Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless
facilities on:
   A.   Property owned by a private party, property owned or controlled by the
Village or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-
of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without
the consent of the property owner;
   B.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government, as provided by the Illinois Highway Code;
   C.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
   D.   For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning
given to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in
this Chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement (a)
to obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable service or
video service or (b) to obtain any required permission to install, place,
maintain, or operate communications facilities other than small wireless
facilities subject to this Chapter. (Ord. 0-2018-1186, 7-12-2018; amd. Ord.
2020-1226, 3-11-2020)
7-6-7: PRE-EXISTING AGREEMENTS:
Existing agreements between the Village and wireless providers that relate to
the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the
collocation of small wireless facilities on Village owned utility poles, that
are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless
facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination
provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall
comply with this Chapter. (Ord. 0-2018-1186, 7-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-1226, 3-
11-2020)
7-6-8: ANNUAL RECURRING RATE:
A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to
collocate a small wireless facility on a Village owned utility pole located in
a right-of-way that equals (i) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or (ii)
the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use
of space on the Village utility pole. If the Village has not billed the
wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars
($200.00) payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the
issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual
anniversary date thereafter. (Ord. 0-2018-1186, 7-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-1226,
3-11-2020)
7-6-9: OBSOLESCENCE, ABANDONMENT, AND REMOVAL:
Any small wireless facility that is no longer needed or is not operational
shall be reported immediately by the small wireless provider to the Village
Administrator. Any obsolete or nonoperational small wireless facilities shall
be removed within ninety (90) days following notice to the Village. A small
wireless facility that is not operated or removed for a continuous period of
twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt
of written notice from the Village notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment. The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal
utility poles, or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. A wireless provider
shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or transfers small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village. Such notice shall
include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. (Ord. 0-
2018-1186, 7-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-1226, 3-11-2020)
7-6-10: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per municipal
utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 0-2018-1186, 7-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-1226, 3-11-2020)
7-6-11: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this Chapter and the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify
or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused
by the sole negligence of the Village or its employees or agents. A wireless
provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the Village
with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused,
based on the theory of liability. (Ord. 0-2018-1186, 7-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-
1226, 3-11-2020)
7-6-12: INSURANCE:
   A.   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
      1.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
      2.   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; and
      3.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits as set forth in section
7-5-8, "Insurance" of this title.
   B.   The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification
and documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility. (Ord. 0-2018-1186, 7-
12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-1226, 3-11-2020)
7-6-13: STEALTH, CONCEALMENT AND AESTHETIC STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: The purposes of this section are to:
      1.   Provide a variety of locations and options for wireless providers
while minimizing the negative visual impacts associated with small wireless
facilities;
      2.   Encourage creative approaches in locating and designing small
wireless facilities that blend in with the surroundings of such facilities;
      3.   Provide standards that comply with the Telecommunications Act of
1996 ("the Telecommunications Act") and the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act (50 ILCS 840/1 et seq.); the provisions of this section are not
intended, and shall not be interpreted, to prohibit or have the effect of
prohibiting personal wireless services as defined in the Telecommunications
Act; and
      4.   Administer the provisions of this Chapter in such a manner as not to
unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal
wireless services, as defined in the Telecommunications Act.
   B.   Site location and development of small wireless facilities shall
preserve the existing character of the surrounding buildings and landscape to
the extent consistent with the function of the proposed small wireless
facilities. All small wireless support infrastructure and poles shall be
integrated through location and design to blend in with the existing
characteristics of the site to the extent practical. Existing on-site
vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance to the existing
topography shall be minimized unless such disturbance would result in less
adverse visual impact to the surrounding area. The following provisions
establish design and concealment standards for small wireless facilities.
      1.   Building Attachment: Small wireless facilities may be mounted to a
building if the antennas do not interrupt the building's architectural theme.
To the extent possible all small wireless facilities shall be concealed within
a structure that is architecturally compatible with the existing rooftop.
Rooftop additions shall be concealed on all sides.
         a.   Small wireless facilities attached to the side or roof of
buildings shall employ a symmetrical, balanced design for all facade mounted
antennas. Subsequent deployments will be required to ensure consistent design,
architectural treatment, and symmetry when placing antennas on the structure's
exterior with any existing small wireless facilities on the same side of the
structure.
         b.   The interruption of architectural lines or horizontal or vertical
reveals is prohibited unless demonstrated to be unavoidable.
         c.   New architectural features such as columns, pilasters, corbels,
or other ornamentation that conceal antennas may be used if it complements the
architecture of the existing building.
         d.   Small wireless facilities shall utilize the smallest mounting
brackets necessary in order to provide the smallest offset from the building.
         e.   Skirts or shrouds shall be utilized on the sides and bottoms of
antennas in order to conceal mounting hardware, create a cleaner appearance,
and minimize the visual impact of the antennas. Exposed conduit, cabling, and
wiring are prohibited.
         f.   Small wireless facilities shall be painted and textured to match
the adjacent building surfaces.
         g.   All installations of small wireless facilities shall have
permission from the pole/structure owner to install facilities on such
structure.
      2.   Signs:
         a.   Small wireless facilities replicating a sign shall be subject to
the requirements of chapter 10 entitled "Signs" of the zoning ordinance. A sign
permit is required unless the small wireless facilities are placed entirely
within an existing sign.
         b.   All antennas shall be completely screened by the facade of the
sign.
         c.   All cables and conduit to and from the sign shall be routed from
within the building wall or structure upon which the sign is mounted. Cable
coverings may be allowed on the exterior of the building wall in limited
circumstances in situations where they are minimally visible and concealed to
match the adjacent building surfaces.
      3.   Existing Or Replacement Utility Poles: An existing utility pole may
be replaced or altered to accommodate small wireless facilities and related
equipment subject to the following requirements:
         a.   Replacement utility poles shall conform to any design standard
for the surrounding zoning district, subdivision, or planned development,
including, but not limited to, historic districts as defined herein and planned
unit developments as described in chapter 6A entitled "Planned Unit Development
District" of the zoning ordinance. The replacement pole shall look
substantially the same as existing poles in the surrounding zoning district,
subdivision, or planned unit development.
         b.   When no design standard is identified for a particular zoning
district, subdivision, or planned unit development, replacement poles shall
match the height, width, color, and material of the original or adjacent poles.
The maximum height of any new or replacement pole shall not exceed limits
specified in section
7-6-4H, subject to any variation requested pursuant to section
7-6-4I. The Village may, likewise, approve minor variations of up to fifty
percent (50%) of the pole width or thirty inches (30"), whichever is greater,
when housing equipment within the pole base.
         c.   Replacement poles shall be located as close as possible to the
existing pole to be replaced, and the replaced pole shall be removed.
         d.   Wherever compatible with the pole design and technologically
feasible, all equipment and cabling shall be internal to the replacement street
lighting or traffic signal standard or otherwise camouflaged to appear to be an
integrated part of a utility pole. If equipment or cabling is not proposed to
be placed internal to the replacement pole, a concealment element plan shall be
submitted in accordance with the provisions of division C.
         e.   No Illumination: Small wireless facilities shall not be
illuminated.
         f.   Generators And Backup Battery: Generators are not permitted for
small wireless facilities. All proposed battery backups must be requested
through the submittal of a concealment element plan in accordance with the
provisions of division C.
         g.   Cabinet Location And Dimensions: The equipment cabinet for small
wireless facilities shall be the smallest amount of cabinet enclosure necessary
to enclose the equipment. Disconnect switches may be located outside of the
primary equipment cabinet.
         h.   Flush-Mounting And Pole-Top Antennas: In situations when interior
concealment is demonstrated to not be possible, the small wireless facility
shall, to the full extent permitted under the state electrical code and the
utilities' requirements, be flush-mounted on the subject pole, which means
mounting directly to the pole with little to no gap other than that which may
be required for the screws/bolts, or located at the top of the pole. Canisters
attached to the top of a pole shall not exceed the diameter of the pole unless
technically required and then shall not be more than fifty percent (50%)
greater than the diameter of the pole.
         i.   Antenna Design: Where an enclosure is proposed to house an
antenna, the antenna shall be located in an enclosure of no more than six (6)
cubic feet in volume, or in case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the
antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no
more than six (6) cubic feet. No more than four (4) antennas are permitted on a
single pole and with a total volume not to exceed twenty four (24) cubic feet.
         j.   Material And Color: If interior concealment described in division
B3d is not possible, the small wireless facility shall to the maximum extent
feasible match the color of the pole and shall be non-reflective.
      4.   New Poles:
         a.   In areas of the Village in which above-ground facilities are
allowed in the public right-of-way pursuant to section
7-5-15 entitled "Location of Facilities," the installation of a new pole for
the purpose of locating small wireless facilities is permitted only when the
applicant establishes that:
            (1)   The small wireless facility cannot be located on a site
outside of the public right-of-way such as a public park, public property, or
in or on a building whether by roof or panel-mount or separate structure; and
            (2)   The small wireless facility cannot be located on an existing
pole within the public right-of-way.
         b.   The applicant shall establish the foregoing requirements by
submission of competent documentary evidence that:
            (1)   No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering plans;
            (2)   Existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small
wireless support structures are not of sufficient height to meet the
applicant's engineering requirements;
            (3)   Existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small
wireless support structures do not have sufficient structural strength to
support the applicant's proposed small wireless facility;
            (4)   The applicant's proposed small wireless facility would cause
electromagnetic interference with the existing utility poles, towers, base
stations, or small wireless facilities, or the existing utility poles, towers,
base stations, or small wireless facilities would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed small wireless facility;
            (5)   The fees, costs and contractual provisions required by the
owners of the existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small wireless
support structures to share existing space, or to adapt existing structures for
sharing space are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are
presumed to be unreasonable;
            (6)   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors which render existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small
wireless support structures unsuitable; and
            (7)   Applicants shall provide evidence that reasonable efforts to
develop an alternative location on an existing utility pole, tower, or small
wireless support structure have been made.
         c.   Any proposed new utility pole or small wireless support structure
proposed by an applicant shall comply with a preferred concealment technique as
described in division B3, or an approved concealment element plan as provided
in division C.
      5.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Standards; ADA Compliance Required: To
allow full use of the public right-of-way by pedestrians, bicycles and other
users, all ground-mounted equipment other than poles or wireless support
structures shall be housed underground in a vault meeting the Village's
construction standards. The location of wireless support structures,
replacement poles, and/or any new poles shall comply with the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA), Village construction standards, and state and federal
regulations in order to provide a clear and safe passage within the public
right-of-way.
      6.   Maximum Noise Levels: No small wireless facilities or related
equipment shall be operated to produce noise levels above forty (40) decibels
as measured from the nearest property line to which the small wireless facility
is located.
      7.   Advertising Prohibited: No lettering, symbols, images, or trademarks
large enough to be legible to pedestrian or vehicular users of the right-of-way
or other persons occupying the space in the immediate area of the small
wireless facility, utility pole, or small wireless support structure shall be
placed on or affixed to any utility pole, small wireless support structure, or
small wireless facility other than as required by Federal Communications
Commission regulations or other applicable law. Small wireless facilities
concealed within signs or billboards shall not be construed to be in violation
of this prohibition.
   C.   Concealment Element Plan:
      1.   Concealment Element Plan Required: Applications for proposed small
wireless facility installations which do not conform to a preferred concealment
technique as identified in section
7-6-13B3 shall submit a concealment element plan. The plan shall include the
design of the screening, fencing, or other concealment technology for a base
station, pole, or equipment structure, and all related transmission equipment
or facilities associated with the proposed small wireless facility.
      2.   Purpose Of Concealment Element Plan, Generally: Concealment element
plans should seek to minimize the visual obtrusiveness of proposed small
wireless facilities using methods including, but not limited to, integrating
the installation with architectural features or building design components,
utilization of coverings or concealment devices of similar material, color and
texture, or the appearance thereof, as the surface or background against which
the small wireless facility will be seen or on which it will be installed.
Other concealment element approaches may include, but not be limited to, use of
street furniture concealment products such as trash cans, benches, information
kiosks, or other types of enclosures reasonably compatible to conceal ground
level equipment. Additionally, the use of a concealment support or device, such
as a clock tower, steeple, flagpole, tree, wayfinding sign, decorative pole
with banner, art work, street sign, or other applicable concealment structure
may be approved.
      3.   Review Of Concealment Element Plan: Where a small wireless facility
is proposed that does not comply with a preferred concealment technique as
specified in division B3, a concealment element plan shall be subject to
Village review and approval in conformance with the procedures, terms and
conditions set forth in section
11-3 of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 0-2018-1186, 7-12-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-
1226, 3-11-2020)
TITLE 8
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
8-1-1: Short Title
8-1-2: Scope Of Regulations
8-1-3: Administration And Enforcement
8-1-4: Building Rules And Codes Adopted
8-1-4-1: Electrical Code
8-1-4-2: Plumbing Code
8-1-4-3: Residential Code
8-1-4-4: Nonresidential Buildings
8-1-4-5: Cook County Building Ordinance (Rep. by Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-1-4-6: Property Maintenance Code
8-1-5: Building Permit
8-1-6: Fees And Deposits
8-1-6-1: Permit, Inspection And Plan Review Fees
8-1-6-2: Deposits
8-1-6-3: Road Repair And Replacement Fund (Rep. by Ord. 0-2003-695, 10-9-2003)
8-1-6-4: Road Repair And Maintenance Tax (Rep. by Ord. 0-2003-690, 7-10-2003)
8-1-6-5: Collection Of Fees
8-1-6-6: Rebate
8-1-7: Time Limit On Construction
8-1-8: Maintenance Of Buildings Required
8-1-9: Additional Building Regulations
8-1-10: Lakes
8-1-11: Penalties
8-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter, including the rules and regulations it adopts by reference, is
entitled the BUILDING ORDINANCE and shall be referred to herein as "this
chapter". The number or letter designations used to set off or identify its
various parts refer to sections, subsections, paragraphs, rules, regulations or
other divisions as the text or arrangement may indicate. Reference to any of
these parts may be by such a designation alone. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-1971)
8-1-2: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
It is hereby required that a permit be obtained in advance and all other
requirements of this chapter be complied with whenever a building or structure
or part or appurtenance thereof, located within the limits of the village, is
erected, installed, altered, converted, remodeled, structurally repaired,
moved, demolished or its use or occupancy is established or changed. (Ord. 0-
71-12, 3-11-1971)
8-1-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Building And Zoning Officer:
      1.   Office Created; Powers And Duties: The office of building and zoning
officer is hereby created in which is vested the power and duty to administer
and enforce all the provisions of this chapter and such related regulations as
are assigned to that office by the board of trustees. That officer is meant
wherever in this chapter the term building official or building officer is
used.
      2.   Office; Appointment: The building and zoning officer shall be
appointed by the president, subject to the advice and consent of the board of
trustees.
      3.   Qualifications; Assistants: The village president shall appoint as
building and zoning officer a person who is qualified by professional or
practical training and experience to conduct the affairs and carry out the
duties of that office. The president shall also provide for the appointment of
such assistants as are needed and qualified to carry out efficiently the duties
and powers assigned to them by the board.
   B.   Supervision: The village president shall supervise and direct the
activities of the building and zoning officer and the building department of
the village and to direct and supervise the enforcement of all village
ordinances relating to the construction and alteration of buildings and other
structures within the village.
   C.   Stop Work Order: The building inspector shall have the power to order
all work stopped on construction or alteration or repair of buildings in the
village when such work is being done in violation of any provision of any
ordinance relating thereto, or in violation of the zoning ordinance. Work shall
not be resumed after the issuance of such an order except on the written
permission of the inspector; provided, that if the stop order is an oral one,
it shall be followed by a written stop order within an hour. Such written stop
order may be served by any law enforcing officer. (Ord. 0-2003-681, 4-17-2003;
amd. Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-1-4: BUILDING RULES AND CODES ADOPTED:
The previously published books or pamphlets described and referred to in this
section
8-1-4 and the administrative or building rules, regulations and standards
contained therein or described portions thereof, modified in some cases as
noted herein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. They shall
apply to those types and kinds of buildings and structures and parts and
appurtenances thereof described or listed below and in said rules. (Ord. 0-71-
12, 3-11-1971)
8-1-4-1: ELECTRICAL CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file
in the office of the building and zoning officer, being marked and designated
as the national electrical code, 1996 edition, as published by the National
Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted by reference as the electrical
code of the village for the installation of any and all electrical wiring and
devices in commercial and industrial buildings in the village, and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the national
electrical code, 1996 edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
(Ord. 0-96-498, 12-12-1996; amd. Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
   B.   Additions, Insertions And Changes:
      1.   Nonresidential Constructions: Paragraph 300-22 of article 300
entitled "Wiring Methods" of chapter 3 entitled "Wiring Methods and Material"
of the 1996 National Electrical Code as applied to nonresidential construction
is hereby deleted and replaced by the following local provision:
         300-22 Wiring in Ducts, Plenums and Other Air-Handling Spaces.
         a.   Ducts for Dust, Loose Stock or Vapor Removal: No wiring system or
electrical equipment of any type shall be installed in any duct, or shaft which
contains such ducts, used to transport dust, loose stock, flammable vapors or
ventilation of commercial-type cooking equipment.
         b.   Ducts or Plenums Used for Environmental Air: Electrical equipment
and devices shall be permitted with such ducts or plenum chambers only if
necessary for their direct action upon, or sensing of the contained air. In
such circumstances, the following wiring methods shall apply:
            (1)   Mineral-insulated metal-sheathed cable, rigid metal conduit
or electrical metallic tubing shall be used for connection of adjustable
equipment. Liquid tight, flexible metal conduit may also be used in lengths not
to exceed four feet (4').
            (2)   Connectors used with the above material shall effectively
close any openings in the connection or termination.
            (3)   Where equipment is installed in plenums and illumination is
necessary for proper maintenance, enclosed gasketed-type fixtures shall be
used.
         c.   Hollow Spaces Used As Ducts or Plenums: For wiring systems for
any air-handling space other than as described in subparagraph b above or as
excepted by subparagraph d below, the following wiring methods shall apply:
            (1)   Mineral insulated metal-sheathed cable, rigid metal conduit
or electrical metallic tubing shall be used for connection of fixtures required
by this Code. Flexible metal conduit may also be used in lengths not to exceed
six feet (6').
            (2)   Connectors and couplings used with the above material shall
effectively close any openings in the connection or termination.
            (3)   Junction boxes shall contain no openings other than those
used for mounting purposes.
            (4)   That part of any fixture or device which protrudes into the
air- handling space shall contain no opening.
         d.   Exceptions: The provisions of subparagraph c above are not
intended to apply to integral fan systems specifically approved for the
purpose, nor to habitable rooms or areas of any building the prime purpose of
which is not air- handling.
         e.   Data Processing Systems: The wiring systems used for data
processing systems and located in air-handling spaces created by raised floors
shall conform to the following:
            (1)   All conductors for one hundred eight (108) volts and higher
shall be enclosed in approved raceway. Cords or cables with plugs furnished
with data processing equipment may be run exposed up to four feet (4') under
raised floors to a point of connection. Low voltage communication cables of
approved non-flammable construction may be run under raised floors without
raceways or conduits.
            (2)   No wiring other than that specifically required by the data
processing system shall be installed.
            (3)   All exposed metal parts shall be grounded in accordance with
the provisions of this Code.
            (4)   Provisions for disconnecting the ventilating system serving
the data processing space and the power supply to all electrical equipment in
such space, except lighting beyond the air-handling space, shall be located
where readily accessible to the operator and at each door designated as an exit
from the data processing space.
(Ord. 0-79-134, 8-9-1979; amd. Ord. 0-95-457, 2-10-1995; Ord. 0-96-498, 12-12-
1996; Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-1-4-2: PLUMBING CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file
in the office of the building and zoning officer, being marked and designated
as the Illinois Plumbing Code, 2014 edition, as published by the Illinois
department of public health, as amended by paragraph B below or other village
ordinance, is hereby adopted by reference as the plumbing code of the village
for the design and installation of any and all plumbing systems in commercial,
industrial and residential buildings in the village, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Illinois
Plumbing Code, 2014 edition, as amended by paragraph B below or other village
ordinance, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this section.
   B.   Additions, Insertions And Changes:
      1.   Overhead Plumbing: All new buildings with basements, floors, rooms
or occupancy areas below ground level at the building site and served by a
public or private sewer system, shall have overhead plumbing. No building
permit application shall be accepted nor any permits issued for construction of
any structure unless plans and specifications therefor provide for overhead
plumbing as called for in this subsection.
      2.   Footing Drains: Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps for
further discharge into storm sewer or drainage ditches. No footing drain or
drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system.
      3.   Amendments: Section 890, appendix A - tables, "Plumbing Materials,
Equipment, Use Restrictions And Applicable Standards": The following amendments
to the table shall be made:
         Table 6, Water Distribution Pipe
         a.   Above ground - approved for use
               • Items 1, 3, 4, 6, 9
            Above ground - not approved for use
               • Items 2, 5, 7, 8
         b.   Below ground - approved for use
               • Item 3, type K copper tube with no joint connections
            Below ground - not approved for use
               • Items 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
(Ord. 0-95-457, 2-10-1995; amd. Ord. 2007-797, 1-11-2007; Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-
2018; Ord. 2021-1275, 4-20-2021)
8-1-4-3: RESIDENTIAL CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: The International Residential Code, 2018 edition,
including Appendix Chapters, as published by the International Code Council
(the "Residential Code"), three (3) copies of which are on file in the office
of the Village Clerk of the Village of South Barrington, is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as the Residential Code of the Village of South
Barrington, Illinois, for the purpose of regulating and governing the
construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family
dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three
stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided and
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes as set forth in subsection B of
this section.
   B.   Additions, Insertions, Deletions and Changes to Residential Code: The
International Residential Code is modified as set forth in a document entitled
"Additions, Insertions, Deletions and Changes to 2018 International Residential
Code - Adopted August 2018," which document will be appended to the Residential
Code and on file in the office of the Village Clerk of the Village of South
Barrington.
   C.   To the extent the Residential Code conflicts with other ordinances or
parts of ordinances adopted by the Village of South Barrington, the more
restrictive ordinance or part thereof shall govern. (amd. Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-
2018)
8-1-4-4: NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
   A.   Code Adopted: The International Building Code, 2018 edition, including
Appendix Chapters, as published by the International Code Council, three (3)
copies of which are on file in the office of the Village Clerk of the Village
of South Barrington, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as the
Nonresidential Building Code of the Village of South Barrington, Illinois
("Nonresidential Building Code"), for the purpose of regulating and governing
the construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance removal and demolition of
nonresidential buildings and those buildings not covered under the
International Residential Code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes as set forth in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Additions, Insertions, Deletions and Changes to Nonresidential Building
Code: The 2018 International Building Code is modified as set forth in a
document entitled "Additions, Insertions, Deletions and Changes to 2018
International Building Code - Adopted December 2020," which document will be
appended to the Nonresidential Building Code and on file in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of South Barrington.
   C.   Fee Schedule: The fee for each plan examination and building permit for
nonresidential buildings shall be paid in accordance with the following
schedule:
      1.   Review fees for on-site improvements, which require the review by
the village engineer for such items as water detention, drainage, waste
treatment facilities, well, and other engineering items shall be billed at cost
of the consulting village engineer plus ten percent (10%) for administrative
handling.
      2.   Review fees for architectural, landscape, and building code items
shall be as follows:
 
Plan review performed in house   Cost plus 10% for administrative handling
Plan review performed by outside Cost plus 10% for administrative handling
consultants
 
      3.   Permit fees shall be one percent (1%) of the first two hundred
thousand dollars ($200,000.00) of estimated construction costs and one-half of
one percent (0.5%) of estimated construction costs over the first two hundred
thousand dollars ($200,000.00).
      4.   Estimated construction costs shall be determined using the following
cost factors:
Types Of Space Construction Cost/Sq. Foot
Types Of Space                                  Construction Cost/Sq. Foot
Stores (shell only)                             $60.00
   (interior finish only)                    $45.00
   (finished)                                $100.00
Office research space (shell only)              $60.00
   (interior finish only)                    $45.00
   (finished)                                $100.00
Service stations                                $100.00
Restaurants                                     $100.00
Manufacturing                                   $75.00
Warehousing                                     $75.00
Underground parking facilities                  $52.50
Foundation work (for buildings being moved or   $35.00
raised)
Other uses (when permitted by zoning ordinance) Furnished upon request
 
   For determination of building permit fees, the gross floor area of each type
of space listed above shall be computed using the outside dimensions indicated
on the blueprints as submitted by the applicant.
   Basic building permit fee shall be the sum of each product which applies
from the above listing:
Plus engineering plan review fee        See section A above
Plus architectural plan review fee      See section B above
Plus well permit fee                    $100.00
Plus septic system fee                  $230.00
Plus water system connection permit fee $750.00 each connection
Plus sewer system connection permit fee $750.00 each connection
Plus driveway fee                       $30.00 each entrance
Plus culvert inspection fee (if any)    $40.00 each culvert
Plus parking lot paving fee             $0.0225 per square foot
Plus certificate of occupancy fee       $115.00
Plus lawn sprinkling system permit fee  $115.00
 
   Any review fees required by sections C shall be paid at time of application.
The building officer shall estimate the review fees and collect them prior to
any reviews. If the actual review costs differ from the estimate, the amount
shall be adjusted at time of building permit issuance.
      5.   Additional Fees:
         a.   Temporary Occupancy Fee: $115.00 plus a performance bond equal to
100% of the cost of completion of the exterior improvements as determined by
the building officer or $5,000.00, whichever is greater.
      6.   Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of
an approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding
thirty (30) days in an institution other than the penitentiary, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
      7.   Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as he is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   D.   To the extent the Nonresidential Building Code conflicts with other
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted by the Village of South Barrington,
the more restrictive ordinance or part thereof shall govern.
(Ord. 1256, 12-10-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-1260, 1-14-2021)
8-1-4-5: COOK COUNTY BUILDING ORDINANCE:
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-1-4-6: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file
in the office of the building and zoning officer, of the village of South
Barrington, being marked and designated as the 2003 international property
maintenance code, as published by the International Code Council Inc., is
hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the village of South
Barrington, in the state of Illinois, for regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such
existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code
on file in the office of the village of South Barrington are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with
the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in
subsection B of this section.
   B.   Additions, Insertions, And Changes: The international property
maintenance code is amended and revised in the following respects:
      Section 101.1 - Title: Insert the words "the village of South Barrington"
to replace the words "(name of jurisdiction)".
      Section 103.5 - Fees: This section is hereby reserved.
      Section 104 - Duties And Powers Of The Code Official: Any reference to
"code official" shall be taken to mean the building and zoning officer of the
village of South Barrington.
      Section 106.4 - Violation Penalties: Delete the phrase "shall be
prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws" and substitute
"shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven
hundred and fifty dollars ($750) for each offense".
      Section 304.14 - Insect Screens: Insert the dates "May 1st to November
1st" to replace the words "(date) to (date)".
      Section 602.3 - Heat Supply: Insert the dates "October 1st to May 1st" to
replace the words "(date) to (date)".
      Section 602.4 - Occupiable Work Spaces: Insert the dates "October 1st to
May 1st" to replace the words "(date) to (date)".
(Ord. 0-2003-696, 11-13-2003)
8-1-5: BUILDING PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct, enlarge, alter,
remodel, remove, structurally repair or demolish a building, accessory building
or structure or change the occupancy of a building from one use group to
another requiring greater strength, exitway or sanitary provisions or to change
to a prohibited use or to alter a building in any manner affecting a bearing
wall or bearing partitions, the outside walls or the roof or to install or
alter any plumbing or electrical work, or to install a driveway, or to
excavate, move, spread, shape or import more than fifty (50) cubic yards of
earth, or to install or alter any equipment for which provision is made or the
installation of which is regulated by the building ordinance of the village
without first filing an application with the building department and obtaining
the required permit therefor; except, that ordinary repairs which do not
involve any violation of the building ordinance shall be exempt from this
provision.
   B.   Construction Documents: When deemed appropriate by the village building
and zoning officer because of the proposed project scope, site topography, or
infrastructure ramifications, no building permit shall be issued for any
construction or alteration exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in
cost unless the application therefor be accompanied by construction documents
approved and sealed by a licensed architect or structural engineer, registered
in the state.
   C.   Site Plan: Whenever any work shall alter or cause or permit the
alteration of any existing land grade, contour or drainage pattern in any
manner, there shall be submitted five (5) copies of site drawings. These site
design drawings shall be signed by the author of said plans and may be required
to be sealed by an appropriate design professional registered in the state of
Illinois and at a minimum conform to the appropriate requirements described in
section
4-7-2, 905.190 of this code.
   D.   As Constructed Documents: Projects requiring site plans, after the
completion of the proposed improvements, shall be required to have as built
site plans prepared. Three (3) copies of the as built site plan shall be
submitted to the Village for review. The as built plans shall be signed by the
author of said plans and may be required to be sealed by an appropriate design
professional or land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois. The as built
plans shall accurately describe all proposed improvements. The as built grades
shall be shown to be within one-tenth of a foot (0.1') of the approved plan
unless approved in writing. The as built plan shall be approved prior to the
project receiving final approval and the return of the permit holder's
performance deposit monies. If the as built plan is not received within sixty
(60) days of receiving a conditional occupancy, the Village may have an as
built survey completed with the cost of the survey deducted from the
performance deposit. (Ord. 2013-997, 8-8-2013)
   E.   Application Fee: The following application fees are applicable to all
residential and nonresidential building permits:
Nonresidential construction, interior build-outs and additions $500.00
Residential construction and additions                         500.00
Building alteration or remodeling                              150.00
Demolition or moving of existing structure                     150.00
Re-roofing                                                     150.00
Site development                                               150.00
Swimming pool, tennis court                                    150.00
Well drilling for additional locations                         150.00
Driveway (temporary, paving, repaving, monument)               100.00
Lawn sprinkler system                                          100.00
Wood deck, gazebo                                              100.00
Septic modification                                            100.00
 
   (Ord. 0-2017-1148, 3-9-2017)
   F.   Review And Inspection Fees: Review and inspection fees for on site
improvements, site plan, or as built plan reviews, which require the review of
the Village Engineer, shall be billed at the cost of the consulting engineer
plus ten percent (10%) for administrative handling. (Ord. 2013-997, 8-8-2013)
8-1-6: FEES AND DEPOSITS:
8-1-6-1: PERMIT, INSPECTION AND PLAN REVIEW FEES:
   A.   Fees For Residential Construction:
      1.   New House Construction: The basic building permit fee shall be ten
dollars ($10.00) for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of scaled cost of
construction, or fraction thereof, with the scaled cost of construction being
determined using the following cost factors:
   Type Of SpacConstruction Cost/Square Foot
   Type Of Space             Construction Cost/Square Foot
Main house                           $95.00
Garage                               40.00
Basement:                       
   Shell only                     40.00
   Finished                       95.00
Bonus space:                    
   Shell only                     40.00
   Finished                       80.00
Screen porch                         45.00
Accessory building (when             45.00
allowed by covenant)
Foundation work (for buildings       25.00
being moved or raised)
 
For determination of building permit fees, the gross floor area of each type of
space listed above shall be computed using the outside dimensions indicated on
the blueprints as submitted by the applicant.
Basic permit fee shall be the sum of each product which applies from the above
listing plus:
Architectural plan review fee Cost plus 10 percent for administrative handling
Architectural plan review fee          Cost plus 10 percent for administrative
                                       handling
Certificate of occupancy fee           $115.00
Culvert inspection fee (if any)        40.00 each culvert
Driveway fee                           30.00 each entrance
Electrical inspection fee              175.00
Fireplace permit fee                   30.00 each opening
Lawn sprinkling system permit fee      115.00
Plumbing inspection fee                175.00
Septic system fee                      230.00
 Sewer system connection permit fee   $750.00 each connection
 Water system connection permit fee   $750.00 each connection
Site plan and septic design review fee Cost plus 10 percent for administrative
                                       handling
Well permit fee                        $75.00
 
      2.   Addition, Alteration, Finishing Or Remodeling: The scaled cost of
construction for any addition, alteration, finishing or remodeling of the above
categories of work shall be determined at the same rate as the scaled cost of
construction of the existing space would be determined if new. For proposed
work not conforming to the square foot method of calculation shown in
subsection A1 of this section, the rate of ten dollars ($10.00) for each one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of actual cost of construction, or fraction
thereof, with the actual cost of such work to be substantiated by a copy of the
signed contract(s) for such work. The Village shall have the right to
substitute its own estimated cost of construction figures when it feels those
being provided by the applicant are unrealistic.
      3.   Wood Deck:
 
Basic fee                 $ 75.00
Plan review fee           57.50
Total building permit fee $132.50
 
      4.   Gazebo:
 
Basic fee                 $ 75.00
Plan review fee           57.50
Total building permit fee $132.50
 
      5.   Tennis Court:
 
Basic fee                 $275.00
Plan review fee           57.50
Total building permit fee $332.50
 
      6.   Subdivision Entrance Structure: When required by the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals during final plat approval, a building
permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged for each entrance
gateway/identification structure indicated on the approved development plans.
Other structures to be built by the developer, other than those itemized in
subsections A3 through A6 of this section, shall be charged at the rate of ten
dollars ($10.00) for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of actual cost of
construction, or fraction thereof, with the actual cost of such work to be
substantiated by a copy of the signed contract(s) for such work.
      7.   Septic Repair; Fee: In the event a septic repair or alteration must
be made or in the event of a septic failure, the permit fee for the necessary
repair work shall be as follows:
 
                                                        Fee     Total Fee
Basic fee                                               $115.00  
Plan review fee for tank replacement                    57.50   $172.50
Plan review fee for replacement of septic system due to 300.00  415.00
failure
Plan review fee for replacement due to additions        400.00  515.00
Minor repairs to existing system                        200.00  315.00
 
The Village will also be reimbursed by the owner of the property on which said
repairs are made for any costs associated with the project, including, but not
limited to, court costs, laboratory work or expert testimony.
      8.   Temporary Driveway: The fee for a temporary driveway permit shall be
charged whenever primary or secondary access must be provided across a ditch
line to a site in conjunction with any category of building construction
indicated herein or for other purposes as the property owner may determine, as
follows:
 
Basic fee                   $30.00 each entrance
Culvert inspection (if any) 40.00 each
 
      9.   Driveway Paving/Repaving: In addition to the basic driveway permit
fee, the culvert(s), if any, must be inspected by the Village Engineer prior to
the start of any paving work. This culvert inspection shall be in addition to
any which were performed at the beginning of the project. Any paving work done
without the required culvert inspection will be done at the risk of the
contractor if it is later determined that adjustments to the pitch or elevation
of the culvert pipes are necessary.
 
Basic fee                   $30.00 each entrance
Culvert inspection (if any) 40.00 each
 
      10.   Lawn Sprinkling System:
 
Basic fee        $ 57.50
Plan review fee  57.50
Total permit fee $115.00
 
      11.   Re-Roofing:
 
Basic fee        $100.00
Plan review fee  50.00
Total permit fee $150.00
 
      12. Surcharge For Construction Without A Permit: In addition to all fees
otherwise provided for herein, a fee surcharge of fifty percent (50%), but not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), shall be assessed if construction is started before the necessary
permit(s) is obtained.
      13. Re-Inspections: Whenever re-inspection of any construction work is
required due to the failure of the work to meet the requirements of any
ordinance of the Village, a re-inspection fee of eighty five dollars ($85.00)
shall be paid to the Village prior to the performance of the re-inspection.
      14. Plan Review Fees When Payment Due: All plan review fees shall be paid
when the building permit application is submitted for review.
   B.   Fees For Nonresidential Construction 1 :
      1.   Subdivision Entrance Structure: When required by the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals during final plat approval, a building
permit fee of one hundred fifteen dollars ($115.00) shall be charged for each
entrance gateway/identification structure indicated on the approved development
plans. Other structures to be built by the developer and/or applicant,
including, but not limited to, gatehouses, waterfalls or outbuildings, shall be
charged at the rate of ten dollars ($10.00) per one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) of actual construction cost, or fraction thereof.
      2.   Surcharge For Construction Without A Permit: In addition to all fees
otherwise provided for herein, a fee surcharge of fifty percent (50%), but not
less than two hundred eighty five dollars ($285.00) nor more than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00), shall be assessed if construction is started before the
necessary permit(s) is obtained.
      3.   Re-Inspections: Whenever re-inspection of any construction work is
required due to the failure of the work to meet the requirements of any
ordinance of the Village, a re-inspection fee of eighty five dollars ($85.00)
shall be paid to the Village prior to the performance of the re-inspection.
   C.   Fees Applicable To Both Residential And Nonresidential Construction:
      1.   Moving Or Raising Existing Structure: In addition to the permit fee
for the necessary new foundation, a fee of three hundred fifty dollars
($350.00) shall be charged to permit the moving or raising of a building or
structure from one (1) lot to another or to a new location on the same lot.
      2.   Demolition Of Existing Structure: The fee for a permit for the
demolition of a building or structure shall be charged at the rate of ten
dollars ($10.00) per one hundred (100) square feet, or fraction thereof, of the
gross floor area, including basement and garage (if any), of the building or
structure being demolished.
      3.   Site Development Permit: The site development permit fee shall be
charged whenever any excavation, clearing, mining, filling, moving, spreading,
shaping, exporting or importing of more than fifty (50) cubic yards of earth,
gravel, landscaping or construction debris takes place on any parcel of
property within the Village, whether vacant or developed, and shall be charged
as follows:
Total site development permit $350.00
      4.   Removal Of Stop Work Order: Whenever a stop work order is issued by
the Building Department, due to the failure of the work to meet the
requirements of any ordinance of the Village, a reinstatement fee of fifty
seven dollars fifty cents ($57.50) shall be paid to the Village Clerk prior to
the lifting of the stop work order.
      5.   Percolation Test Fee: A fee of one hundred fifteen dollars ($115.00)
shall be charged for each percolation test witnessed by the building officer or
his representative.
   D.   Additional Fees:
 
                        $115.00 plus a performance bond equal to 100 percent of
Temporary occupancy fee the cost of completion of the exterior improvements as
                        determined by the building officer or $5,000.00,
                        whichever is greater
 
   E.   Refunds: Whenever, after application for a building permit but prior to
any building site preparation and/or construction activity, the applicant
requests that the application be withdrawn and permits issued (if any) be
revoked, the village shall issue a refund of all building permit fees paid by
the applicant, excepting, however:
      1.   Plan review fee(s).
      2.   An additional charge, when appropriate, to reimburse the village for
time spent or costs incurred other than the plan review fee.
Upon withdrawal of a building permit, the applicant can obtain, at his cost,
copies of any or all materials from the file so established by the building
department, but the actual submissions themselves shall remain the property of
the village. No refund shall be made once construction activities have
commenced. (Ord. 2013-994, 7-11-2013; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1077, 7-9-2015; Ord. 0-
2017-1148, 3-9-2017; Ord. 2024-1404, 5-9-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 8-1-4-4A2 of this chapter.
8-1-6-2: DEPOSITS:
   A.   Cash Deposit Required: Before commencing any work for which a building
permit is required, the person, builder, or developer applying for such
building permit shall make a cash deposit with the village to ensure the
completion of said work and to provide for the cost of repairing any damage to
village property for which such building permit was issued. Such deposit shall
be made in the following amounts for each building permit issued:
 
Value of work exceeding $25,000.00          $5,000.00
Value of work from $10,000.00 to $25,000.00 3,000.00
Value of work is less than $10,000.00       1,000.00
Construction of driveway only               1,000.00
Moving or demolition of building            5,000.00
Lawn sprinkling system                      1,000.00
Generator install (contractor only)         500.00
 
Except that upon a written request by a builder/developer and approval by the
building officer, a builder or developer who intends to construct not less than
twenty five (25) single-family homes on lots under single ownership in an
approved subdivision may make a lump sum cash deposit of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) for all of the single-family building permits applied for
by that builder or developer on lots under its ownership in said subdivision.
Such builder or developer must also have a valid letter of credit for the
public improvements required for said subdivision.
   B.   Payment, Retention: The cash deposit provided for herein must be paid
as follows: Fifty percent (50%) to be paid by contractor doing the work and
fifty percent (50%) to be paid by the owner. When no owner exists, as in the
case of a spec house, the owner's portion shall be paid by the contractor. The
contractor's portion of the cash deposit shall be held by the village treasurer
until all construction and restoration work is completed to the satisfaction of
both the village engineer and the building officer. The owner's portion of the
cash deposit shall be held by the village treasurer until all landscaping and
restoration work is completed to the satisfaction of both the village engineer
and the building officer.
   C.   Return: Upon the written request from the applicant or contractor for
the return of the cash deposit, and if no damage to village property resulting
from the construction work or landscaping work has been determined upon
inspection by the village engineer and/or building department, and if all
inspections have been made and all requirements arising out of those
inspections have been addressed to the satisfaction of the building department,
and if all required documentation has been submitted to complete the job file
for the subject project, the total amount of the deposit, without accrued
interest, shall be returned to the contractor. A builder or developer, who has
posted the lump sum cash deposit as provided in subsection A of this section,
may request in writing the return of said deposit, and in lieu thereof, provide
an individual cash deposit for each permit that has not been completed at the
time of the request.
   D.   Retention; Additional Deposit: In the event that damage resulting from
the construction work or landscaping work has been detected by the village
engineer and/or the building department, any or all of the deposit necessary to
effect repairs to village property shall be retained by the village and the
balance (if any) returned to the contractor pursuant to subsection C of this
section, but an applicant who continues to do work pursuant to the building
permit and/or upon whose lot landscaping work remains to be completed shall
make an additional deposit in an amount sufficient to meet the requirements of
this section. Failure to make an additional deposit as required by this
subsection, within ten (10) days after demand has been made by the village,
shall result in the revocation of the applicant's building permit, and an
immediate stop work order shall be issued.
   E.   Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00), nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed to have been committed for each day during which such
violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-2005-738, 4-14-2005; amd. Ord. 2021-
1272, 4-8-2021)
8-1-6-3: ROAD REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT FUND:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-2003-695, 10-9-2003)
8-1-6-4: ROAD REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE TAX:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-2003-690, 7-10-2003)
8-1-6-5: COLLECTION OF FEES:
Such permit and other fees as may be established by resolution of the village
board shall be collected by the building and zoning officer for deposit with
the village treasurer. (Ord. 99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-1-6-6: REBATE:
If a residential building is constructed with a fire sprinkler system, the
village shall rebate to the building permit applicant an amount equal to ten
percent (10%) of the building permit fee(s) collected by the village pursuant
to this chapter. To be eligible for such rebate, the fire sprinkler system must
comply with the requirements of this chapter. The fire sprinkler system must
comply with the specifications set forth in the BOCA national fire prevention
code, as amended from time to time. Prior to construction, the fire sprinkler
system design and plans must be reviewed and approved by the village. No rebate
shall be made prior to completion, inspection, testing and approval of the fire
sprinkler system by the village. (Ord. 0-99-561, 4-8-1999)
8-1-7: TIME LIMIT ON CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Residential Construction: Whenever any building permit is issued, the
construction contemplated by such permit shall begin within six (6) months from
the date of the issuance of such permit. In the event such construction is not
begun within said period, the building permit shall be considered null and
void, with all fees paid being retained by the village. All construction shall
be completed within twenty four (24) months of the issuance of such permit. A
six (6) month extension shall be granted should the pace of construction so
require if the construction has reached the stage that the interior gypsum
board wall surface has been installed. A six (6) month extension shall be
available at the thirty (30) month point, or at the twenty four (24) month
point should the gypsum board wall surface not be installed, at one-fourth (1/
4) of the original building permit fee should the pace of construction so
require. Without such extension, each day that construction remains incomplete
after the expiration of the twenty four (24) month period shall be deemed to be
a separate offense. (Ord. 2006-764, 4-13-2006)
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: Whenever any building permit is issued,
the construction contemplated by such permit shall begin within six (6) months
from the date of the issuance of such permit. In the event such construction is
not begun within said period, the building permit shall be considered null and
void, with all fees paid being retained by the village. All construction shall
be completed within twenty four (24) months of the issuance of such permit. A
six (6) month extension shall be available at one-half (1/2) the original
building permit fee should the pace of construction so require. Without such
extension, each day that construction remains incomplete after the expiration
of the twenty four (24) month period shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
(Ord. 0-88-310, 9-8-1988)
8-1-8: MAINTENANCE OF BUILDINGS REQUIRED:
Each regulated building, accessory building or structure, as well as any part
or appurtenance thereof, both existing and hereafter erected or installed,
shall be so maintained that the occupants and users thereof and others are
reasonably safe from the hazards of fire, explosion, collapse, contagion and
spread of infectious disease. (Ord. 0-88-309, 9-8-1988)
8-1-9: ADDITIONAL BUILDING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Windows; Floor Grade: Each room, other than a utility room, storage
room, or basement room, shall have exterior wall windows on at least one wall.
PVC (polyvinyl chloride) and vinyl framed windows shall not be permitted. The
floor level of each such room shall be not lower than the finished grade at any
such exterior wall. (Ord. 0-2018-1175, 2-8-2018)
   B.   Fire Resistant Walls: All walls and ceilings shall be constructed of
materials having a fire resistance rating of not less than forty five (45)
minutes, based on the Underwriters Laboratory Building Material list dated
January 1963.
   C.   Number Of Bathrooms: There shall be not less than one bathroom for each
two (2) bedrooms in each residential building.
   D.   Underground Wiring: No new building shall hereafter be constructed in
the Village without the furnishing of underground electric wiring and
underground telephone wiring; no overhead wiring shall be permitted to any new
building.
   E.   Guesthouse: Each guesthouse constructed or occupied in the Village
shall have water and sewage facilities, including a toilet. Each guesthouse to
be constructed shall have a maximum of five hundred (500) square feet of floor
area. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-1971)
8-1-10: LAKES:
   A.   Permit And Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to construct any
lake anywhere within the Village without complying with the terms of this
section, and without obtaining a permit therefor as herein provided.
   B.   Application For Permit: Applications for a permit shall be accompanied
by a topographical map showing the shoreline and the depth of water proposed,
test borings to show soil conditions indicating that the lake will retain water
throughout the year, and a performance bond guaranteeing that the work will be
completed in accordance with all Village ordinances. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-1971)
   C.   Fees:
      1.   Filing Fee And Engineering Review Fee: Any person applying for a
permit for the installation of a lake or pond as required by this section shall
pay, at the time of such application, a filing fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) and an engineering review fee. The amount of the engineering review
fee shall be determined by the Village official accepting the application for
the permit and shall be equal in amount to the cost to the Village of the
Village Engineer's review of the plans and specifications for the proposed lake
or pond.
      2.   Permit Fee: Prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation
of a lake or pond, the person having applied for such permit shall pay a permit
fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) for each surface acre or fraction
thereof of the proposed lake or pond. The permit fee shall not become due, and
the permit shall not be issued, until the application is approved by the
President and Board of Trustees pursuant to this section.
      3.   Reimbursement To Village For Engineering And Inspection Fees: Any
person having received a permit for the installation of a lake or pond is
hereby required to reimburse the Village for engineering and inspection costs
incurred by the Village for inspections of the proposed pond or lake. Such
reimbursement shall be made within thirty (30) days after the permittee has
received a bill for such engineering and inspection costs.
      4.   Penalties: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
subsection C shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 0-78-89, 3-9-1978)
   D.   Issuance Of Permit: Permits for lakes shall be issued by the President
and Board of Trustees.
   E.   Regulations And Restrictions On Construction Operations:
      1.   Dykes And Dams: Any dykes or dams shall be constructed in such a
manner as to hold water safely.
      2.   Hours Of Construction: No trucks used for construction of a lake
shall use Village roads, and no trucking operations shall be carried on after
the hour of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day or before the hour of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. of any day.
      3.   Littering And Storage Of Materials Prohibited: No accumulation of
litter or storage of materials shall be permitted on any premises in connection
with the construction of a lake.
      4.   Location Of Lake: No lake shall be constructed in such a location or
in such a manner as to create any danger of chemical pollution or biological
pollution of the lake water.
      5.   Seeding Of Shoreline: The shoreline must be seeded upon completion
of construction.
      6.   Time For Completion Of Work: All work shall be completed within one
year of the issuance of the permit therefor.
   F.   Inspections: All construction of lakes shall be inspected before and
during construction by a person designated by the President and Board of
Trustees for the purpose. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-1971)
   G.   Revocation Of Permit: In addition to the penalty hereinafter provided
and in addition to any civil remedy available to the Village, the President and
Board of Trustees may revoke any permit issued for the installation of a lake
or pond upon the failure of the permittee to pay any of the fees herein
provided and/or upon the failure of the permittee to conform to any applicable
ordinance of the Village. (Ord. 0-78-89, 3-9-1978)
8-1-11: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with,
or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter,
including provisions adopted by reference, or who refuses to remedy a violation
of any such provisions or to remedy a hazard of fire, explosion, collapse,
contagion or spread of infectious disease found to exist and duly ordered
eliminated, unless otherwise provided herein, shall be fined not more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-1971)
ARTICLE A. RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
8-1A-1: Definitions
8-1A-2: Minimum Planning Requirements
8-1A-2-1: Light, Ventilation and Safety
8-1A-2-2: Space Requirements
8-1A-2-3: Habitable Basement Rooms
8-1A-2-4: Porches and Terraces
8-1A-2-5: Ingress and Egress
8-1A-2-6: Ceiling Heights
8-1A-2-7: Doors
8-1A-2-8: Stairways Design and Location
8-1A-2-9: Floor Areas and Fire Walls
8-1A-2-10: Minimum Width
8-1A-2-11: Construction Within Fire Limits
8-1A-3: Minimum Construction Requirements
8-1A-3-1: General Requirements
8-1A-3-2: Foundations
8-1A-3-3: Grading and/or Drainage
8-1A-3-4: Masonry Materials
8-1A-3-5: Concrete Work
8-1A-3-6: Masonry Work
8-1A-3-7: Structural Steel and Iron
8-1A-3-8: Wood Construction
8-1A-3-9: Exterior Wall Finish
8-1A-3-10: Roof Coverings
8-1A-3-11: Flashing
8-1A-3-12: Gutters and Downspouts
8-1A-3-13: Interior Wall and Ceiling Finish
8-1A-3-14: Finish Floors
8-1A-3-15: Garages
8-1A-3-16: Septic Systems
8-1A-4: List of Reference Material
8-1A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose
of this Code, have the meanings indicated in this Section. Words used in the
present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural and
the plural the singular. Where terms are not defined in this Section, they
shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply.
APARTMENT: One or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more individuals
living together as a single housekeeping unit with cooking, living, sanitary
and sleeping facilities.
APPROVED: As to materials and types of construction, refers to approval by the
Building Official as the result of investigation and tests conducted by him, or
by reason of accepted principles or tests by national authorities, technical or
scientific organizations.
APPROVED AGENCY: An established and recognized agency regularly engaged in
conducting tests or furnishing inspection services when such agency has been
approved by the Building Official.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The officer or other designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of this Code, or his duly authorized
representative.
DEAD LOAD: The weight of all permanent construction, including walls, floors,
roofs, partitions, stairways and of fixed service equipment.
FELT: A fabric saturated with bitumen weighing up to forty five (45) pounds per
one hundred eight (108) square feet used as an underlayment or sheeting paper.
Not commonly accepted as flashing.
FIRE RESISTANCE RATING: The time in hours that the material or construction
will withstand the standard fire exposure as determined by a fire test made in
conformity with the "Standard Methods of Fire Tests of Building Construction
and Materials". See NBFU-Building Code-55.
MASONRY UNIT:
Hollow Masonry Unit: A masonry unit whose net cross- sectional area in any
plane parallel to the bearing surface is less than seventy five percent (75%)
of its gross cross- sectional area measured in the same plane.
Solid Masonry Unit: A masonry unit whose net cross- sectional area in every
plane parallel to the bearing surface is seventy five percent (75%) or more of
its gross cross- sectional area measured in the same plane.
Veneer: A facing of brick, stone, concrete, tile, metal or similar material
attached to a wall for the purpose of providing ornamentation, protection or
insulation but not counted as adding strength to the wall.
WALLS:
Bearing Wall: A wall which supports any vertical load in addition to its own
weight.
Cavity Wall: A wall built of masonry units or of plain concrete, or a
combination of these materials, so arranged as to provide an air space within
the wall, and in which the inner and other wythes of the wall are tied together
with metal ties.
Faced Wall: A wall in which the masonry facing and the backing are of different
materials and are so bonded as to exert a common reaction under load.
Foundation Wall: A wall below the floor nearest grade serving as a support for
a wall, pier, column or other structural part of a building.
Nonbearing Wall: A wall which supports no vertical load other than its own
weight. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-2: MINIMUM PLANNING REQUIREMENTS:
8-1A-2-1: LIGHT, VENTILATION AND SAFETY:
   A.   General:
      1.   Install windows in outside walls to provide natural light and
ventilation in all habitable rooms.
      2.   Windows in habitable rooms, whose areas provide the light and
ventilation necessary to comply with the following requirements, are considered
required windows. All windows in addition to these, and also windows in rooms
other than habitable rooms, are considered nonrequired windows.
      3.   The area of glazed portions of doors located in exterior walls may
be included when necessary in determining compliance with the following
requirements.
      4.   Where window or drain openings are provided below grade, protect
with metal gratings.
   B.   Habitable Rooms: A habitable room is a room designed to be used for
living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Required windows in each habitable room as
follows:
      1.   Total Glass Area: Not less than ten percent (10%) of floor area of
room.
      2.   Ventilating Area: Not less than five percent (5%) of floor area of
room.
   C.   Alcoves: An alcove is a recess connected or at the side of a larger
room.
      1.   Unless separately lighted and ventilated by windows which provide
the required window area, include any alcove adjoining a habitable room as part
of that room in computing required window area.
      2.   The common wall between the alcove and the habitable room shall
contain an opening, the area of which shall not be less than eighty percent
(80%) of the area of the entire wall on the alcove side.
   D.   Bathrooms and Water Closet Compartments: Provide ventilation by one of
the following means:
      1.   Windows or Skylight: Windows or skylights located in exterior walls
or roofs the light and vent area will not be less than three (3) square feet.
      2.   Vent in or near ceiling with continuous duct connection to outside
air.
         a.   Gravity exhaust, connect to louvered roof vent, minimum duct
dimension, three and one-half inches (31/2"); minimum area, forty eight (48)
square inches.
         b.   Mechanical exhaust, one complete air change each ten (10)
minutes.
   E.   Open Basements: Provide light and ventilation by windows or doors in
exterior walls with both glazed and ventilating area not less than two percent
(2%) of the floor area.
   F.   Utility Rooms: A utility room is a room or area, enclosed or
unenclosed, that the major housekeeping appliances, laundry facilities and
water heating devices are located. Ventilate utility room by:
      1.   Windows or doors in exterior walls with ventilating area not less
than five percent (5%) of floor area; or
      2.   Duct or ducts to outside area minimum total free area two percent
(2%) of floor area.
   G.   Heater Rooms: A heater room is an enclosed room or area where the
central heat producing device is located. Provide fixed ventilation to any
confined space which encloses heating equipment by means of ducts arranged to
supply continuous circulating air from outside. Ducts to be screened and to
have total free area equal to one square inch for each one thousand (1,000)
B.T.U. input rating of all fuel burning equipment.
   H.   Crawl Spaces: A crawlspace is an area beneath the bottom of floor
joists and the ground below.
      1.   Unheated crawlspaces, install at least four (4) foundation wall
vents located near corners of the crawlspaces having a free ventilating area
equal to 1/160 of the ground area of the crawlspace in square feet.
      2.   Heated crawl spaces, install at least two (2) foundation wall vents
located for effective cross ventilation having a free ventilating area equal to
1/1200 of the ground area of crawlspace in square feet.
      3.   No vents required for basementless spaces one side of which,
exclusive of structural supports such as piers, chimney foundations, etc., is
open to a ventilated basement, provided the total area of ventilating openings
is two percent (2%) of the sum of the basement area and the area of the
basementless space.
      4.   In each vent opening, install corrosion-resistant screening, mesh
not less than eight (8) per inch.
      5.   In crawlspaces, ground shall be covered with four inches (4") of
coarse granular material one-half inch (1/2") to five- eighths inch (5/8")
reasonably level over which a vapor smooth asphalt roofing weighing at least
fifty five (55) pounds per one hundred eight (108) square feet, (or material of
equal Perm rating) lapped four inches (4"). Extend up foundation wall six
inches (6").
   I.   Attics and Air Space Between Ceiling and Flat Roofs: Attic means the
space between the ceiling beams of the top habitable story and the roof
rafters.
      1.   Provide effective fixed ventilation in all spaces between roofs and
top floor ceilings by replaceable or nonferrous screened louvers, sixteen (16)
mesh.
      2.   Net ventilation area for each separate space to be not less than 1/
300 of area of house at top plate. Where possible, locate vents to provide
effective cross- ventilation. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-2-2: SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Room Sizes: Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, rooms
for the following uses shall meet the standards specified below:
  Min. Area Square Feet
                                                      Min. Area Square Feet
1. Living, Dining, Cooking:
 a. Living, dining and cooking, when in one room      220
  (includes area occupied by equipment).
 b. Living, dining, when in one room.                 180
 c. Living only in one room, when dining space is     160
  provided in kitchen or separate room.
  d. Kitchen, cooking only (including area occupied by
 equipment). Provide at least thirty (30) square feet 60
  additional area, useable for dining purposes when
  dining space is included in the kitchen.
2. Sleeping:
 a. Major bedroom.                                    100
   b. When no bedroom exists and bed is located in living room, the area of
living room shall be increased thirty (30) square feet over minimum area
requirement of subsection A1c of this Section.
3. Bathroom Size: Adequate for water closet, lavatory and tub or shower. The
water closet may be located in a separate compartment adjoining the
bathroom.
 
   B.   Additional Habitable Rooms: Minimum floor area eighty (80) square feet.
   C.   Bedroom Closets: Provide each bedroom with at least one closet or
wardrobe having a minimum:
      1.   Depth: One foot ten inches (1'10").
      2.   Floor area: Five (5) square feet.
      3.   Height: Six feet (6').
   D.   Space for Heating Units:
      1.   Provide space within the building for heating unit or system.
      2.   Provide clearances for maintenance and repair.
      3.   Provide clearances for fire safety, determined by insulation of
heater and combustibility of walls, floor and ceiling. As required by National
Board of Fire Underwriters' gas and oil equipment list. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-2-3: HABITABLE BASEMENT ROOMS:
   A.   Generally: Comply with requirements for main floor rooms with respect
to privacy, light, ventilation and floor area.
   B.   Finish Floor Below the Adjoining Outside Finish Grade: Maximum, two
foot six inches (2'6") at required windows.
   C.   Areaways: Minimum width measured perpendicular to face of building
wall, two feet (2'); increased one inch (1") for every inch of depth over two
feet (2'). Head of window, in all cases, to be at or above top of area wall.
(Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-2-4: PORCHES AND TERRACES:
   A.   Minimum dimension from face of building where there are more than two
(2) risers between grade and first floor, four feet (4').
   B.   Guardrails to be Provided:
      1.   When more than twenty four inches (24") above grade and center line
of exterior door is on center line of steps.
      2.   When more than sixteen inches (16") above grade and center line of
door is not on center line of stairs.
   C.   Provide guardrails on exterior steps of more than three (3) risers to
porches or terraces above grade. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
   D.   The maximum allowable opening between stair rail and guardrail
balusters shall not exceed four inches (4"). (Ord. 0-93-419, 6-10-93)
8-1A-2-5: INGRESS AND EGRESS:
   A.   Access:
      1.   Living Units: Each living unit shall be provided with two (2) means
of access without passing through any other living unit, unless of fire
resistive construction.
      2.   Attics: Provide access to attics by means of scuttles, disappearing
or built-in stairways.
      3.   Crawlspaces: Provide access from outside not less than thirty inches
(30") wide and forty inches (40") high. Areaway to equal area of access.
      4.   Basements: Provide direct access to outside by a door, or a window
having an openable area at least two feet (2') wide and thirty inches (30")
high, stool not more than three feet (3') above floor. A basement stairway
leading to a breezeway or a garage on grade may be considered an outside
entrance to a basement.
   B.   Privacy:
      1.   Bedrooms:
         a.   Each bedroom to have access to a bathroom without passing through
another bedroom.
         b.   Each habitable room to have access to each other habitable room
without passing through a bedroom.
      2.   Nonacceptable Bathroom Arrangements:
         a.   Sole bathroom opening directly into a kitchen.
         b.   Bathroom providing sole access to any other room.
         c.   Bathroom in the basement as the only one serving a living unit.
(Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-2-6: CEILING HEIGHTS:
Minimum ceiling heights shall be:
   A.   Basements: Seven feet (7') clear under joists.
   B.   Main floor of any living unit: Eight feet (8') clear for at least
seventy five percent (75%) of the total floor area.
   C.   Second story of any living unit: Seven feet six inches (7'6") clear;
under sloping roofs, seven feet six inches (7'6") for not less than fifty
percent (50%) of floor area having five feet (5') or more headroom. (Ord. 0-71-
12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-2-7: DOORS:
   A.   Exterior Doors, Minimum Sizes:
      1.   Main entrance doors: Two feet ten inches (2'10") wide.
      2.   Service entrance doors: Two feet eight inches (2'8") wide.
      3.   Heights: Six feet eight inches (6'8").
   B.   Interior Doors:
      1.   Provide a door for each opening to a bedroom, bathroom and toilet
compartment.
      2.   Minimum sizes:
         a.   All habitable rooms: Two feet four inches (2'4") wide by six feet
six inches (6'6") high.
         b.   Bathrooms and powder rooms: Two feet four inches (2'4") wide by
six feet six inches (6'6") high. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-2-8: STAIRWAYS DESIGN AND LOCATION:
   A.   Headroom: Continuous clear headroom measured vertically from front edge
of tread to a line parallel with stair run, minimum six feet six inches (6'6").
   B.   Width:
      1.   Main Stairs: Minimum, two feet nine inches (2'9") clear of handrail.
      2.   Basement Stairs: Minimum, two feet six inches (2'6") clear of
handrail.
   C.   Treads: Minimum width, nine and one-half inches (91/2"), clear of tread
above.
   D.   Riser: Eight inches (8") maximum; all riser heights to be same in any
one story.
   E.   Winders: Tread width fifteen inches (15") from converging end shall at
least equal tread width on straight stair run unless a width of tread at
converging end is six inches (6") or more.
   F.   Landings: Width equal to that of stair.
   G.   Handrail: Install continuous handrail on at least one side of each run
on each stair and on stair well.
   H.   Guardrail: Provide guardrail around all stairways of more than three
(3) risers. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
   I.   Opening: The maximum allowable opening between stair-rail and guardrail
balusters shall not exceed four inches (4"). (Ord. 0-93-419, 6-10-93)
8-1A-2-9: FLOOR AREAS AND FIRE WALLS:
Provide one hour fire-resistive wall and/or ceiling without openings between
living units of duplexes and row houses and between tiers of living units of
other multiple-family dwellings. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-2-10: MINIMUM WIDTH:
The width of any row or duplex dwelling measured between the interior finished
surfaces of party walls or end walls shall be not less than fifteen feet (15').
(Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-2-11: CONSTRUCTION WITHIN FIRE LIMITS:
Within the fire limits, residential buildings shall comply with the
requirements of ordinances relating to construction within such limits. (Ord.
0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-3: MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
8-1A-3-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Construction Materials and Methods: These requirements specify minimum
acceptable construction materials and methods. Other materials and methods not
specified herein may be approved for use by the Building Official upon the
submission of evidence satisfactory to him that their performance in use will
be at least equivalent to that of the materials and methods specified herein.
It shall be required that such evidence include adequate reports and test data
from a recognized testing laboratory, or proven and authoritative service
records, or analysis of performance made in accordance with well established
principles of mechanics.
   B.   Loads:
      1.   All parts of dwellings and accessory buildings and structures shall
be designed, constructed and maintained to support safely their own weight and
all other loads and forces to which they may be subjected.
      2.   Assumed minimum live loads (uniformly distributed) for design
purposes.
         a.   Ceiling or attic floor joists, no storage - none; attic floors,
limited storage only - twenty (20) pounds per square foot.
         b.   Girders - Dead loads of floor, partition and ceiling
constructions, plus fifty percent (50%) of assumed live loads of floors plus
combined dead and live loads of roof.
         c.   Roofs, either pitched or flat - twenty (20) pounds per square
foot normal to the roof surface.
      3.   Wind loads:
         a.   On vertical faces - twenty (20) pounds per square foot
horizontally, any direction.
         b.   Roofs or parts with slopes greater than thirty degrees (30°) -
twenty (20) pounds per square foot acting inward normal to surface, on windward
slope only.
         c.   Lifting forces - twenty (20) pounds per square foot. To prevent
sliding or overturning, anchor roofs to walls and columns, and walls and
columns to foundations.
   C.   Special Conditions and Tests: When special conditions exist or arise
during construction which necessitate additional precautions, the Building
Official may require work in excess of these requirements.
   D.   Vapor Barriers:
      1.   Definition: A material having a vapor transmission rate of one point
five (1.5) perm or less. Generally acceptable are:
         a.   Fifty five (55) pounds per one hundred eight (108) square feet of
smooth roofing.
         b.   Foil or foil backed board.
         c.   Duplex laminated papers 30-60-30.
         d.   Duplex papers coated with metal oxides.
         e.   Insulation backup paper-treated.
      2.   Ceiling: Where unheated spaces above, install independent vapor
barrier or one integral with insulating material immediately above ceiling
interior finish.
      3.   Sidewalls: When exterior coefficient of heat transmission is not
more than sixteen one-hundredths (0.16) B.T.U. per square foot, per degree
temperature difference. Install immediately back of interior wall finish.
      4.   Crawlspace: See subsection 8-1A-2-1H5 of this Article.
      5.   Vapor barrier to be applied tightly against any electrical outlets,
registers or framed openings.
   E.   Thermal Insulations:
      1.   Unheated Crawlspaces:
         a.   Insulation of floors (any one of the following):
            (1)   Foil reflective type on both sides between joists with two
inches (2") air space maintained between bottom of floor and foil. Install so
that there are no openings at ends of joists.
            (2)   One-half inch (1/2") rigid insulation board fastened to
bottom of floor joists. Install so that there are no openings at ends of
joists.
            (3)   Any insulation better than that above, i.e., one inch (1")
blanket.
         b.   Insulation of ducts and pipes located in crawlspace:
            (1)   Warm air ducts and plenum shall be covered with insulation
material, minimum thickness two inches (2").
            (2)   Return air ducts shall be covered with insulation material,
minimum thickness one inch (1").
            (3)   Sewer and water supply shall be covered with insulation
material, minimum thickness one inch (1").
      2.   Heated Crawlspaces:
         a.   Install insulation, minimum one inch (1") thick, on all surfaces
of foundation walls that are adjacent to crawlspace.
         b.   Insulation shall be waterproof and noncapillary, inorganic and
termite and fungi resistant.
         c.   Insulation shall be installed to extend up to underside of sub-
flooring, to extend down to six inches (6") above ground and to be fastened to
foundation walls.
      3.   Insulation for exterior perimeters of concrete floor slabs:
         a.   At least one inch (1") thickness at edges.
         b.   Where heating ducts in floor increase to one and one-half inches
(11/2") at slab edge.
         c.   Extend insulation down along inside face of foundation wall for a
distance of at least eighteen inches (18").
         d.   Insulation material requirements shall be inorganic, waterproof
and noncapillary, and termite and fungi resistant.
      4.   Ceiling Insulation:
         a.   Not less than six inches (6") net thickness of fire resistive,
flameproof insulation.
         b.   Foil of equivalent rating acceptable.
      5.   Heating Requirements:
      a.   Provide heating unit capable of heating dwelling from minus ten
degrees (-10°) Fahrenheit to seventy two degrees (72°) Fahrenheit at fifteen
(15) miles per hour outside wind with heat loss calculated in accord with
American Society of Heating and Ventilating Engineers standards.
      b.   Heating unit shall be constructed and installed in strict accord
with the applicable current published standards, requirements and
recommendations of the National Fire Protective Association, National Board of
Fire Underwriters, American Standards Association, and the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers. Labeling and listing by following shall be accepted as
conforming with equipment design standards: Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.,
American Gas Association, or American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
      c.   Clearance shall be provided for all heating equipment for access,
repair and maintenance.
      d.   Smoke pipes where extreme heat is hazardous to human occupancy shall
be insulated from furnace to chimney with a minimum of one- fourth inch (1/4")
of asbestos-free, fire-resistant material.
      e.   Insulation of all heat producing devices shall be such that
temperature rise of surrounding frame construction will not exceed one hundred
sixty degrees (160°) Fahrenheit.
   6.   Wall Insulation:
      a.   Not less than three-fourths inch (3/4") net thickness of fire
resistive, flameproof insulation between furring strips on exterior masonry
walls.
      b.   Not less than three and five-eighths inch (35/8") net thickness of
fire resistive, flameproof insulation between studding on exterior frame walls.
   F.   Alternative Material Construction: The following provisions shall apply
with respect to the use of alternative material construction for air conveyance
duct work in residential structures:
      1.   All air conveyance for heating, cooling and conditioning purposes
within a residential structure or dwelling shall take place within approved,
noncombustible duct work. The construction of these ducts shall be of sheet-
metal. Flexible nonmetal ducts (where permitted) shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions and shall meet or
exceed the following requirements:
         a.   UL Class 1 Flexible Air Duct – U1 181 rated,
         b.   NFPA 90A-90B,
         c.   SMACNA Standards and
         d.   BOCA Basic Mechanical Code.
      2.   Sheet metal duct work shall be installed in accordance with the
following minimum requirements:
         a.   BOCA Basic Mechanical Code and
         b.   SMACNA standards.
      3.   The maximum permitted length of each flexible nonmetal duct shall be
six feet (6'), and shall only be installed where, in the opinion of the
building officer, the use of sheet metal elbows, fittings and bends would
greatly diminish the air movement quality of the installation. (Ord. 0-71-12,
3-11-1971; amd. Ord. 0-89-338, 5-11-1989; Ord. 2024-1395, 3-14-2024)
8-1A-3-2: FOUNDATIONS:
   A.   Walls and piers:
      1.   Extend to solid ground. Do not place footing on filled ground.
Exception: When in compliance with applicable village ordinances, footings may
be placed on filled soil of an appropriate composition and compacted to a
minimum of ninety five percent (95%), as measured by the ASTM D 1557 (modified)
laboratory procedure.
      2.   Bottom of footings, not less than three feet six inches (3'6") below
finished grade, except where placed on solid rock.
      3.   Protect against freezing. No concrete shall be placed on frozen
ground.
   B.   Crawl spaces:
      1.   Ground level under the dwelling shall be at least thirty six inches
(36") below bottom of floor joists and girders. Ground under dwelling shall be
approximately level. (Ord. 2006-779, 6-8-2006)
      2.   Remove all debris, sod, tree stumps and other organic matter within
area occupied by dwelling. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-3-3: GRADING AND/OR DRAINAGE:
Grading or drainage or both shall be performed so that water will drain away
from the building on all sides and off the lot in a manner which will provide
reasonable freedom from erosion and pocketed surface water. Construction such
as walks, driveways and retaining walls shall be installed so that they will
not interfere with drainage. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-3-4: MASONRY MATERIALS:
Masonry materials described below apply to all masonry and concrete work:
   A.   Cement:
      1.   Portland cement. See ASTM C 150-56.
      2.   Prepared masonry cement for mortar: See ASTM C 91-55T.
      3.   Pozzolamic materials, such as fly ash, will not be substituted for
any portion of cement without the knowledge and consent of the Building
Official. When used as a replacement for cement, manufacturer's recommendations
will be followed and subjected to testing by an approved laboratory.
   B.   Aggregate:
      1.   Sand: Clean, hard and sharp, free from harmful materials, graded
according to intended use. See ASTM C 33-56T.
      2.   Coarse aggregate:
         a.   Crushed stone or gravel: Hard strong cystalline rock, properly
graded, clean and free from shale or other soft material.
         b.   Light weight aggregate. See ASTM C 330-53T.
   C.   Water: Clean and free from harmful material.
   D.   Lime:
      1.   Hydrated lime. See ASTM C 207-49.
      2.   Quick lime, slake thoroughly. See ASTM C 5-26.
   E.   Brick:
      1.   Face brick. See ASTM C 216-50.
      2.   Common brick. See ASTM C 62-50.
         a.   Selected hard-burned common brick may be used for facing of
exterior and interior walls.
         b.   Salmon or soft brick may be used in interior walls when not
exposed, and for backup work.
      3.   Fire brick. See FS-HH-B-671d.
      4.   Concrete brick. See ASTM C 55-52.
   F.   Structural Hollow Clay Tile:
      1.   Sound, kiln-burned units, free from defects that would impair the
strength or permanence of the construction.
      2.   Load-bearing tile. See ASTM C 34-55.
      3.   Nonload bearing tile. See ASTM C 56-52.
      4.   Glazed or unglazed facing tile. See ASTM C 126-52T.
   G.   Concrete Masonry Unit: See ASTM C 129-52, ASTM C 145-52 and ASTM C 90-
52. Sound and thoroughly cured.
   H.   Stone:
      1.   Rubble and cut stone: Good quality building stone.
      2.   Cast stone. See ACI 704-44.
   I.   Flue Lining: Glazed fire clay and vitrified tile, free from cracks or
other defects.
   J.   Glass Block: See NDFU-Bldg. Code-55. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-3-5: CONCRETE WORK:
   A.   General:
      1.   Materials: See Section
8-1A-3-4 hereof.
      2.   Water content not to exceed seven (7) gallons of water per bag of
cement, including moisture in the aggregate (except as noted).
      3.   Maximum slump, six inches (6") (except as noted).
      4.   Retempering of concrete not permitted.
      5.   Calcium chloride may be used as an accelerator but shall not exceed
two (2) pounds per bag of cement.
   B.   Quality of Concrete:
      1.   Commercial Ready Mix:
         a.   Minimum Portland cement content: Five (5) bags per cubic yard.
         b.   Water shall not be added at the job.
         c.   Mixing period shall not extend beyond one and one-half (11/2)
hours per batch. (Where an accelerator is used, mixing shall not exceed one
hour per batch.)
      2.   Exposed Concrete (Pavements, Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters, Open
Slabs, Etc.):
         a.   Minimum cement content, six (6) bags per cubic yard except five
(5) bags per cubic yard with three percent (3%) to six percent (6%) air-
entrainment.
         b.   Maximum slump, four inches (4").
         c.   Maximum water content, six (6) gallons per bag of cement
including water in the aggregates, except seven (7) gallons per bag with three
percent (3%) to six percent (6%) air entrainment.
      3.   Hardened Concrete: To determine the quality of hardened concrete,
the water-cement ratio for a tested compressive strength shall be found in
table 5, "Compressive Strength of Concrete for Various Water-Cement Ratios" of
"Recommended Practice for Selecting Proportions for Concrete" (A.C.I. 613-54)
published in the Proceedings of the American Concrete Institute, Volume 51. The
water-cement ratio thus established will determine whether or not the concrete
meets the Code requirements.
   C.   Reinforced Concrete: The design and construction of reinforced concrete
shall be in accordance with the provisions of the "Building Code Requirements
for Reinforced Concrete" (A.C.I. 318-56) published in the Proceedings of the
American Concrete Institute, Volume 52.
   D.   Forms:
      1.   Double forms required for all basement concrete foundation walls.
      2.   Side forms required for footings where soil conditions prevent
sharp-cut trenches.
      3.   Build tight, straight, plumb, and brace rigidly.
      4.   Do not remove until concrete has thoroughly set.
      5.   Remove all forms, spreaders and stakes before backfilling.
   E.   Placing:
      1.   Place continuously unless otherwise allowed by Building Official.
      2.   When not placed continuously, clean score and wet the top surface of
the concrete before continuing. Key all vertical joints.
      3.   Spade and rod concrete thoroughly in form work. Place in horizontal
layers not more than twelve inches (12") thick.
   F.   Protection:
      1.   Concrete shall be protected from drying for a minimum of five (5)
days.
      2.   Concrete shall be maintained at temperatures of not less than:
         a.   Seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) for three (3) days or fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) for five (5) days for normal concrete.
         b.   Seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) for two (2) days or fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) for three (3) days for high early strength concretes.
   G.   Loading: Allow sufficient time for strength of concrete to develop
before subjecting to loads or traffic. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-1971)
   H.   Footings:
      1.   General:
         a.   Design for proper distribution of superimposed loads.
         b.   Materials: Cast in place concrete.
         c.   Bear on solid, unfilled ground.
Exception: When in compliance with the applicable village ordinances, footings
may be placed on filled soil of an appropriate composition and compacted to a
minimum of ninety five percent (95%), as measured by the ASTM D 1557 (modified)
laboratory procedure.
         d.   Reinforce with steel bars where footings cross or bear on filled
trenches or other unstable soil.
         e.   Footing dimensions listed below are based upon soils of average
bearing capacity (3,000 pounds per square foot). For soils of lesser bearing
capacity or where unusual loading conditions exist, larger footings will be
required.
      2.   Wall Footings: Minimum dimensions for spread footings shall be ten
inches (10") deep by twenty inches (20") wide.
      3.   Pier, Post And Column Footings For Dwellings: Minimum area, six and
twenty five one-hundredths (6.25) square feet; thickness, one and one-half (11/
2) times the projections, minimum twelve inches (12"). (Not permitted under
exterior walls.)
      4.   Chimney Footings:
         a.   Dwellings: Minimum thickness, twelve inches (12"); minimum
projection each side, six inches (6").
         b.   Pour integral with wall footing when chimney occurs in outside
wall or inside bearing wall. (Ord. 2006-779, 6-8-2006)
   I.   Footing Drain Tile: See ASTM C4-55 (54T).
      1.   Required outside or inside (if inside, at least 2 feet from
footings) of basement footings. Minimum diameter, three inches (3").
      2.   Cover tile with eight inches (8") gravel, or crushed stone; ninety
five percent (95%) passing three-fourths inch (3/4") mesh, less than five
percent (5%) passing three-eighths inch (3/8") mesh.
      3.   Connect with tight joint glazed tile to storm sewer, dry well or
other outlet.
   J.   Concrete Foundation Walls Cast In Place 1 :
      1.   General:
         a.   Materials: See section
8-1A-3-4 of this article.
         b.   Walls supporting frame construction: Extend concrete not less
than six inches (6") above adjoining outside finished grade.
         c.   Walls supporting masonry veneered wood frame: Extend foundation
so that wood portion of wall is not less than six inches (6") above outside
finished grade.
      2.   Minimum Thickness:
         a.   Not less than that of wall supported.
         b.   Supporting porch slabs, steps and one-story wood frame structures
without basement, minimum eight inches (8").
         c.   Interior walls not subject to lateral pressure, six inches (6")
minimum.
         d.   Exterior walls subject to lateral pressure, to be a minimum of
ten inches (10") thick with reinforcing bars at top and bottom when wall
heights exceed four feet (4') in height; when less than four feet (4') in
height, eight inch (8") thickness shall be minimum.
      3.   Girder Pockets: Provide four inch (4") end bearing on main wall for
girder. For pocket for wood girder one inch (1") wider than girder.
      4.   Sill Anchor Bolts To Be Installed:
         a.   Diameter, one-half inch (1/2") minimum.
         b.   Minimum length, ten inches (10").
         c.   Provide washer under nuts on bolts.
         d.   Spacing, not more than eight feet (8') on center; minimum, two
(2) bolts in each piece.
      5.   Anchorage For Intersecting Walls And Slabs: Provide dowel bar
anchorage for porch and terrace slabs, concrete or masonry steps and area
walls, which adjoin foundation walls. For basementless portions and attached
garages, imbed four (4) 1/2-inch round hooked bars four feet (4') long in main
wall, two (2) near top and two (2) near bottom of attached wall.
      6.   Chimney Foundations: Start at level of lowest adjacent foundation
wall footings.
      7.   Special Or Unforeseen Soil Conditions: If special or unforeseen soil
conditions warrant, the Building Official may require either reinforcement of
wall or increased thickness.
      8.   Dampproofing And Waterproofing: See subsection 8-1A-3-6C of this
Article. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-1971)
   K.   Concrete Floor Slabs On Ground: No floor slab to be placed in water or
on a soft wet subgrade. Basements must be pumped dry at least twenty four (24)
hours before floor is poured.
      1.   Construction:
         a.   Fill Under Slabs: Gravel, screenings or crushed rock, minimum
thickness four inches (4"), thoroughly tamped.
         b.   Wire Mesh Reinforcing: When required, minimum weight forty (40)
pounds per one hundred (100) square feet.
         c.   Bottom Of Slab: Not lower than top of footing. Provide at least
four inch (4") bearing on footing.
         d.   Backfill: All backfill of excavated material under concrete slabs
shall be gravel, screenings or crushed rock, thoroughly tamped. (Ord. 99-570,
5-13-1999)
      2.   Cement Floor Finish:
         a.   Finish basement slab with steel trowel.
         b.   Integral finish on concrete slab.
      3.   Slabs On Ground Used As A Base For Floors Or As A Finish Floor In
Habitable Rooms:
         a.   Minimum thickness, four inches (4").
         b.   Provide membrane waterproofing directly under slab, at least
thirty (30) pound felt, lapped four inches (4").
         c.   Provide perimeter insulation. Insulating material shall be
noncapillary waterproof not subject to deterioration by termites or fungi.
      4.   Basement Floor Slabs: Minimum thickness, four inches (4").
      5.   Garage Floor Slabs: See Section
8-1A-3-15 of this Article.
      6.   Terrace And Porch Floor Slabs:
         a.   Minimum thickness, four inches (4").
         b.   If reinforced, fill may be omitted.
         c.   Install metal flashing between slabs and all wood construction.
See subsection 8-1A-3-11F of this Article.
      7.   Slabs On Ground Used To Support Interior Bearing Walls Or
Partitions: Thicken to at least ten inches (10") for a width of twenty inches
(20").
   L.   Exterior Wood Stairs: Wood construction shall be at least two inches
(2") above walk or finished grade.
   M.   Reinforced Concrete Floor on Precast Joist:
      1.   Minimum bearing of joists, three inches (3").
      2.   When span exceeds fifteen feet (15'), shore at midspan until slab is
set.
      3.   Structural design based on T-beam action not acceptable when metal
lath or paper backed mesh is used for slab forms. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
 
Notes
  1. For masonry unit foundation walls, see section
1 8-1A-3-6 of this article.
   
8-1A-3-6: MASONRY WORK:
   A.   General:
      1.   Materials: See Section
8-1A-3-4 of this Article.
      2.   Mortar:
         a.   Masonry below grade, Portland cement mortar: one part Portland
cement, three (3) parts sand by volume. Lime, not more than twenty five percent
(25%) of the cement by volume, may be added.
         b.   All other masonry:
            (1)   Portland cement mortar: See paragraph a above.
            (2)   Cement-lime mortar: One part Portland cement, one part lime
putty, six (6) parts sand by volume.
            (3)   Prepared masonry cement mortars: One part masonry cement,
three (3) parts sand by volume; add no materials other than sand and water.
         c.   Retempering of mortar: This may be permitted up to one and one-
half (11/2) hours after mixing. All mortar shall be used within two (2) hours
after mixing.
      3.   Joints:
         a.   Maximum thickness, five-eighths inch (5/8"). Joints for
decorative stone work may be increased one-fourth inch (1/4"). All joints to be
uniform in thickness.
         b.   Solid masonry units: Fill joints solid.
         c.   Hollow masonry units: No through mortar joints.
         d.   Fill all joints solid both sides of wall.
      4.   Bonding:
         a.   Walls of solid masonry units: Solid masonry bearing and
nonbearing walls shall be bonded in accordance with one of the following
methods:
            (1)   Bonding with headers: The facing and backing shall be bonded
with a header course consisting of alternate through header and stretcher every
seventh course, or one through header in every two hundred forty (240) square
inches, uniformly placed throughout wall.
            (2)   Bonding with metal ties: The facing and backing shall be
bonded with corrosion-resistant metal ties conforming to requirements of
subsection G4 of this Section for cavity walls. There shall be one metal tie
for not more than each four and one-half (41/2) square feet of wall area. Ties
in alternate courses shall be staggered. The maximum vertical distance between
ties shall not exceed eighteen inches (18"), and the horizontal distance shall
not exceed thirty six inches (36"). Walls so bonded shall conform to the
thickness (excluding cavity), height and mortar requirements for cavity walls.
         b.   Masonry walls on hollow units: Where two (2) or more hollow units
are used to make up the thickness of a wall, bonding shall be in accord with
recommendations of American Standard Building Code Requirements for Masonry M.
P. No. 211 (7-15-1954) Section 72.
         c.   Stone walls:
            (1)   Ashlar masonry, bond stones uniformly distributed shall be
provided to the extent of not less than ten percent (10%) of exposed faces.
            (2)   Rubble stone masonry twenty four inches (24") or less in
thickness shall have bond stones with a maximum spacing of three feet (3')
vertically and three feet (3') horizontally, and if the masonry is of greater
thickness than twenty four inches (24"), shall have one bond stone for each six
(6) square feet of wall surface on both sides.
         d.   Intersecting concrete and masonry walls shall be bonded together
in an approved manner.
      5.   Closed Cell Hollow Units: Use for rough openings, corners and wall
intersection. Filling exposed ends of cells not acceptable.
      6.   Protection: Provide frost protection acceptable to Building Official
when temperature falls below freezing; except, that no masonry work shall be
done in temperatures below twenty degrees (20°) Fahrenheit. (Protection as
outlined by American Standard Building Code Requirements for Masonry M P-211
shall be considered acceptable practice.)
      7.   Loading: Allow sufficient time for strength of masonry to develop
before subjecting to loads.
   B.   Masonry Unit Foundation Walls: Masonry unit foundation walls shall not
be allowed and their use in new construction is hereafter forbidden.
   C.   Dampproofing and Waterproofing: Dampproof basement or cellar walls on
exterior from finish grade to outside edge of footing:
      1.   Masonry Unit Walls: Apply one-half inch (1/2") thick Portland cement
plaster coat forming a cove at the footing, over which apply at least one heavy
coat of undiluted hot tar, asphalt or compound acceptable to the Building
Official.
      2.   Concrete Walls Cast in Place: Apply at least one heavy coat of
undiluted hot tar, asphalt or compound acceptable to the Building Official.
   D.   Piers:
      1.   When Acceptable: Piers only acceptable for one-story accessory
buildings, open porches and carports.
      2.   Materials: Masonry units or cast-in-place concrete. See Section
8-1A-3-4 of this Article.
      3.   Minimum Sizes in Inches:
         a.   Masonry, twelve inches (12") by twelve inches (12").
         b.   Plain concrete, ten inches (10") by ten inches (10") or twelve
inch (12") round.
      4.   Maximum Spacing:
         a.   Exterior wall piers supporting floor joists, eight feet (8') on
center.
         b.   Exterior wall piers in line parallel to joists and interior
piers, twelve feet (12') on center.
      5.   Minimum height above grade, six inches (6").
      6.   When of hollow masonry units, cap with at least four inches (4")
solid masonry or concrete. See subsection B1e of this Section.
      7.   Sill anchor bolts or dowels to be installed.
      8.   Piers shall be poured to within one-half inch (1/2") of correct
grade and shimmed with metal plates, cement shims or acceptable hardwood
blocks.
   E.   Exterior Walls Above Grade:
      1.   Materials: All materials shall meet the requirements of Section
8-1A-3-4 of this Article.
      2.   Allowable Heights and Thicknesses:
         a.   In residence buildings not more than two (2) stories in height,
walls other than coursed or rough or random rubble stone walls, may be of eight
inch (8") thickness when not over thirty feet (30') in height from grade to
ridge at gable ends, and when the roof is designed to impart no lateral or
horizontal thrust. When the roof imparts a horizontal thrust, such walls shall
have a minimum thickness of twelve inches (12").
         b.   Rough or random or coursed rubble stone walls shall be not less
than sixteen inches (16") in thickness.
         c.   Hollow walls of masonry units shall not exceed thirty feet (30')
in height from grade to ridge of gable ends; except, that ten inch (10") cavity
walls shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height above the support of
such walls. The facing and backing shall each have a thickness of at least a
nominal four inches (4") and the cavity shall be not less than two inches (2")
(actual) nor more than three inches (3") in width. The facing and backing of
cavity walls shall be bonded with metal ties. (See subsection A4a(2) of this
Section.)
         d.   Walls in one-story residence buildings, and one-story private
garages, may be of six inch (6") thickness when not over ten feet (10') in
height when solid structural clay masonry units are used, or nine feet (9') in
height for hollow structural clay masonry units, except that an allowance of an
additional six feet (6') is permitted for gables.
      3.   Maximum Height for Eight (8") Inch Thickness: Twenty two feet (22')
from grade to eaves, or thirty feet (30') from grade to ridge in gable ends.
For greater heights, minimum thickness twelve inches (12") except top twenty
two feet (22').
      4.   Backing, When Used, Solid or Hollow Masonry Units, Minimum
Thickness:
         a.   Bonded to facing, four inches (4").
         b.   Tied to facing with sheet metal ties, eight inches (8").
      5.   Furring When Interior Finish is Applied: Not less than one inch (1")
wood strips. Spacing as permitted for interior finish 1 . Bituminous
waterproofing materials on masonry not acceptable for plaster base. Install
horizontal furrier strips at ceiling and floor to form fire stops and prevent
convection.
      6.   Lintels: Size to be determined by span in each case. No concentrated
loads over nonreinforced lintels.
         a.   Lintels may be:
            (1)   Precast concrete and brick reinforced.
            (2)   Stone.
            (3)   Masonry arch.
            (4)   Steel. See ASTM A7-56T.
         b.   Support on four inches (4") of solid masonry.
      7.   Rafter Plate Anchor Bolts to be Installed:
         a.   Diameter, one-half inch (1/2") minimum.
         b.   Minimum length in masonry unit walls, fifteen inches (15");
poured concrete walls, ten inches (10").
         c.   In masonry walls, washer and three inch (3") square plate on
bolts.
         d.   Spacing, not more than eight feet (8') on center.
      8.   Radiator Recesses:
         a.   Construct at time wall is built.
         b.   Maximum recess depth, four inches (4") in eight inch (8") walls,
eight inches (8") in twelve inch (12") walls.
         c.   Back and sides of recess to be waterproofed and insulated.
         d.   Width under windows not greater than rough opening.
      9.   Vertical Chases:
         a.   Construct at time wall is built.
         b.   Maximum length for chases where net wall thickness is eight
inches (8") or less, four feet (4').
         c.   Maximum chase depth, four inches (4").
         d.   Back and sides of chase to be plastered with one-half inch (1/2")
of Portland cement mortar.
      10.   Horizontal Chases:
         a.   Not acceptable unless wall thickness is at least four inches (4")
greater than thickness required under subsection E2 of this Section.
         b.   Maximum depth, four inches (4").
   F.   Masonry Veneer:
      1.   Minimum thickness:
         a.   Brick, three and three-fourths inches (33/4").
         b.   Ashlar stone masonry, four inches (4").
         c.   Rubble-stone masonry, uncoursed (field stone), twelve inches
(12"); mosaic or random, twelve inches (12"); coursed, one story, eight inches
(8"); over one story, twelve inches (12").
      2.   Masonry Veneered Wood Frame Construction: Veneer applied over
sheathing with air space between.
         a.   Air space: Three-fourths inch (3/4") between masonry veneer and
sheathing.
         b.   Base flashing: Copper extending over top of foundation wall from
outside face of wall and not less than twelve inches (12") up on sheathing.
         c.   Apply water-resistant building paper or saturated asphalt felt
over sheathing. Lap base flashing at least four inches (4").
         d.   Bonding: Corrosion-resisting metal ties spaced not more than
fifteen inches (15") vertically and thirty two inches (32") on center
horizontally. When other than wood board sheathing is used, secure ties through
to studs with corrosion-resistant nails of length sufficient to penetrate wood
at least one inch (1").
         e.   Lintels: Size to be determined by materials and span in each
case. Bearing, at least four inches (4"). Arches permitted.
   G.   Cavity Walls:
      1.   The minimum thickness of the inner and outer wythes of cavity walls
shall not be less than a nominal four inches (4"), and the nominal out to out
dimension of the wall shall not be less than ten inches (10").
      2.   The maximum height of ten inch (10") cavity walls and the width of
the cavity shall conform to the requirements of subsection E2c of this Section.
      3.   All masonry units shall be laid in a full head and bed mortar joint.
The mortar used in cavity wall construction shall conform to the requirements
of Portland cement mortar or cement-lime mortar. (See subsections A2a and A2b
of this Section.)
      4.   The facing and backing of cavity walls shall be bonded with three-
sixteenths inch (3/16") diameter noncorrosive steel rods or metal ties of
equivalent stiffness embedded in the horizontal joints. There shall be one
metal tie for not more than each four and one-half (41/2) square feet of wall
area. Ties in alternate courses shall be staggered, the maximum vertical
distance between ties shall not exceed eighteen inches (18"), and the maximum
horizontal distance shall not exceed thirty six inches (36"). Rods or ties bent
to rectangular shape shall be used with hollow masonry units laid with the
cells vertical; in other walls, the ends of the ties shall be bent to ninety
degree (90o) angles to provide hooks not less than two inches (2") long.
Additional bonding ties shall be provided at all openings, spaced not more than
three feet (3') apart around the perimeter and within twelve inches (12") of
all openings.
      5.   Noncorrodible flashing shall be placed over the top of all openings,
at window sills and at the bottom of the cavity.
      6.   Weep holes shall be provided in the exterior wythe along all
flashing. The weep holes shall be spaced not more than twenty four inches (24")
on centers. Every effort shall be made to keep the cavity clear of mortar
droppings.
      7.   Furring: See subsection E5 of this Section.
   H.   Interior Masonry Walls:
      1.   Material: Masonry or cast-in-place concrete.
      2.   Pipes Recesses: Construct at time walls are built.
      3.   Party and Fire Walls:
         a.   Minimum thickness: Cast-in-place concrete, six inches (6");
masonry units, eight inches (8"). Chases or recesses not permitted. See
paragraph 4d below.
         b.   Flat roofs: Extend above roof, flash and cap with stone,
concrete, vitrified tile or terra cotta.
         c.   Under pitched roofs: Build masonry solid to underside of roof
sheeting unless carried above roof.
      4.   Bearing Partitions:
         a.   Minimum thickness of plain concrete or unit masonry wall shall be
not less than a nominal six inches (6").
         b.   Sections of walls with distance between openings two feet (2') or
less: Solid masonry units or hollow units filled with concrete.
         c.   Lintels: Steel, reinforced concrete or masonry arches. Minimum,
four inch (4") bearing upon solid masonry at least four inches (4") thick.
         d.   Joist bearings: Solid masonry at least four inches (4") thick.
         e.   Girder bearing: Solid masonry at least eight inches (8") thick.
      5.   Nonbearing Partitions:
         a.   Minimum thickness, three inches (3").
         b.   Lintels: Steel, reinforced concrete or masonry, or masonry
arches.
   I.   Chimneys 2 :
      1.   Provide Masonry Chimney:
         a.   Separate flue required for each fireplace.
         b.   Separate flue required for each appliance fired with natural-
draft oil burner. Separate flues required for all other equipment, depending
upon sustained chimney draft for proper operation, unless combined flue is
specifically approved by the Building Official.
      2.   Materials: Solid masonry; footing concrete cast in place.
      3.   Effective Flue Area: At least as recommended by the manufacturer of
equipment connected to chimney and at least equal to area of outlet (smoke or
vent) of equipment connected to it; minimum diameter for house heating flue,
eight inches (8"). For fireplaces, effective area not less than one-tenth (1/
10) of fireplace opening.
      4.   Chimney Linings, Wythes and Walls:
         a.   Glazed fire clay flue lining required in all chimneys for liquid
and solid fuels. When gas is used as fuel, provide flue lining of metal or
composition acceptable to the Building Official, or glazed fire-clay lining or
vitrified tile lining, bell and spigot type, bell end up, all with joints made
with acid-resisting mortar. Provide drain to dispose of condensation.
         b.   Two (2) flues may be grouped without a wythe of masonry between
them, provided the joints of the linings are staggered at least seven inches
(7").
         c.   Wythes separating flues or groups of flues with linings not
staggered, three and three-fourths inches (33/4") minimum thickness.
         d.   Walls, minimum thickness, three and three-fourths inches (33/4")
in addition to lining.
      5.   Height of Chimney: As recommended by equipment manufacturer, and not
less than two feet (2') above the ridge of the roof that the chimney penetrates
and not less than two feet (2') above the highest ridge within fifteen feet
(15') of the chimney.
      6.   Cap chimney to form wash from flue to outside edge, minimum
thickness, two inches (2").
      7.   Metal thimbles and clean-out doors to be built in at the time
chimney is constructed.
   J.   Fireplaces:
      1.   Smoke Chamber and Damper: Smoke chamber and damper required in all
fireplaces.
      2.   Minimum Wall Thickness: Eight inches (8") in addition to the lining.
      3.   Ash Dump: When provided, empty into concrete or masonry chamber
provided with metal cleanout door.
      4.   Linings: Two inch (2") fire brick or other material acceptable to
Building Official.
      5.   Hearth:
         a.   Support independently on masonry or concrete.
         b.   Projection from chimney breast, at least sixteen inches (16").
         c.   Width, at least eight inches (8") wider than fireplace opening on
each side.
         d.   Material, incombustible.
         e.   Combined thickness of hearth and support, six inches (6").
      6.   Fireplace Opening Lintels: Use brick arch, concrete, stone or steel.
      7.   Facing: Masonry, no combustible material closer than three and one-
half inches (31/2") to fireplace opening.
   K.   Glass Block:
      1.   May not use as load-bearing units.
      2.   Maximum size of unsubdivided panel: Area one hundred forty four
(144) square feet; length twenty five feet (25'); height twenty feet (20').
      3.   Provide for expansion. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71; amd. Ord. 2024-1395,
3-14-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  8-1A-3-13 of this Article.
2 1. See also Section
  8-2-3 of this Code.
8-1A-3-7: STRUCTURAL STEEL AND IRON:
   A.   General:
      1.   Structural Steel: See ASTM A 7-56-T.
      2.   Design, Fabrication and Erection: See AISC Manual 1956.
   B.   Beams and Girders:
      1.   Connections:
         a.   Design to carry superimposed loads.
         b.   Rivet weld, or bolt.
      2.   Bearing: On walls, minimum, four inches (4").
      3.   Bearing Plates:
         a.   Design to distribute load, minimum thickness, five- sixteenths
inch (5/16").
         b.   Bed in Portland cement mortar.
         c.   Plates may be omitted under wide flange type steel beams if width
of flange provides sufficient bearing area so that allowable compressive stress
of supporting material is not exceeded.
      4.   Paint Beams With Two (2) Coats of an Acceptable Metal Protective
Paint: This is in addition to shop paint. For crawlspace construction, painting
shall be completed before installing floor joists and before foundation
inspection. Beam ends shall be grouted in foundation wall pockets.
   C.   Columns:
      1.   Material:
         a.   Standard shape, steel or cast iron.
         b.   Concrete-filled steel pipe, new material, standard weight or
heavier.
         c.   Boiler tubing not acceptable.
      2.   Bases and Caps: Steel or cast iron.
         a.   Caps: Rivet or bolt to steel girders; spike or lagscrew to wood
girders.
         b.   Bases: Anchor by bolts or imbed in concrete.
      3.   Shims: Metal. Loose shims not acceptable. Maximum of two and one-
fourth inches (21/4"). (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-3-8: WOOD CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Lumber:
      1.   Structural Stress-Graded Lumber: Spans for structural stress-graded
and marked lumber shall be determined from National Lumber Manufacturers
Association publications. See NLMA 1957 Edition.
      2.   Plywood: All plywood used structurally shall bear the identification
of an approved testing agency as to type and grade of plywood, species of
veneer and conformance with the appropriate U.S. Commercial Standard.
      3.   Lumber Dimensions:
         a.   Nominal sizes are given in these requirements unless noted
otherwise.
         b.   Minimum finish dimensions, width and thickness, as follows:
   (Dimensions in Inches)
 
Nominal Actual Nominal Actual Nominal Actual
                                  
1       3/4    4       35/8   8       71/2
2       15/8   5       45/8   10      91/2
3       25/8   6       55/8   12      111/2
 
   B.   Framing, General:
      1.   Structural Framing Members:
         a.   Splicing between bearing points not permitted.
         b.   When structural strength is impaired by cutting, drilling or by
inherent defects, replace or reinforce members in manner acceptable to Building
Official.
      2.   Framing at Chimneys:
         a.   Bearing of framing members on chimney masonry not acceptable.
Piers built integral with chimney may be used for girder bearing provided end
of girder is at least two inches (2") away from chimney masonry.
         b.   Framing members: No closer than two inches (2") to chimney
masonry. Space may be one-half inch (1/2") if board one-fourth inch (1/4")
thick and same width as framing members is used between masonry and framing.
      3.   Firestopping:
         a.   Firestop all furring, partitions and outside stud walls at level
of each floor or ceiling and at juncture of roof rafters and wall.
         b.   Wood or masonry, tightly fitted, or other methods acceptable to
Building Official may be used.
   C.   Floor Framing:
      1.   Columns and Posts:
         a.   Structural steel or iron. See Section
8-1A-3-7 hereof.
         b.   Wood posts: Bear on concrete base resting on footing, top of base
three inches (3") above finish floor; securely fasten top of post to girder. If
necessary for bearing, install bearing plate or cap secured to both post and
girder.
      2.   Girders:
         a.   Material: Structural steel, reinforced concrete, solid wood or
built-up wood.
         b.   Spans for wood girders: Determine in accordance with sound
engineering practice and subject to approval of the Building Official.
         c.   Joints of solid and built-up wood girders to be made over pier or
column supports only.
         d.   Air space each side of wood girders framing into masonry, one-
half inch (1/2").
      3.   Level and grout with Portland cement mortar. Wood shingles, chips or
similar material are not acceptable for permanent shims.
      4.   Joists:
         a.   Maximum spans for wood are as follows:
   MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR FLOOR JOISTS
   Of other than structural stress-graded and marked lumber.
Lumber Size                                    Maximum Allowable Spans
                             Spacing Center to Assumed live load 40 lbs. per
Nominal Inches Actual Inches Center Inches    sq. ft.
                             Feet              Inches
Lumber Size                                    Maximum Allowable Spans
                             Spacing Center to Assumed live load 40 lbs. per
Nominal Inches Actual Inches Center Inches    sq. ft.
                             Feet              Inches
2 x 6          15/8 x 55/8   24                7      8
                           16                9      1
                           12                10     5
2 x 8          15/8 x 71/2   24                9      11
                           16                12     1
                           12                13     10
2 x 10         15/8 x 91/2   24                12     6
                           16                15     2
                           12                17     5
2 x 12         15/8 x 111/2  24                15     1
                           16                18     3
                           12                20     11
3 x 8          25/8 x 71/2   24                13     1
                           16                14     11
                           12                16     4
3 x 10         25/8 x 91/2   24                16     5
                           16                18     10
                           12                20     6
3 x 12         25/8 x 111/2  24                20     0
                           16                22     7
                           12                24     6
 
         b.   Framing into headers or side of wood girders: Use steel joist
hangers metal framing anchors or wood bearing strip at least two inches (2") by
three inches (3"). Notching of joist more than one-fourth (1/4) of depth not
permitted.
         c.   Framing into side of steel girders: Allow one-half inch (1/2")
clearance over top of top flange. Secure to girder or to opposite joists or
bridge joist firmly at girder ends if other ends are fixed. Notch for bearing
not more than one- fourth (1/4) of joist depth.
         d.   Framing into masonry:
            (1)   Minimum bearing, three inches (3").
            (2)   Fire cut or bevel, two inches (2").
            (3)   Second story floor joists parallel with masonry: Tie to
masonry with metal straps extending over and secured to at least one joist and
not more than eight feet (8') on center.
         e.   Butt or lap joists over girders and bearing partitions:
            (1)   Butting: Center and tie with metal straps or one inch (1")
thick wood ties at least two feet (2') long.
            (2)   Lapping: At least four inches (4"); spike together; maximum
projection beyond bearing, one foot (1').
         f.   Double joists:
            (1)   Under all bearing partitions and under plaster finished
nonbearing partitions when parallel to floor joists.
            (2)   Where piping or duct work occurs, block joists apart at four
foot (4') intervals.
            (3)   Under heading partitions, more than two (2) joists may be
required by the Building Official depending upon loading conditions.
            (4)   Support of furnace unit: Double the floor joists framing each
side of floor opening for plenum of furnace, spike joists together.
            (5)   Support of hot water heater, washing machine or special
loading conditions: Double the floor joists supporting unit, especially where
the equipment is aligned on both sides of a partition wall.
         g.   Headers and trimmers:
            (1)   Headers four feet (4') or less in length may be single;
headers receiving three (3) or more tail beams, support in steel hangers or on
ledger boards not less than two inches (2") by three inches (3"). If header is
over seven feet (7') in length, secure ledger to trimmer with lag screws.
            (2)   For openings at end of joist, span with headers four feet
(4') or less; trimmers may be single.
            (3)   Use double framing under all other conditions.
         h.   Cutting of floor joists:
            (1)   Notching top or bottom for piping and duct work is permitted
to not more than one-sixth (1/6) minimum required joist depth except no
notching in middle third of span; otherwise install header.
            (2)   Holes may be bored through joists, maximum diameter two and
one-half inches (21/2"); edges not nearer than two inches (2") to top and
bottom of joists.
         i.   Cross-bridging:
            (1)   Maximum spacing, eight feet (8'); minimum size, one inch (1")
by three inch (3") double wall at each end; bridging split in nailing not
acceptable.
            (2)   Rigid metal bridging may be used when acceptable to Building
Official.
         j.   Cantilevered construction: Submit detail drawing.
      5.   Subflooring:
         a.   Wood boards:
            (1)   Thickness, one inch (1"); maximum width, eight inches (8"),
unless triple-nailed. Maximum joists spacing, sixteen inches (16") on center.
            (2)   No two (2) adjoining boards to break joints over same joist
space; each board to bear on at least two (2) joists.
            (3)   Other spacings may be used when subflooring is designed
according to loads to be imposed.
         b.   Plywood:
            (1)   Minimum thickness for indicated joist spacing:
               One-half inch (1/2") (5 ply)
               Sixteen inches (16"), on center.
               Three-fourths inch (3/4") (5 ply)
               Twenty four inches (24"), on center.
               One and one-eighth inch (11/8") (7 ply)
               Forty eight inches (48"), on center.
            (2)   Minimum recommended width of girders, supporting floor loads
for one and one-eighth inch (11/8") plywood at forty eight inches (48") on
center is four inches (4"). Recommended sizes and spans for girders are:
 
4 x 6  Eight feet (8'0")
4 x 8  Eleven feet (11'0")
4 x 10 Fourteen feet (14'0")
4 x 12 Seventeen feet (17'0")
 
            (3)   Under nonstructural finish flooring, when used as a base for
parquet wood finish flooring less than twenty five thirty-seconds of an inch
(25/32") thick, linoleum, composition, rubber or ceramic tile, install solid
blocking under all edges at right angles to floor joists.
            (4)   Nailing, nail securely to joists and blocking with nails six
inches (6") on center on edges and ten inches (10") on center in intermediate
framing members.
            (5)   As underlay, when used for leveling purposes over other
subflooring, minimum thickness, one-fourth inch (1/4"), three (3) ply. (See
subsection 8-1A-3-14D2 of this Article.)
         c.   Provide one-half inch (1/2") clearance between all subflooring
and all masonry walls, chimneys and partitions.
         d.   Floors finished with any material other than hardwood, see
subsection 8-1A-3-14D2 of this Article.
   D.   Ceiling Framing: See subsection
8-1A-3-1 of this Article.
      1.   Joists:
         a.   Maximum spans for ceiling or attic floor joists are as follows:
            (1)   For no attic storage, maximum access opening is six hundred
(600) square inches.
            (2)   With larger access opening, design for limited attic storage.
            (3)   With permanent or disappearing stair, design according to
floor joist table in subsection C4a of this Section.
   MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR CEILING OR ATTIC FLOOR JOISTS
   Of other than Structural Stress-Graded and Marked Lumber
                                       Maximum Allowable Spans (Clear) For
                                        No attic storage. Limited attic
Lumber Size                            Assumed live load storage Assumed
                                        - none            live load 20 lbs.
                                                          per sq. ft.
Nominal Actual Inches Spacing Center to Ft. Inches        Ft. Inches
Inches                Center Inches
                                       Maximum Allowable Spans (Clear) For
                                        No attic storage. Limited attic
Lumber Size                            Assumed live load storage Assumed
                                        - none            live load 20 lbs.
                                                          per sq. ft.
Nominal Actual Inches Spacing Center to Ft. Inches        Ft. Inches
Inches                Center Inches
2 x 4   15/8 x 35/8   24                8   9             6   0
                    20                9   3             6   7
                    16                10  0             7   4
                    12                11  0             8   5
2 x 5   15/8 x 55/8   24                13  7             9   3
                    20                14  4             10  2
                    16                15  8             11  4
                    12                17  1             13  1
2 x 8   15/8 x 71/2   24                18  1             12  5
                    20                19  1             13  7
                    16                20  11            15  2
                    12                22  10            17  6
2 x 10  15/8 x 91/2   24                                  15  8
                    20                                  17  2
                    16                                  19  3
                    12                                  22  1
 
         b.   Use ceiling joists as ties for rafters whenever possible.
         c.   Bridging: Solid, two inches (2") thick full depth of joists,
staggered for end nailing. Joists eight inches (8") and over, one inch (1") by
three inch (3") cross bridging or rigid metal bridging may be used; when
acceptable to Building Official, maximum spacing, eight feet (8') on center.
         d.   Framing of ceiling joists over girders and bearing partitions: As
required for floor joists. See subsection C4e of this Section.
      2.   Hung Ceilings, Flat Roof Construction:
         a.   Minimum size two inches (2") by four inches (4") on edge
separated by wood or metal hangers, not more than ten feet (10') on center.
         b.   Ceiling joist bridging not required.
   E.   Roof Framing:
      1.   General:
         a.   Headers and trimmers:
            (1)   Headers four feet (4') or less in length may be single.
            (2)   When chimney is at ridge or eaves and header is four feet
(4') or less, trimmers may be single; use double framing under all other
conditions.
            (3)   Dormer windows not supported on partitions, double headers
and rafters.
         b.   Anchor wall plates for rafters and roof joists on masonry wall.
See subsection 8-1A-3-6E7 of this Article.
      2.   Pitched Roofs:
         a.   Minimum pitch: See subsection 8-1A-3-10a1 of this Article.
         b.   Maximum rafter spans are as follows:
   MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SPANS OF RAFTERS AND FLAT ROOF JOISTS
   Of Other Than Structural Stress-Graded and Marked Lumber
   Between Plate and Ridge or Intermediate Support For Wood or
   Asphalt Shingles or Built-Up Roofing
   (Collar beams designed as compression members may be accepted as
intermediate supports)
                            Maximum Allowable Spans (Clear) for Roof Slopes
Lumber Size                 Greater than 3   3 in 12 or less measured
                            in 12 measured   horizontally
               Spacing C.   on slope
               to C. Inches Roofing Material
Nominal Actual              Weight 5 lbs.    Supporting       Not supporting
Inches  Inches              per sq. ft. or   finished ceiling finished ceiling
                            less
                          Ft. Inches       Ft. Inches       Ft. Inches
                               Maximum Allowable Spans (Clear) for Roof
                               Slopes
Lumber Size                    Greater than 3  3 in 12 or less measured
                    Spacing C. in 12 measured  horizontally
                    to C.      on slope
                    Inches     Roofing         Supporting
Nominal Actual                 Material Weight finished   Not supporting
Inches  Inches                 5 lbs. per sq.  ceiling    finished ceiling
                               ft. or less
                             Ft. Inches      Ft. Inches Ft. Inches
2 x 4   15/8 x 35/8 24         7   6
                  20         8   3
                  16         9   2
                  12         10  7
2 x 6   15/8 x 55/8 24         11  8           8   7      10  2
                  20         12  9           9   5      11  1
                  16         14  3           10  6      12  6
                  12         16  5           12  1      14  4
2 x 8   15/8 x 71/2 24         15  6           11  5      13  6
                  20         17  0           12  6      14  10
                  16         19  0           14  0      16  7
                  12         22  0           16  2      19  2
2 x 10  15/8 x 91/2 24         19  8           14  6      17  1
                  20         21  6           15  10     18  9
                  16         24  1           17  9      21  0
                  12         27  10          20  6      24  2
 
         c.   Rafters: Cut for level bearing and spike to wall plate; no
portions of cut end of rafters to project beyond inside edge of wall plate;
frame rafters opposite at ridge; provide tie for rafters to prevent thrust and
uplift.
         d.   Collar beams:
            (1)   Minimum size one inch (1") by six inches (6") or two inches
(2") by four inches (4"); maximum spacing four feet (4') on center.
            (2)   When ceiling joists do not serve as tie at plate line or are
not below lower third of rafters, install ceiling joists (collar beams) same
size as rafters on each pair of rafters and make special provisions for tying
the lower end of rafters to the floor or wall construction.
         e.   Ridge boards: Not required for simple gable roofs where rafters
frame opposite each other. All other types, use two inch (2") member with depth
not less than cut end of rafters.
         f.   Valley rafters:
            (1)   Minimum thickness, two inches (2"); minimum depth, not less
than cut end of jack rafters.
            (2)   Maximum unsupported length of single valley rafters, eight
feet (8'); double rafters, twelve feet (12').
            (3)   May be omitted when jack rafters of one roof frame on sole
plate on top of roof sheathing of adjoining roof.
         g.   Crickets or chimney saddles at upper side of all chimneys not in
contact with ridge.
      3.   Flat Roofs:
         a.   Roof joist spans: See subsection E2b of this Section.
         b.   Cross-bridging: Minimum size, one inch (1") by three inches (3");
maximum spacing, eight feet (8') on center.
         c.   Joists supporting hung ceilings: See subsection D2 of this
Section.
         d.   Framing of roof joists over girders and bearing partitions: As
required for floor joists. See subsection C4e of this Section.
      4.   Trussed Rafters: Trussed rafters may be used in construction of
roofs for residence and buildings of similar size and design when designed
according to generally accepted good engineering practices.
   F.   Exterior Wall and Bearing Partition Framing:
      1.   Studs:
         a.   Continuous lengths without splicing.
         b.   Minimum size, two inches (2") by four inches (4").
         c.   Maximum spacing for all construction, sixteen inches (16") on
center; one story detached accessory buildings, twenty four inches (24").
         d.   Maximum length for balloon frame, twenty feet (20'); notch studs
at second floor to receive one inch (1") by four inch (4") ribbon. Nail joists
to studs.
      2.   Corner Posts: Not less than three (3) two (2) by fours (4) set to
receive interior finish.
      3.   Corner Bracing:
         a.   Braces at external corners: One inch (1") by four inch (4"), let
into outside face of studs and plates, set approximately at forty five degrees
(45°), extend from sill to plate. Attaching ends of braces to blocks nailed to
studs or plates not acceptable. May be omitted only when wood sheathing boards
are laid diagonally or when fiberboard, minimum twenty five thirty-seconds of
an inch (25/32") by four feet (4') by eight feet (8') is applied vertically.
         b.   Openings near corner: Use one inch (1") by four inch (4") knee
braces, extending from corner post to sill and to top plate. Extend over at not
less than three (3) stud spaces.
         c.   Openings at corner: Brace as in paragraph a above, set as near
opening as possible.
      4.   Sill Construction:
         a.   Sill anchorage: See subsections 8-1A-3-5J4 and 8-1A-3-6B4 of this
Section.
         b.   Sills and girders on top of foundation walls and piers: Level and
grout with Portland cement mortar; wood not to be used for permanent shims.
         c.   Other methods may be used if detailed on drawings submitted with
application and acceptable to Building Official.
      5.   Window and Door Openings:
         a.   Inner stud on jambs: Extend in one piece from header to bearing
and nail to outer stud.
         b.   Headers for usual loading condition:
 
Size                Maximum Span
Two 2 x 4s on edge  3'6"
Two 2 x 6s on edge  4'6"
Two 2 x 8s on edge  6'0"
Two 2 x 10s on edge 7'6"
 
         c.   Where headers support concentrated loads or are subjected to
other unusual loading conditions, the header shall be specially designed.
         d.   If desired, truss construction may be used.
      6.   Plates:
         a.   Top plates, two (2) two (2) by fours (4). Lap at corners and
intersecting partitions. Single two (2) by four (4) acceptable for bearing
partitions when studs occur directly under joists or rafters. When plates are
cut for piping or duct work, install steel angles on each side of plate not
less than one and one-half inches (11/2") by one and one-half inches (11/2") by
one-eighth inch (1/8") to serve as plate ties and bearing for joists. Spike
angles to joists and plates using not less than three (3) nails at each end.
Alternate method for reinforcing cut plates - solid full depth two inch (2")
header and metal tie one-half inch (1/2") by twelve (12) gauge with three (3)
heavy nails or screws at each end.
         b.   Where headers support concentrated loads or are subjected to
other unusual loading conditions, header shall be specially designed.
         c.   Sole plates, minimum thickness, two inches (2"); exterior wall
studs may bear on the sill or on a sole plate on top of subfloor.
      7.   End studs of bearing partitions connecting to masonry walls. Anchor
with bolts or spikes.
      8.   Wood bearing partitions in cellars or basements are not acceptable.
      9.   Studs to be continuous (balloon frame) when exterior is to have
continuous stucco finish.
   G.   Nonbearing Partition Framing:
      1.   Studs:
         a.   Use continuous lengths without splicing.
         b.   Partitions exceeding six feet (6') of unsupported length
containing openings. Size and spacing same as bearing partitions.
         c.   Partitions less than six feet (6') unsupported length with
openings:
 
Minimum Size          Maximum Spacing
2 x 4s (2" thickness) 16" on center
2 x 4s (4" thickness) 24" on center
2 x 3s (3" thickness) 16" on center
 
         d.   Partitions six feet (6') or over in length without openings:
 
Minimum Size          Maximum Spacing
2 x 4s (2" thickness) 16" on center
2 x 3s (3" thickness) 24" on center
2 x 4s (4" thickness) 24" on center
 
      2.   Openings:
         a.   In two inch (2") thick partitions: Inner stud on jambs, size two
inches (2") by two inches (2"), extend in one piece from header to bearing and
nail to outer stud; or single frame with two inches (2") by six inches (6")
jambs continuous from top plate to sole plate with header notched two inches
(2") into each jamb.
         b.   In three inch (3") and four inch (4") thick partitions: Single
framing permitted provided opening does not exceed three feet (3') in width and
header is secured by spiking through jamb studs.
         c.   Headers:
            (1)   Opening width three feet (3') or less:
               2" thick partition, 2" x 4" on edge.
               3" thick partition, 2" x 3" flat.
               4" thick partition, 2" x 4" flat.
            (2)   Opening width over three feet (3'):
               2" thick partition, 2" x 4" on edge.
               3" thick partition, two 2 x 3s flat.
               4" thick partition, two 2 x 4s.
      3.   Top and Sole Plates: Minimum thickness, two inches (2"); lap top
plate at outside walls and at bearing partitions.
      4.   Nonbearing Partitions: Wardrobes, cabinets or casework acceptable as
non-bearing partition.
      5.   Sole Plaster Partitions:
         a.   Maximum unsupported length, sixteen feet (16').
         b.   Core: Three-eighths inch (3/8") or one-half inch (1/2") gypsum
lath continuous from floor to ceiling and full width of door frames. Set in
grooves of wood sill and plate members and of jambs and heads of door frames.
Grooved member not required at intersection of walls to be plastered. At
masonry wall intersections, tie or lace cornerite through lath core with wire.
Butting units may be fastened as recommended by manufacturer and as approved by
the Building Official.
         c.   Sill and plate members: Finished thickness, one and one- fourth
inches (11/4") minimum. Securely nail to floor and structural framing.
         d.   Door frames: Mill built as finished frame. Thickness, one and
five-eighths inches (15/8") minimum. Prime coat all sides. Secure to floor
framing and sill members. Provide anchor for plaster by driving 8d nails on
each side of lath, three- eighths inch (3/8") out from groove, at thirty degree
(30o) angle with plane of lath, on twelve inch (12") centers staggered, then
bend back against lath.
         e.   Pipes and conduits: Plumbing pipes not permitted. Moisture-
resistant electrical conduit, tie securely to face of lath. Use shallow outlet
box.
         f.   Coat core both sides with gypsum plaster to overall thickness of
two inches (2"), three (3) coat or two (2) coat double-up work.
   H.   Wall Sheathing: Sheathing may be omitted on detached accessory
buildings not containing habitable rooms.
      1.   Wood Boards:
         a.   May be used under any exterior finish material.
         b.   Minimum thickness, one inch (1") (25/32); maximum width, eight
inches (8") unless triple-nailed; maximum stud spacing, twenty four inches
(24") on center.
         c.   Break joints over center of studs unless end-matched (T&G) boards
are used; no two (2) adjoining end-matched boards to bread joints over same
stud space and each board to bear on at least two (2) studs.
         d.   Application: When laid diagonally, extend at forty five degrees
(45°) in opposite directions from each corner; apply horizontally under stucco
finish.
      2.   Plywood:
         a.   May be used under any exterior finish material.
 
b. Minimum thickness Maximum stud spacing
5/16 inch            16 inches
3/8 inch             24 inches
 
         c.   Types of finish which affect the minimum thickness of plywood
used:
            (1)   Under wood shingles: If five-sixteenths inch (5/16") plywood
is used, apply shingles over one inch (1") by two inch (2") nailing strips
using copper or galvanized nails for attaching shingles. Nailing strips may be
omitted if annular ringed nails are used for attaching the shingles.
            (2)   Under cement shingles and siding: If five-sixteenths inch (5/
16") thick plywood is used, apply siding or shingle material with annular
ringed nails. Do not apply over wood nailing strips.
      3.   Fiberboard: Structural. See FS-LLL-F-321b.
         a.   Under wood shingle siding: Apply one inch (1") by two inch (2")
nailing strips over sheathing, spaced according to shingle spacing. Wood
shingles may also be applied over fiberboard shingle backer and fiberboard
sheathing with annular grooved nails at least two inch (2") length.
         b.   Cement siding or cement shingles shall be attached with special
metal fastening devices.
 
c. Minimum thickness Maximum stud spacing
                     
1/2 inch             16 inches
3/4 inch             24 inches
 
      4.   Gypsum Sheathing Board: See ASTM C 79-54.
         a.   Cement siding or cement shingles shall be attached with special
metal fastening devices.
         b.   Minimum thickness, one-half inch (1/2"); maximum stud spacing,
sixteen inches (16").
         c.   Under wood shingle siding: Apply one inch (1") by two inches (2")
nailing strips over sheathing, spaced according to shingle exposure.
   I.   Sheathing Paper:
      1.   Material:
         a.   Water-resistant building paper.
         b.   Asphalt saturated felt.
         c.   Vapor resistance shall be less than that of vapor barrier
provided on inside of wall.
      2.   Application:
         a.   Use over all types of sheathing except as noted in paragraph 3
below.
         b.   Apply shingle fashion, four inch (4") lap. Lap four inches (4")
over paper strips around openings.
         c.   Use six inch (6") side strips behind exterior trim of all
exterior openings.
      3.   Paper not required over gypsum or fiberboard, factory treated to be
moisture resistant, (except when used behind masonry veneer and stucco)
provided:
         a.   Necessary corner and opening cuts are caulked with elastic
waterproof caulking material. Corner joints may be protected with eighteen inch
(18") widths of sheathing paper applied shingle fashion.
         b.   At heads of openings, bottom edge of board is located to permit
head flashing to be extended under and turned up behind sheathing, and joint
between head flashing and board is caulked.
   J.   Roof Sheathing:
      1.   Wood Boards:
         a.   May be used under any roofing material.
         b.   Minimum thickness, one and three-fourths inch (13/4"); maximum
width, eight inches (8"); maximum rafter spacing, twenty four inches (24") on
center.
         c.   Break joints over center of rafters unless end-matched (tongue
and groove) boards are used; no two (2) adjoining end-matched boards to break
joints over same rafter space and each board to bear on at least two (2)
rafters.
         d.   Application: Lay closed under all roof material except wood
shingles. Under wood shingles, use one inch (1") by four inches (4") shingle
lath spaced according to shingles' exposure.
      2.   Plywood:
         a.   May be used under any roofing material.
         b.   Minimum thickness:
 
Roofing material          Rafters Maximum Spacing  Plywood Minimum Thickness
                          (inches)                 (inch)
Wood and asphalt shingles 16                       5/16
                         24                       3/8
Slate, tile and cement    16                       1/2
shingles
                         24                       5/8
Flat roofs                16                       3/8
                         24                       1/2
 
         c.   Under wood shingles, apply one inch (1") by two inches (2")
nailing strips over plywood less than three-eighths inch (3/8") thick, spaced
according to shingle exposure.
         d.   Protect exposed edges of sheathing along eaves and rake of roof
with mouldings or sheet-metal flashing. Flashing along eaves may be integral
with gutters. If gutters are not installed, form the flashing to provide a
drip.
      3.   Fiberboard: Acceptable for roof sheathing, two inch (2") minimum
thickness.
   K.   Stair Stringers 1 :
      1.   Provide solid bearing on top and bottom.
      2.   Effective Depth of Wooden Stringers: Minimum, three and one-half
inches (31/2").
      3.   Open Basement Stairs: Minimum stringer thickness, two inches (2").
      4.   Third Stringer: Install if treads are less than one and one-eighth
inches (11/8") thick and stair is more than two feet six inches (2'6") wide.
   L.   Caulking:
      1.   Caulk around exterior openings in masonry or masonry veneer walls.
      2.   Caulk at intersections of wood and masonry except when flashed. This
does not apply to tops of foundations.
      3.   Caulking shall remain elastic nonhardening and firmly adherent.
(Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71; amd. Ord. 2024-1395, 3-14-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  8-1A-2-8 of this Article.
8-1A-3-9: EXTERIOR WALL FINISH:
See subsection 8-1A-3-8H of this Article.
   A.   Wood Siding:
      1.   Use well-seasoned material.
      2.   Nail at each bearing with hot-dipped galvanized or cement- coated
nails.
      3.   Bevel Siding:
         a.   Finish dimensions to comply with the following limitations as to
minimum top and butt thickness:
 
Nominal width (in.) Thickness at top (in.) Thickness at butt (in.)
4, 6 and 8          3/16                   7/16
10 and 12           3/16                   9/16
 
         b.   Minimum Headlap: One inch (1") for four inch (4") width; one and
one-fourth inches (11/4") for widths over four inches (4").
         c.   Nail near butt only. Do not nail through board underneath.
      4.   Rustic and Drop Siding: Minimum thickness, three-fourths inch (3/4")
(finished); maximum width, eight inches (8") (nominal).
      5.   Shiplap or Matched Siding:
         a.   Minimum thickness, 25/32 inch (finished); maximum width, twelve
inches (12") (nominal.
         b.   Triple-nail all boards over eight inches (8") in width.
         c.   When boards are applied vertically, set edges in white lead.
   B.   Wood Shingle Siding:
      1.   Shingle Grades:
         a.   Single course siding, No. 1 or No. 2.
         b.   Double course siding, No. 1 for exposed shingles; under course
may be No. 1 or No. 2.
      2.   Minimum Size:
 
Length (inches) Thickness
   16        5 Butts in 2 inches
   18        5 Butts in 21/4 inches
   24        4 Butts in 2 inches
 
      3.   Maximum Exposure:
 
Shingle Length In. Single Course Exposure - In. Double Course Exposure - In.
16                 71/2                         12
18                 81/2                         14
24                 11                           16
 
      4.   Nailing:
         a.   Nails: Noncorrodible.
         b.   Butt nail double coursing: Exposed nails may be small- headed.
   C.   Cement Siding and Shingles: See subsection 8-1A-3-8H3b of this Article.
      1.   Material: See SS-S-291c.
      2.   Apply clapboards and shingles in accordance with manufacturer's
recommendations.
      3.   Nails: Noncorrodible.
   D.   Plywood:
      1.   Approved grade mark, for exterior use, on each sheet of plywood.
      2.   Plywood, three-eighths inch (3/8") thick, may be used on sheathed
walls.
      3.   Installation:
         a.   Protect edges prior to erection with paint, mixed one hundred
(100) pounds white lead paste, one and three-fourths (13/4) gallons raw linseed
oil and one pint dryer, applied without thinning.
         b.   Vertical joints: To occur over studs.
         c.   Horizontal joints: Install solid blocking between studding for
nailing.
         d.   Butt joints of square-edge material, whether exposed or covered
by battens, fill with mastic.
         e.   Corner boards: Apply over plywood or butt plywood against boards
at all corners.
         f.   Nails: Cement-coated or hot-dipped galvanized, flat head. Minimum
spacing; on edge, six inches (6"); on center, at intermediate bearings, twelve
inches (12") on center.
   E.   Stucco: See subsections F9 and H1d of this Section.
      1.   Lath for stucco. See FS-QQ-B-101c Wood lath not acceptable.
         a.   Expandable metal lath, painted; with large openings. One and
eight-tenths (18/10) pounds per square yard.
         b.   Nails: Electrolytic zinc-coated furring nails.
         c.   Metal lath, held at least one-fourth inch (1/4") away from
sheathing by furring nails. Furring strips and self-furring lath not permitted.
      2.   Stucco:
         a.   Materials. See Section
8-1A-3-4 hereof.
         b.   Mixture: One part Portland cement, three (3) parts sand, and
hydrated lime equal to ten percent (10%) of cement by volume; or prepared
Portland cement stucco used in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations.
         c.   Thickness: Three (3) coat work, one inch (1") total; two (2) coat
work, five-eighths inch (5/8") total.
         d.   Application:
            (1)   Three (3) coat work, over wood frame.
            (2)   Two (2) coat work, over masonry surfaces.
            (3)   Finish coat may be trowel coat of prepared exterior Portland
cement stucco.
            (4)   Thoroughly cover and embed lath in stucco.
            (5)   Keep wet two (2) days after application of each coat.
            (6)   Drying time before application of finished coat, seven (7)
days.
            (7)   Stucco not to be applied when temperature is lower than forty
degrees (40°) Fahrenheit.
   F.   Hardboard
      1.   Material.
      2.   Grade: Tempered, exterior shall be of a type specially manufactured
for siding purposes.
      3.   Hardboard one-fourth inch (1/4") or five-sixteenths inch (5/16") in
thickness may be used over sheethed walls.
      4.   Application: Hardboard siding shall be applied in accordance with
the manufacturer's recommendations, provided they are not in conflict with
these regulations.
   G.   Aluminum Siding: Provided that such exterior wall finish may only be
applied to those stories of a building above the first story, the floor of
which is on ground level.
      1.   024 rigid insulation backing.
      2.   Double four (4) or double five (5) panel only.
      3.   Textured aluminum siding only.
      4.   Installation per manufacturer's recommendations. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-
11-71; amd. Ord. 0-85-233, 10-10-85; Ord. 2024-1395, 3-14-2024)
8-1A-3-10: ROOF COVERINGS:
   A.   General:
      1.   Roof Slope:
         a.   Shingle and tile roof, five (5) in twelve (12) minimum.
         b.   Shingle roof less than five (5) in twelve (12) but not less than
two (2) in twelve (12) shall be applied in strict accordance with
manufacturer's specifications cementing or otherwise protecting tabs against
wind uplift.
         c.   Built-up roofs (gravel or slag surface), two (2) in twelve (12)
maximum.
         d.   Built-up roofs with mineral surface cap sheet, three (3) in
twelve (12) maximum.
         e.   When materials and method of application provide precautions in
excess of these four (4) minimum requirements to assure a weather-tight roof,
above roof slopes may be reduced subject to acceptance by Building Official.
Application and materials as outlined by "Manufacturers Selection and
Application of Asphalt Roofing and Siding Products" published by A.R.I.B. shall
be considered as acceptable good practice.
      2.   Double starting row, on all shingle applications.
      3.   Nails for attaching roof covering, copper or hot-dipped galvanized
nails. Staples not permitted.
   B.   Asphalt Shingles:
      1.   Fire Underwriters' Class C label on each bundle.
      2.   Approximate Shipping Weights Per Square:
         a.   Square butt strip, two hundred ten (210) pounds.
         b.   Hexagonal strip, one hundred sixty five (165) pounds.
         c.   Individual shingles, two hundred fifty (250) pounds.
      3.   Exposure as required for Fire Underwriters' Class C label.
      4.   Headlap as recommended by manufacturers; minimum two inches (2").
      5.   Double thickness at all points. Cut-outs and vertical spacing three-
fourths inch (3/4") or less may be disregarded.
      6.   Underlay: Asphalt-saturated felt; weight approximately fifteen (15)
pounds per one hundred (100).
   C.   Wood Shingles:
      1.   Edge-grain, tapered shingles (No. 1 grade).
      2.   Minimum Size:
 
Length (inches) Thickness
   16        5 Butts in 2 inches
   18        5 Butts in 21/4 inches
   24        4 Butts in 2 inches
 
      3.   Maximum Exposure:
 
Slope of Roof Exposure for shingle length - inches
Rise    Run   16 18   24
3 to 7  12    4  41/2 6
7 to 18 12    5  51/2 71/2
 
      4.   Underlay not permitted.
   D.   Cement Shingles:
      1.   Quality: Dense, hard structure and thoroughly seasoned.
      2.   Fire Underwriters' Class A or B label on each bundle.
      3.   Underlay: One layer asphalt-saturated felt, approximately thirty
(30) pounds per one hundred (100) square feet.
      4.   American Method:
         a.   Standard shingle: Minimum weight per square, four hundred seventy
(470) pounds.
 
Length of Shingle Inches Maximum Exposure  Inches
16                       7
15                       61/2
12                       5
 
         b.   Strip shingle: Minimum weight per square, two hundred eighty five
(285) pounds.
      5.   Dutch Method:
         a.   Minimum weight per square, two hundred sixty five (265) pounds.
         b.   Minimum headlap, three inches (3").
         c.   Minimum sidelap, four inches (4").
      6.   French or Hexagonal Method:
         a.   Minimum weight per square, two hundred fifty (250) pounds.
         b.   Minimum overlap two (2) edges, three inches (3").
   E.   Tile Roofing:
      1.   Quality: Hard-burned roofing tile.
      2.   Underlay: One layer asphalt saturated felt approximately thirty (30)
pounds per one hundred (100) square feet.
      3.   Shingle Tile, American Method:
 
Length of Shingle Inches Maximum Exposure  Inches
16                       7
15                       61/2
14                       6
12                       5
 
      4.   Interlocking Tile and Curved Tile: Lay in accordance with
manufacturer's recommendations.
   F.   Slate Shingles:
      1.   Quality: Free from knots or knurls and of reasonably smooth
cleavage. See FS-SS-S-451.
      2.   Underlay: Asphalt-saturated felt approximately thirty (30) pounds
per one hundred (100) square feet.
      3.   Laid American Method:
         a.   Minimum thickness, three-sixteenths inch (3/16").
 
b. Length of Shingle Inches Maximum Exposure Inches
  18                       71/2
  16                       61/2
  14                       51/2
  12                       41/2
  10                       31/2
 
   G.   Built-Up Roofs:
      1.   Asphalt or Tar and Gravel Coverings, Including Flashings: Comply
with requirements of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.; built-up roof coverings,
minimum three (3) ply.
      2.   Apply according to manufacturer's directions.
      3.   Each Ply of Felt: Minimum weight, fifteen (15) pounds per one
hundred (100) square feet.
      4.   Surface Weight:
         a.   Roofing gravel or crushed stone, approximately four hundred (400)
pounds per one hundred (100) square feet; or
         b.   Crushed slag, approximately three hundred (300) pounds per one
hundred (100) square feet.
         c.   Other material approved as to quality and weight by Building
Official.
      5.   Top ply of felt and crushed stone or slag surfacing may be replaced
with one layer of mineral surfaced cap sheet, minimum weight eighty five (85)
pounds per square.
   H.   Metal Roofs:
      1.   Materials:
         a.   Galvanized sheet metal: Twenty six (26) gauge sheets, one and
twenty five one-hundredths (1.25) ounces (total weight both sides) zinc coating
per square foot.
         b.   Copper: Sixteen (16) ounce soft (roofing temper).
         c.   Roofing tin: Forty (40) pound coating.
         d.   Lead: Sheet lead, two and one-half (21/2) pounds per square foot.
      2.   Nails:
         a.   Hard copper or copper alloy, for copper roofs.
         b.   Hot-dipped galvanized, for galvanized, sheet metal roofs.
      3.   Seams: Flat or standing; flat seams, locked and soldered.
      4.   Provide for expansion.
   I.   Other Types of Roof Coverings: Roof coverings such as metal shingles,
canvas or roll roofing may be used when the type and weight of material and
method of application are acceptable to the Building Official. (Ord. 0-71-12,
3-11-71; amd. Ord. 2024-1395, 3-14-2024)
8-1A-3-11: FLASHING:
Flashings, A lap joint or a turned up flange, usually of metal to make a
watertight connection between two (2) different materials.
   A.   Material:
      1.   Copper: Sixteen (16) ounce soft (roofing temper).
      2.   Galvanized sheet metal: Twenty six (26) gauge, one and twenty five
one-hundredths (1.25) ounce (total weight both sides) zinc coating per square
foot.
      3.   Lead: Hard lead, two (2) pounds; soft lead, four (4) pounds.
      4.   Tin: Forty (40) pound coating, painting both sides.
      5.   Membrane waterproofing material acceptable to Building Official.
      6.   Copper and zinc flashings, gutters and downspouts not to be used in
conjunction with each other.
   B.   Openings Not Protected by Overhang:
      1.   Heads of openings, wood frame walls:
         a.   Sheet metal extended behind finish siding material and turned
down over outside edge of head trim unless drip cap extends behind the above
bottom of finished material; or
         b.   Three (3) ounce copper coated building paper may be used,
provided flashing is not exposed to weather more than two inches (2"). Extend
behind siding. Blank tack at outside edge of drip cap, one inch (1") on center.
      2.   Heads and sills of openings, masonry-veneered wood frame walls.
         a.   Material: Sheet metal or membrane waterproofing material
acceptable to Building Official.
         b.   Head Flashing: Extend from front edge of lintel, up and over top
of lintel and up on sheathing under building paper.
         c.   Sill Flashing: Extend under masonry sill, up on sheathing and
under wood sill.
      3.   Heads and sills of openings, masonry walls:
         a.   Material: Sheet metal or membrane water proofing material
acceptable to Building Official.
         b.   Head Flashing: Extend from front edge of lintel, up and over top
of lintel, through wall and turn up one inch (1") on inside surface.
         c.   Sill Flashing: Extend under and behind masonry sill.
      4.   Heads of openings, stuccoed wood frame walls:
         a.   Material: Sheet metal.
         b.   Drip: Form drip on front edge of drip cap and extend flashing up
behind building paper underneath stucco.
   C.   Intersections:
      1.   Provide sheet metal flashing for all horizontal and vertical
intersections of stucco with other materials.
      2.   All flashing in connection with masonry walls shall have flashing or
counter-flashing built into masonry not less than one inch (1").
   D.   Valleys:
      1.   Rigid shingle roof covering:
         a.   Flash with sheet metal.
         b.   Flashing on:
            (1)   Roof slopes less than seven (7) in twelve (12), width
eighteen inches (18").
            (2)   Roof slopes seven (7) in twelve (12) or more, width twelve
inches (12").
      2.   Asphalt shingle roof covering:
         a.   Flash with sheet metal; or
         b.   Two (2) thicknesses of mineral surfaced roll-roofing material cut
from rolls weighing not less than eighty five (85) pounds per square. Bottom
strip, eighteen inches (18") wide, top strip at least thirty six inches (36")
wide, lapped twelve inches (12").
   E.   Roof and Wall Intersections:
      1.   Sloping Roof: Sheet metal flashing.
      2.   Flat Roof: Sheet metal or same material as roof covering. When sheet
metal is not used, install forty five degree (45°) cant strip at roof and wall
intersection.
   F.   Terrace or Porch Slabs. Suspended (reinforced) type or bearing on the
ground, which abut wood construction at exterior wall.
      1.   Flashing Material: Sheet metal.
      2.   Extend flashing at finish floors of terrace or porch from one-fourth
inch (1/4") outside exterior face of finish, turn up four inches (4") behind
exterior finish, thence turn down and through wall under wood construction to
one-half inch (1/2") beyond inside face of foundation. The horizontal
projection of the flashing under the exterior finish is to be turned down the
sides of the terrace or porch slab to the level where the flashing goes through
the wall.
   G.   Chimneys:
      1.   All chimney and roof intersections, sheet metal flashing.
      2.   Cricket or saddle covering: Sheet metal. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-3-12: GUTTERS AND DOWNSPOUTS:
When dwelling is provided with a basement, install gutters and downspouts
unless omission is specifically permitted by Building Official.
   A.   Materials:
      1.   Copper: Sixteen (16) ounce, hard (cornice temper).
      2.   Galvanized Sheet Metal: Twenty six (26) gauge sheets, one and twenty
five one-hundredths (1.25) ounce (total weight both sides) zinc coating per
square foot.
      3.   Solid Wood Gutters: Paint inside with two (2) coats pitch or three
(3) coats lead and oil after installation.
   B.   Basket Strainers:
      1.   Material: Copper wire for copper gutters, heavily galvanized wire
for all other gutters.
      2.   Install strainers in all gutter cutlets to downspouts.
   C.   Roof Water Disposal: Provide outlet acceptable to Building Official.
(Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-3-13: INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING FINISH:
   A.   Lath and Plaster:
      1.   Wood Lath:
         a.   Maximum stud or furring spacing, sixteen inches (16") on center.
         b.   Lath, No. 1, five-sixteenths inch (5/16") thick.
         c.   Space lath one-fourth inch (1/4") to three-eighths inch (3/8")
apart; break joints every seventh lath; nail at each bearing.
      2.   Expanded Metal Lath:
         a.   Painted or galvanized lath.
         b.   Minimum weights, maximum spacing of supports as follows:
Use Pounds per yd. Stud spacing - in.
Use               Pounds per yd. Stud spacing - in.
Walls:                            
All dwellings     2.5            16
1 story dwellings x 3.4          20
                 x 4.0          24
                 xx 3.0         24
                                Joist Spacing - in.
Ceilings:         x 2.75         16
                 3.4            16
                 xx 3.4         24
 
      3.   Insulating Fiberboard Lath:
         a.   Minimum thickness, one-half inch (1/2").
         b.   Lath size, eighteen inches (18") by forty eight inches (48").
Lath of twenty four inches (24") by forty eight inches (48") may be used
provided all joints at right angles to the framing members are covered with
continuous strips of metal lath and ends of lath are nailed to solid bearing
(framing members) at approximately four inches (4") on center including
intermediate supports.
         c.   Maximum stud or joist spacing, sixteen inches (16") on center.
         d.   Apply in accordance with manufacturer's directions.
      4.   Gypsum Lath:
         a.   Minimum thickness, three-eighths inch (3/8").
         b.   Size, sixteen inches (16") by forty eight inches (48").
         c.   Maximum stud or joist spacing, sixteen inches (16") on center.
         d.   Apply in accordance with manufacturer's directions.
      5.   Lathing:
         a.   Heads of openings: Install lath so vertical joints of first
course of lath above head will not occur on jamb studs.
         b.   Corner beads: Galvanized metal for all external corners.
         c.   Corner and joint reinforcing: Metal lath two and one-half inch
(21/2") lap on each surface.
         d.   Over solid wood surfaces: Install metal lath on strips or use
furring nails. Lap metal lath on adjoining lath surfaces.
      6.   Plaster:
         a.   Mix all plaster (lime and prepared) according to manufacturer's
recommendations.
         b.   Quick lime, slake thoroughly.
         c.   Minimum thickness, one-half inch (1/2") over lath base. Finish
all ceilings level and walls and corners plumb and straight.
      7.   Drying Periods: Allow sufficient time for plaster to dry thoroughly
before application of trim.
   B.   Ceramic Tile:
      1.   Materials.
      2.   Grade: To be at least standard grade.
      3.   Installation:
         a.   Stud covering: Fifteen (15) pound asphalt saturated felt applied
shingle style (unless metal lath is paper-backed).
         b.   Metal lath: See subsection A2 of this Section.
         c.   Scratch coat: Portland cement plaster, minimum five- eighths inch
(5/8") thick, integrally waterproofed. Scratch thoroughly. Allow to dry before
installing tile.
   C.   Shower Walls:
      1.   Materials: Dense and water repellant. Plaster not acceptable.
      2.   Installation:
         a.   Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
         b.   Minimum height, not below shower head.
         c.   Caulk and protect joints at corners, bathtub, top edges of
wainscot and at intersections of wainscot and other materials. Use moldings
designed for the purpose or other materials satisfactory to the Building
Official.
   D.   Dry Wall Finish:
      1.   Minimum Thickness:
 
                   Actual Inches
Type of wall finish Spacing of studs or furring strips
                   16  20  24
Wood boards         3/8 1/2 1/2
Plywood             1/4 3/8 3/8
Gypsum board        3/8 1/2 1/2
Fiber board         1/2 3/4 3/4
 
      2.   Other types of boards, including compressed dense composition board
less than one-half inch (1/2") thick, may be used when acceptable to the
Building Official. Maximum stud spacing, sixteen inches (16") on center.
   E.   Heater Room Interior Finish:
      1.   Materials: One hour fire-resistive construction. See NBFU- Building
Code-55.
      2.   Installation: Apply over all combustible materials, including
ceiling area, within four feet (4') of heating unit and flue pipe. (Ord. 0-71-
12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-3-14: FINISH FLOORS:
   A.   Cement Floors:
      1.   Mix: See subsection 8-1A-3-5B and K2 of this Article.
      2.   Heater Room Floors on Wood Construction Where Solid or Liquid Fuel
is Used:
         a.   Minimum thickness, four inches (4").
         b.   Use sheet metal over tops of joists for concrete forms or cut in
one inch (1") boards flush with top of joists. If wood boards are used, remove
after the slab has set.
         c.   Reinforce slab with wire mesh weighing not less than thirty (30)
pounds per one hundred (100) square feet, or with one-fourth inch (1/4") bars
spaced one foot (1') on center each way.
      3.   Heater Room Floors on Wood Construction Where Gas Burning Equipment
Raises Temperature of Floor to Above One Hundred Sixty Degrees (160°)
Fahrenheit: Comply with the provisions of paragraph 2 above. See American Gas
Association specifications.
   B.   Wood Floors: See subsection 8-1A-3-8C5 of this Article.
      1.   Materials:
         a.   Flooring: Kiln-dried material.
         b.   Strip Flooring, Hardwood or Softwood: Minimum thickness, 25/32
inch; maximum width, two and one-fourth inches (21/4") for hardwood, three and
one-fourth inches (31/4") for softwood. Three-eighths inch (3/8") thickness may
be used where laid directly on a subfloor. Wider widths (plank flooring) and
parquet flooring may be used when precautions are taken to prevent warping or
cupping.
         c.   Nails: Maximum spacing, sixteen inches (16") on center.
         d.   Building Paper or Deadening Felt: Apply under all finish flooring
unless floor is insulated.
      2.   Installation:
         a.   Finish Flooring over Subflooring: Apply at right angles to
subflooring except when subflooring is laid diagonally.
         b.   Finish Flooring on Strips: Wood strips, minimum size, one inch
(1") by two inches (2"); maximum spacing, sixteen inches (16") on center. Apply
strips over building paper or deadening felt on top of subflooring.
         c.   Strip Flooring on Concrete: Apply on not less than two inches
(2") by two inches (2") sleepers embedded in concrete.
         d.   Wood Block Floorings on Concrete: Set blocks in mastic and
install in accordance with flooring manufacturer's directions.
   C.   Ceramic Tile: See subsection 8-1A-3-8C5f of this Article.
      1.   Materials: See ASTM C 126-52T.
      2.   Grade: Not less than standard grade.
      3.   Setting Bed:
         a.   Mix one part Portland cement, four (4) parts sand; or one part
Portland cement, two (2) parts sand, and four (4) parts pea-size aggregate.
         b.   Minimum thickness, one and one-fourth inches (11/4"), if
reinforced with wire mesh; three inches (3") when installed below top of
chambered joists, with finish tile surface at least one and one-half inches
(11/2") above tops of joists.
      4.   When Applied Over Wood Subfloor: Install asphalt-saturated felt over
subfloor underneath the wire mesh.
   D.   Rubber Tile, Asphalt Tile, Linoleum and Wall-to-Wall Carpeting:
      1.   Do not apply rubber tile or linoleum on slabs resting on the ground.
Asphalt tile may be used on slabs bearing on the ground provided the slab area
where the tile are to be applied has first been covered with membrane
waterproofing.
      2.   Hardboard, plywood or similar underlayment leveler having a nominal
thickness of one-fourth inch (1/4") shall be used over wood subfloors to
provide a smooth, flat surface for the finish floor covering (including wall-
to-wall carpeting). Apply in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations.
      3.   Adhesive for flooring to be waterproof; type as recommended by
manufacturer of the floor covering. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-3-15: GARAGES:
   A.   Attached and Built-In Garages:
      1.   Construction same as required for the dwelling.
      2.   If door opening occurs between garage and dwelling, provide six inch
(6") curb at the service door, or construct garage floor six inches (6") lower
than adjoining floor.
      3.   Installation of house heating unit or other fuel burning appliance
in garage space not permitted. Install partition between space containing house
heating unit and garage space. Doors are not permitted common to heater room or
garage.
      4.   Wood frame walls and doors common to dwelling and garages: Finish on
garage side to be one hour fire resistive construction. Where gable-type
breezeway connection is used, a one hour fire resistive bulkhead may be
established in the attic space directly above and continuous from the interior
one hour fire resistive garage wall. Where rooms occur over garage area,
ceilings and all walls shall be of one hour fire resistive construction.
Service doors common to dwelling are to be one hour fire resistive. One and
three-fourths inches (13/4") solid wood will be considered in lieu of a rated
door.
   B.   One Story Detached Garages and Accessory Buildings: Comply with
construction requirements for one story dwellings with the following
exceptions:
      1.   Footings, minimum six inches (6") deep and sixteen inches (16") wide
not less than eighteen inches (18") below finish grade.
      2.   Foundation wall, minimum eight inches (8") of poured concrete or
solid masonry.
      3.   Grade beam construction permitted consisting of a four inch (4")
concrete floor on minimum four inches (4") of crushed stone or gravel poured
monolithically with a minimum ten inch (10") thickened outer edge a width of
twenty inches (20") around perimeter of building; said twenty inch (20") grade
beam to be of equal depth and on undisturbed soil.
      4.   Studs, maximum spacing twenty four inches (24") on center. Doubling
of studs not required on jambs of openings less than three feet five inches
(3'5") wide.
      5.   Wall sheathing and building paper may be omitted if corner bracing
is used. Each corner is to be braced from top outward in two (2) directions to
a minimum of seventy two inches (72") from corner at sill plate, and may be
applied on the inside surface of studs, minimum one inch (1") by four inches
(4").
      6.   Corner post may be two (2) two by fours (2x4) or one four by four
(4x4).
      7.   Top plate may be single, provided rafters occur directly over studs
and plate at corners is lapped to provide tie.
      8.   Rafter ties at eaves not less than two by fours (2x4), maximum
spacing, six feet (6') on center.
      9.   Flooring may be gravel if foundation is in accordance with
paragraphs 1 and 2 above. If concrete, minimum four inches (4") on minimum four
inches (4") of crushed stone or gravel. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-3-16: SEPTIC SYSTEMS:
See Section
4-7-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71)
8-1A-4: LIST OF REFERENCE MATERIAL:
Abbreviation and Name of Standard - Address
 
A.C.I.   American Concrete Institute
         18263 West McNichols Road, Detroit, Mich.
A.I.S.C. American Institute of Steel Construction
         New York City
A.S.T.M. American Society for Testing Materials
         206 South Board Street, Philadelphia, Pa.
         Federal Specifications
F.S.     U.S. Department of Commerce
         General Service Administration
         219 South Clark Street, Chicago, Illinois
N.B.F.U. National Board of Fire Underwriters
         85 John Street, New York City
N.L.M.A. National Lumber Manufacturing Association
         176 West Adams Street, Chicago, Illinois
 
Material Standard and Specification  Number or Volume
Material                           Standard and Specification  Number or Volume
Aggregates, Concrete               ASTM C 33-56T
Aggregate, Lightweight, Structural ASTM C 330-53T
Concrete
Block, Glass                       NBFU Building Code-55
Board, Sheathing                   ASTM C 79-54
Board, Fiber                       FS-LLL-F-321b
Brick, Common                      ASTM C 6250
Brick, Concrete                    ASTM C 55-52
Brick, Face                        ASTM C 216-50
Brick, Fire                        FS-HH-B-671d
Cast Stone                         ACI 704-44
Cement, Portland                   ASTM C 150-56
Cement, Prepared Masonry            
(for Mortar)                       ASTM C 91-55T
Concrete, Masonry Units,            
Hollow Load Bearing                ASTM C 90-52
Concrete, Masonry Units,            
Solid Load Bearing                 ASTM C 145-52
Finish, Heater Room Interior       NBFU Building Code-55
Lime, Hydrated                     ASTM C 207-49
Lime, Quick                        ASTM C 5-26
Lumber                             NLMA 1957 Edition
Shingles, Slate                    FS-SS-S-451
Steel, for Bridges and Buildings   ASTM A 7-56T
Stucco                             FS-QQ-B-101c
Tile, Ceramic                      ASTM C 126-52T
Tile, Facing, Glazed and Unglazed  ASTM C 126-52T
Tile, Footing Drain                ASTM C 4-55
Tile, Load Bearing                 ASTM C 34-55
Tile, Non Load Bearing             ASTM C 56-52
 
(Ord. 0-71-12, 3-11-71; amd. Ord. 2024-1395, 3-14-2024)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Material For Waste Pipe Systems (Rep. by Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-2-2: Forced Air Systems (Rep. by Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-2-3: Prefabricated Metal Chimneys Or Fireplaces Prohibited (Rep. by Ord.
2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-2-4: Fill For Concrete Slabs (Rep. by Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-2-5: Driveways
8-2-6: Fees In Lieu Of Public Lands Dedications (Rep. by Ord. 0-2004-718, 5-13-
2004)
8-2-7: Smoke Detectors
8-2-8: Construction And Maintenance Activity Time And Place Limitations
8-2-9: Drainage Easement Landscaping
8-2-1: MATERIAL FOR WASTE PIPE SYSTEMS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-2-2: FORCED AIR SYSTEMS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-2-3: PREFABRICATED METAL CHIMNEYS OR FIREPLACES PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-2-4: FILL FOR CONCRETE SLABS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-2-5: DRIVEWAYS:
   A.   Driveways Required With New Building Construction:
      1.   Driveway Required; Installation: It shall be unlawful for any person
to construct any building within the village without first having installed a
driveway leading from the street to the location of a proposed garage or
parking area located upon the premises upon which the construction is to take
place. Said driveway, together with any required culvert underneath the
driveway for drainage purposes, shall be installed in accordance with the
ordinances of the village. All driveways must be constructed with a hard
surface consisting of asphalt, concrete or pavers. No gravel surface driveways
are permitted in the village. (Ord. 2016-1143, 11-10-2016)
      2.   Stop Work Order: If any person fails to install said driveway and/or
culvert as provided in subsection A1 of this section, a stop order shall be
issued by the building department of the village ordering that any and all
construction taking place on the premises to be served by the required driveway
cease and desist.
      3.   Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this subsection A,
upon conviction, shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and a separate offense shall be
deemed to be committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 0-73-24, 4-12-1973)
   B.   Driveway Installation After Building Construction:
      1.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to install, change or alter
any driveway within the village, except for driveways encompassed in a permit
issued for the construction of a building or structure, without first having
obtained a permit therefor. (Ord. 0-77-67, 7-14-1977)
      2.   Permit Fee: The minimum fee for obtaining the driveway permit
required under subsection B1 of this section is hereby set at one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 2016-1143, 11-10-2016)
      3.   Penalties: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
subsection B shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 0-77-67, 7-14-1977)
   C.   Driveway And Culvert Specifications:
      1.   All culvert pipe used shall be of sufficient diameter so as to
provide a means for adequate drainage as determined by a licensed professional
engineer.
No culvert pipe shall be less than twelve inches (12") in diameter and shall be
fitted with flared end sections. Only concrete, aluminized corrugated metal and
plastic pipe are allowed. The length of the pipe shall be the width of the
driveway plus a minimum of two feet (2') but no more than three feet (3')
beyond the edge of the driveway; all plastic pipe shall be HDPE corrugated
pipe; all concrete pipe shall meet IDOT specifications.
      2.   Driveways shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') wide with a
minimum of a five foot (5') radius.
      3.   The following minimum design specifications are required for
residential driveways:
         a.   Asphalt driveway: Six inches (6") crushed aggregate (CA6) base
and two and one-half inches (21/2") compacted bituminous surface course.
         b.   Concrete driveway: Five inches (5") gravel base and five inches
(5") portland cement concrete with wire mesh or synthetic fiber reinforcement.
         c.   Paver driveway: Pavers to be placed on a minimum of eight inches
(8") aggregate base (CA6) covered with one inch (1") sand bedding prior to
placement of bricks. A geotextile fabric is to be placed between the aggregate
and the sand layers. All other requirements to meet manufacturer's
specifications. A three foot (3') wide strip of hard surface made of the same
material as the edging, such as asphalt or concrete, may be placed between the
edge of the road pavement and the bricks or pavers. The village will not be
responsible for any damage done to bricks or pavers within three feet (3') of
the road pavement due to snowplowing and road maintenance.
      4.   The following minimum design specifications are required for
commercial driveways:
         a.   Asphalt driveway: Eight inches (8") crushed aggregate (CA6) base
and four inches (4") compacted bituminous surface course.
         b.   Concrete driveway: Six inches (6") gravel base and five inches
(5") portland cement concrete with wire mesh or synthetic fiber reinforcement.
         c.   Paver driveway: Pavers to be placed on a minimum of eight inches
(8") aggregate base (CA6) covered with one inch (1") sand bedding prior to
placement of bricks. A geotextile fabric is to be placed between the aggregate
and the sand layers and between the subgrade and the aggregate base. All other
requirements to be based on engineering plans and manufacturer's
specifications. (Ord. 2016-1143, 11-10-2016; amd. Ord. 2021-1283, 5-18-2021)
8-2-6: FEES IN LIEU OF PUBLIC LANDS DEDICATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-2004-718, 5-13-2004)
8-2-7: SMOKE DETECTORS:
   A.   Definition: For the purposes of this section, "approved smoke detector"
or "detector" means a smoke detector of the photoelectric type, which complies
with all the requirements of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., standard UL
217, second edition, October 4, 1978, as revised May 19, 1983.
   B.   Installation And Maintenance:
      1.   Every single-family residence, both new and existing, shall have at
least one approved smoke detector installed on every story of the dwelling
unit, including basements but not including unoccupied attics.
      2.   Multiple detectors shall be installed as required so that no doorway
to a room used for sleeping purposes is more than fifteen feet (15') from the
nearest smoke detector.
      3.   All detectors shall be installed on the ceiling and at least six
inches (6") from any wall, or on a wall located between four inches (4") and
six inches (6") from the ceiling.
      4.   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to
supply and install all detectors required by this section. The owner shall also
be responsible for providing to his tenant (if any) written information
regarding detector testing and maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of
the tenant (if any) to test and to provide general maintenance for the
detectors within the property, and to notify the owner in writing of any
deficiencies which the tenant cannot correct.
   C.   Application Of Provisions: The requirements of this section shall apply
to all residential properties as follows:
      1.   Homes already occupied: The required smoke detectors may be either
battery powered or wired into the structure's AC power supply, and need not be
interconnected.
      2.   Homes under construction: Same as above.
      3.   Permits not yet issued: The required smoke detectors shall be
permanently wired into the structure's AC power supply, and if more than one
detector is required, the detectors shall be wired so that the actuation of one
detector will actuate all detectors. (Ord. 0-88-305, 8-18-1988)
   D.   Smoke Detectors At Furnace Location: Fire protection at the ceiling
level above all gas fired appliances may be fulfilled with either drywall or
smoke detectors.
      1.   Smoke Detectors: A smoke detector shall be installed at the ceiling
level of each space or room containing a gas fired appliance (furnace, boiler,
hot water heater, etc.) within fifteen feet (15') of each appliance. Each smoke
detector shall be connected to the full house one hundred ten (110) volt alarm
system.
      2.   Drywall: Install five-eighths inch (5/8") fire code drywall above
all gas fired appliances. Drywall shall extend a distance of four feet (4')
beyond the edge of the equipment. All combustible material within this four
foot (4') zone shall be covered. All penetrations through this drywall shall be
fire stopped. (Ord. 0-93-419, 6-10-1993)
   E.   Penalty: Wilful failure to install or maintain in operating condition
any smoke detector required by this section shall subject the owner to a fine
of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues to exist.
(Ord. 0-88-305, 8-18-1988)
8-2-8: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIVITY TIME AND PLACE LIMITATIONS:
Noise emanating from construction and maintenance activities shall be limited
in time and location as hereinafter provided.
   A.   Definition: For the purposes of this section, "construction and
maintenance activity" shall mean any work upon any building, structure, land or
appurtenance thereto which shall be undertaken with or without the assistance
of machinery or equipment, including, but not limited to, new construction of
any building or structure, remodeling or reconstruction of an existing building
or structure, application of trades including, but not limited to, masonry,
electrical, plumbing, roofing, and carpentry, installation of above or under
ground infrastructure, transportation of materials for construction and/or
maintenance activities. (Ord. 2009-893, 11-12-2009)
   B.   Time: No commercial or noncommercial construction and maintenance
activities shall be permitted except:
      1.   Monday through Friday from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M.
      2.   Saturday from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
      3.   Sunday, homeowner performed maintenance only, from ten o'clock (10:
00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Commercial activity is prohibited.
      4.   Exceptions:
         a.   Municipal repair and maintenance activities for the purpose of
maintaining or reinstating village services, including, but not limited to,
water, sewer and road repairs and maintenance.
         b.   Bona fide emergency maintenance and repairs.
         c.   Hardship relief may be approved by the village board for a
designated time period. (Ord. 2015-1092, 10-8-2015)
   C.   Holidays: No commercial or noncommercial construction and maintenance
activities shall be permitted on the following legal holidays: Memorial Day,
July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and New Year's Day.
      1.   Exceptions:
         a.   Noncommercial home repair, maintenance and remodeling upon the
personal residence of the person or persons engaging in such activities shall
also be allowed and permitted from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M.
         b.   Municipal repair and maintenance activities for the purpose of
maintaining or reinstating village services, including, but not limited to,
water, sewer and road repairs and maintenance.
         c.   Bona fide emergency maintenance and repairs.
         d.   Hardship relief may be approved by the village board for a
designated time period.
   D.   Place: The restrictions in subsections A, B, and C of this section
shall apply only to residential zones and those properties located within one
thousand feet (1,000') of any occupied residential unit.
   E.   Penalties: Any property owner, lessee, or any occupant of any property
in the village of South Barrington who allows such noise emanating from
construction and maintenance activities on the property owned or occupied by
him or her in violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or upon which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2009-893,
11-12-2009)
8-2-9: DRAINAGE EASEMENT LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Drainage Easement Landscaping: It shall be unlawful to plant trees,
bushes and shrubs anywhere within the full width and length of easements
identified as Drainage Easements or Drainage and Utility Easements.
      1.   Trees, bushes and shrubs existing in Drainage Easements and/or
Drainage and Utility Easements at the effective date of this ordinance can
remain in place but cannot be replaced. If existing landscaping is hindering
storm water movement at the surface or its roots have grown into storm water
piping, then this landscaping shall be removed at the direction of the Village
of South Barrington.
      2.   Homeowners with trees, bushes and shrubs planted in Drainage
Easements and/or Drainage and Utility Easements shall be fully responsible to
reimburse the Village for all cost associated with cutting and removing roots
and removing landscaping debris blocking or hindering water flow in storm sewer
piping, structures and swales located in those easements.
      3.   Homeowners with trees, bushes and shrubs planted in Drainage
Easements and/or Drainage and Utility Easements shall be fully responsible to
reimburse the Village for all cost associated with tree removal and restoration
of drainage swales for trees, bushes and shrubs that block or hinder the
movement of storm water.
   B.   The Village of South Barrington shall not be responsible to replace any
trees, bushes or shrubs and/or pay for any trees, bushes or shrubs that may be
removed because they are blocking or hindering the movement of storm water.
   C.   Penalty: A violation of this section is punishable by a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part
thereof on which a violation occurs, continues, or is permitted to occur or
continue. (Ord. 2019-1209, 6-13-2019)
CHAPTER 3
FENCES
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Purpose And Intent
8-3-3: Fence Location
8-3-4: Fences In Public Right-Of-Way
8-3-5: Barbed Wire; Electrically Charged Fences
8-3-6: Maintenance Of Fences
8-3-7: Obstructions To Line Of Sight
8-3-8: Fence Materials
8-3-9: Fence Permit Required
8-3-10: Residential Front Yard Fences Prohibited
8-3-11: Height Regulations; Exceptions
8-3-12: Density Regulations
8-3-13: Exceptions
8-3-14: Variations
8-3-15: Penalty
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires otherwise:
 
             A strand or strands of wire or similar material with barbs, razors
BARBED WIRE: or other sharp objects spaced at regular intervals along the
             strand or strands of wire.
             A fenced enclosure not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in
DOG RUN:     area, attached to the rear wall of the principal structure, and
             constructed for the purpose of containing the dogs owned by the
             resident of the principal structure.
             Any structure, of whatever material, serving an enclosure,
FENCE:       barrier, boundary, or separation, or privacy screen; excluding,
             however, landscape screening and driveway monument gates. (Ord.
             2006-790, 10-12-2006; amd. Ord. 0-2017-1147, 3-9-2017)
 
8-3-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This chapter is intended to regulate the construction, placement, and
maintenance of fences as may be required or permitted by this chapter. (Ord.
2006-790, 10-12-2006)
8-3-3: FENCE LOCATION:
   A.   Fences in residentially zoned districts shall be permitted only as
enclosures for swimming pools, tennis courts and/or dog runs. (Ord. 2006-790,
10-12-2006)
   B.   Fences shall not be permitted in any front, rear or side yard setbacks
as those setbacks are defined by the Village zoning ordinance. (Ord. 0-2017-
1147, 3-9-2017)
8-3-4: FENCES IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY:
No fence shall be permitted, erected or maintained in any public right-of-way
except as may be erected by the Village or other governmental body for purposes
of public safety. (Ord. 2006-790, 10-12-2006)
8-3-5: BARBED WIRE; ELECTRICALLY CHARGED FENCES:
The construction, installation, maintenance or use of barbed wire or
electrically charged fences is prohibited in all residential zoning districts.
Invisible dog fences shall be allowed in all residential zoning districts but
shall not be installed over utility easements. (Ord. 0-2017-1147, 3-9-2017)
8-3-6: MAINTENANCE OF FENCES:
Owners shall be responsible to properly maintain and repair, as necessary, all
fences on their property. (Ord. 0-2017-1147, 3-9-2017)
8-3-7: OBSTRUCTIONS TO LINE OF SIGHT:
No fence shall be placed or maintained in such a manner as to impair the sight
of oncoming or outgoing vehicular or pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 2006-790, 10-12-
2006)
8-3-8: FENCE MATERIALS:
Except as may otherwise be authorized by a variation, fence materials shall be
constructed of aluminum, steel, or wrought iron. Plastic and PVC shall not be
allowed for fence material. Fences constructed of wire mesh (chain-link)
material are permissible only in construction of dog run enclosures or tennis
court fence enclosures constructed in accordance with subsection
8-3-11D of this chapter. All fences shall be constructed in such a way that a
four inch (4") diameter sphere cannot pass through any openings in the fence.
(Ord. 0-2017-1147, 3-9-2017)
8-3-9: FENCE PERMIT REQUIRED:
No fence shall be constructed or erected without having first obtained a fence
permit from the Village. (Ord. 2006-790, 10-12-2006)
8-3-10: RESIDENTIAL FRONT YARD FENCES PROHIBITED:
No fence shall be constructed in any front yard in any residential district.
(Ord. 2006-790, 10-12-2006)
8-3-11: HEIGHT REGULATIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Nonresidential Fences: No fence of any height shall be erected or
maintained in a front yard of any nonresidential district lot adjoining a
public street. (Ord. 0-2017-1147, 3-9-2017)
   B.   Nonresidential Side And Rear Yard Fences: No fence shall be erected or
maintained in a side or rear yard of any nonresidential district at a height
greater than six feet (6').
   C.   Permitted Rear And Side Yard Fences In Residential Districts: Permitted
side yard and rear yard fences in residential districts shall not exceed four
feet (4') in height and the fence shall not extend forward of the rear wall of
principal residential structure, and such fences shall not extend into any side
or rear yard setback.
   D.   Height Exceptions:
      1.   Dog runs under two hundred (200) square feet placed against the rear
of a residential structure shall be permitted provided the fence height does
not exceed six feet (6').
      2.   Fences not exceeding ten feet (10') in height shall be permitted
surrounding tennis courts.
      3.   Pools: Minimum pool enclosure fence height is four feet (4').
Maximum pool enclosure fence height is five feet (5'). (Ord. 2006-790, 10-12-
2006; amd. Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-3-12: DENSITY REGULATIONS:
   A.   Solid fences, privacy fences or the like are prohibited in all
residential zoning districts.
   B.   In all residential zoning districts, no fence shall have support posts,
boards, or columns greater than four inches (4") in width or diameter.
   C.   All fences in residential zoning districts shall have support posts,
boards, spindles or columns spaced so that the maximum spacing thereof is four
inches (4").
   D.   The finished side of all fences shall face the adjoining property. The
"finished side" shall be defined as the smooth side or the side not containing
the structural supports. (Ord. 0-2017-1147, 3-9-2017)
8-3-13: EXCEPTIONS:
The restrictions provided in sections
8-3-3,
8-3-10 and subsection 8-3-11C of this chapter shall not apply to undivided
residentially zoned lots of five (5) acres or more in existence as of October
1, 2006. (Ord. 2006-790, 10-12-2006)
8-3-14: VARIATIONS:
Variations from the requirements of sections
8-3-3,
8-3-8,
8-3-11 and
8-3-12 of this chapter shall be considered by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board
of Appeals pursuant to the variation provisions and procedures set forth in
section
11-3 of the Village zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2006-790, 10-12-2006)
8-3-15: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day the violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2006-790, 10-12-
2006)
CHAPTER 4
SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Private Residential Pools Regulated
8-4-3: Reserved
8-4-4: Building Permit; Application
8-4-5: Reserved
8-4-6: Construction Of Pool
8-4-7: Drainage
8-4-8: Pools Creating Nuisances
8-4-9: Pools To Be Kept In Sanitary Condition
8-4-10: Indoor Private Swimming Pools
8-4-11: Penalty
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ELEVATED DECK: An exterior deck, attached to and projecting from the principal
structure, home or residence, and with a walking surface height of at least
four feet six inches (4'6") above grade at the foundation of the principal
structure.
PERMANENT SWIMMING POOLS: Pools constructed above or below grade, which cannot
be readily disassembled.
PORTABLE SWIMMING POOLS: Those maintained essentially above grade having a
depth of one feet (1') or more, which can be readily disassembled and stored.
For the purpose of this chapter portable swimming pools are presumed to require
reassembly each year.
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOLS: A receptacle for water, or an artificial
pool of water having a depth at any point of one feet (1') or more, intended
for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and
including all appurtenant equipment, constructed, installed, and maintained in
or above the ground outside of a building used as a dwelling unit, provided,
that such swimming pool is maintained by an individual primarily for the sole
use of his household and guests and not for the purpose of profit or in
connection with any business operated for profit. (Ord. 0-2006-762, 4-13-2006;
amd. Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018)
8-4-2: PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL POOLS REGULATED:
Every private residential swimming pool constructed or installed after the
effective date hereof shall comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter and section
2-9 of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2010-905, 5-13-2010)
8-4-3: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2010-905, 5-13-2010)
8-4-4: BUILDING PERMIT; APPLICATION:
No pool shall be constructed without having first secured a building permit
which permit shall be deemed an initial permit only and shall not authorize
additional or future erection, modification or dismantling of either permanent
or temporary private residential swimming pools. (Ord. 0-2006-762, 4-13-2006)
8-4-5: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2010-905, 5-13-2010)
8-4-6: CONSTRUCTION OF POOL:
   A.   Materials: Permanent private residential swimming pool walls and floors
shall be constructed of impervious material, which will provide a tight tank
and an easily cleaned surface. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall
have a nonslip finish as smooth as possible, and the side and end walls shall
present a smooth finish.
   B.   Recirculation Pools: All swimming pools shall be of the recirculation
type in which circulation of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps,
the water drawn from the pool being clarified and disinfected before being
returned to the pool.
   C.   Walk Areas (Permanent Type): Unobstructed walk areas not less than
forty eight inches (48") wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the
pool, with the exception of an indoor swimming pool pursuant to subsection
8-4-10F of this chapter. The walk areas shall be constructed or made of
impervious materials, and the surfaces shall be of such material as to be
smooth and easily cleaned and of nonslip construction. The slope of the walks
shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth inch (1/4") to one foot (1'),
designed so as to prevent back drainage from entering the pool.
   D.   Fencing: All outdoor pools must be completely fenced prior to filling,
by a fence not less than four feet (4') in height, constructed of approved
materials. All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching
devices placed at the top of the gate. Fence posts shall be decay or corrosion
resistant and shall be set in concrete bases. All such fences and gates shall
be so constructed and spaced as to prohibit the passage of any object greater
than four inches (4") in diameter.
   E.   Lights: Floodlights or other artificial lighting shall not be used to
illuminate a pool. Pools shall be illuminated with below water lighting only.
Path lighting fixtures shall not exceed two feet (2') in height and shall
project the light downward toward the ground. (Ord. 0-2006-762, 4-13-2006; amd.
Ord. 2018-1187, 8-9-2018; Ord. O-2021-1300, 11-11-2021)
8-4-7: DRAINAGE:
No direct connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer or septic system, and
no drainage shall be made into or over a septic system. Clean, nonchlorinated,
pH neutral water may be discharged to storm sewers or surface drainageways. No
water shall be discharged into the stormwater drainage system containing any
pollutant that causes or contributes to a violation of applicable water quality
standards and such discharge shall not result in nuisance conditions,
including, but not limited to, offensive color, odor, stagnant wet areas, or a
breeding environment for insects. (Ord. 2011-930, 2-17-2011)
8-4-8: POOLS CREATING NUISANCES:
No pool shall be operated or maintained so as to create a public nuisance, or
be in any way detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare of the
community. (Ord. 0-2006-762, 4-13-2006)
8-4-9: POOLS TO BE KEPT IN SANITARY CONDITION:
All swimming pools and their appurtenant facilities shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition. (Ord. 0-2006-762, 4-13-2006)
8-4-10: INDOOR PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS:
   A.   Location: Indoor swimming pools can be located anywhere on the lowest
level of the residence. The indoor pool must be isolated from the remainder of
the residence to prevent moisture migration throughout the structure and to
control access into the pool room. One wall of the pool may be constructed
immediately adjacent to a structure wall creating a zero foot (0') clearance
condition between edge of pool and edge of wall. All other pool walls shall
have a walk area pursuant to subsection 8-4-6C of this chapter.
   B.   Structural Design: The pool structure and the structure around it shall
be engineered and designed to withstand the expected forces to which the pool
and the pool room will be subjected.
   C.   Wall Slopes: To a depth up to two feet nine inches (2'9") from the top,
the wall slope shall not be more than one unit horizontal to five units
vertical (1:5).
   D.   Floor Slopes: The slope of the floor on the shallow side of the
transition point shall not exceed one unit vertical to seven units horizontal
(1:7). The transition point between shallow and deep water shall not be more
than five feet (5') deep.
   E.   Surface Cleaning: All indoor swimming pools shall be provided with a
recirculating skimming device or overflow gutters to remove scum and foreign
matter from the surface of the water. Where skimmers are used for private
pools, there shall be at least one skimming device for each one thousand
(1,000) square feet of surface area or fraction thereof. Overflow gutters shall
not be less than three inches (3") deep and shall be pitched to a slope of one
unit vertical to forty eight (48) units horizontal toward drains, and
constructed so that such gutters are safe, cleanable and that matter entering
the gutters will not be washed out by a sudden surge of entering water.
   F.   Walkways: All private indoor swimming pools shall have walkways not
less than three feet (3') in width extending entirely around the pool with the
exception of one wall only, which may be constructed without a walkway, or zero
foot (0') clearance. Any zero foot (0') clearance wall shall be constructed
with a below water shelf and/or shall have a ladder at each end of the zero
foot (0') clearance wall.
   G.   Steps And Ladders: Each indoor private swimming pool shall have at
least one means of egress provided. Treads of steps and ladders shall have slip
resistant surfaces and handrails on both sides, except that handrails are not
required where there are not more than four (4) steps or where the steps extend
the full width of the side or end of the pool.
   H.   Safety Cover: Private, indoor pools shall be equipped with a power
safety cover. Where in a closed position, the cover shall be capable of holding
a weight of four hundred eighty five (485) pounds, shall not have any openings
that allow passage of a four inch (4") sphere and shall incorporate a system to
drain standing water that collects on the cover. The cover control switch shall
be permanently installed in accordance with NFPA 70 listed in chapter 35, and
be key operated and of a spring loaded or momentary contact type. Where the
switch is released, the operation of the cover shall stop instantly and be
capable of reversing direction immediately. The switch shall be in the line of
sight of the complete pool cover.
   I.   Pool Room Doors: All doors with direct access to the pool shall be
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device with the release
mechanism located a minimum of fifty four inches (54") above the floor.
Swinging doors shall open away from the pool area. (Ord. 2015-1100, 12-10-2015)
8-4-11: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
fined in the amount of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed each day the violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 0-2006-
762, 4-13-2006)
CHAPTER 5
SATELLITE ANTENNAS (TVRO'S)
SECTION:
8-5-1: Findings
8-5-2: Permit Requirements
8-5-3: Rules and Regulations
8-5-4: Existing TVRO's
8-5-5: Variances
8-5-6: Penalties
8-5-1: FINDINGS:
   A.   It is the determination of the Village that receive-only satellite
antennas of all sizes, shapes, varieties and uses constitute physical additions
to the Village of such a character and degree of unsightliness that their
construction, placement, installation and use require close examination and
constant review by the Village.
   B.   The apparent demand for installation of commercial and private
television receive-only antennas (TVRO's) in South Barrington have been cause
for concern since the industry supplying the TVRO's has not developed
recognized standards, the structures required are quite different in appearance
from typical structures anticipated by the ordinances of the Village, and the
structures can be unsightly nuisances not compatible with existing structures
and land uses in the Village.
   C.   In view of the foregoing and to provide for reasonable regulation, all
TVRO's shall be considered structures subject to all applicable ordinances of
the Village. (Ord. 0-85-220, 5-30-85)
8-5-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to install a TVRO in the Village
without having obtained a permit therefor.
   B.   Application for Permit: Each application for a permit to install a TVRO
shall include all items generally required for the action sought (i.e., permit,
variation, etc.) plus the following:
      1.   Plot plan showing the proposed location of the TVRO on the property.
      2.   Plans and specifications for the installation, including elevations,
dish configuration, mount, foundation and any motorization.
      3.   Complete description of any vegetation on the property which is to
shield the TVRO.
      4.   Landscape plan for completely screening the installation from
neighboring and street view pursuant to, and as required by subsection 8-5-3D
of this Chapter.
      5.   Location of principal structures on adjacent lots.
      6.   Proof that the installation does not violate any covenant applicable
to the lot upon which the TVRO is to be located.
      7.   A permit fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), which shall be
returned in the event the permit is not granted.
      8.   Five hundred dollars ($500.00) cash bond to ensure compliance with
the requirements of this Chapter which shall be refunded upon inspection and
acceptance of the TVRO by the Building Officer or upon withdrawal, before
installation, of the application for the permit to install the TVRO. Said cash
bond shall be forfeited to the Village in the event the TVRO is installed and
the requirements of this Chapter are not complied with within sixty (60) days
after such installation.
   C.   Procedures:
      1.   An application for a permit for installation of a TVRO may be
obtained from the Village Clerk's office.
      2.   The application shall then be submitted to the Village Board and to
the Architectural Committee (if any exists) of the particular subdivision in
which the TVRO is to be located.
      3.   All permits issued under this Chapter shall be issued upon authority
of the Village Board and shall bear the signature of the Village Clerk. (Ord.
0-85-220, 5-30-85)
8-5-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to install or maintain a TVRO within the Village except in
compliance with the following:
   A.   Use of TVRO: The intended use shall be authorized under applicable
Federal law. (Ord. 0-85-220, 5-30-85)
   B.   Size and Height: The smallest practical size dish shall be used, and in
any event, such dish shall be of a size no greater than ten feet (10') in its
maximum dimension. Any such dish shall be mounted as close to the ground as
possible and shall not rise from the ground in excess of eleven feet (11') in
height at its maximum point. Elevated installations on poles or roofs are
prohibited. (Ord. 0-85-236, 10-10-85)
   C.   Construction and Installation: The construction and installation of
TVRO's shall strictly conform to all other applicable ordinances of the
Village. (Ord. 0-85-220, 5-30-85)
   D.   Location: No installation shall be located in any front yard or any
corner side yard abutting a street. The location shall not be in the required
yard area (as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the Village) 1  unless
encroachment in the required side or rear yard areas provides an acceptable
location and if such location is otherwise in conformity with all other
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 0-89-348, 11-9-89)
   E.   Screening: The proposed location is such that each TVRO shall be
totally screened, for its entire height, from view at ground-level from any
adjacent lot or street, public or private. Screening shall be provided by any
one or more of the following: the dwelling, garages, storage buildings or other
accessory buildings on the lot where such TVRO is located; or landscaping and
plantings which provide year- round screening.
   F.   Number of TVRO's: No more than one such TVRO may be installed on a
single zoning lot.
   G.   Architectural Compatibility: All installations shall exhibit
architectural quality, coloration to blend with surroundings and structural
integrity. No advertising, logos or symbols shall be permitted on any TVRO, nor
shall a TVRO be illuminated by a direct or indirect light. Experimental or
temporary installations, inferior materials and questionable stability are not
permitted. In every case, the entire installation must be compatible with the
character of the surrounding area, and shall have no adverse impact on the
property, neighborhood and general public.
   H.   Foundations; Electrical Regulations: Permanent foundations shall be
adequate for anticipated wind loads. Each TVRO shall be permanently ground
mounted. No TVRO shall be installed on a portable or moveable structure, such
as a trailer. Electrical connections must meet local and national building
guidelines as to installation 2 . Consideration shall be given to protection of
children as in the case of an attractive nuisance. (Ord. 0-85-220, 5-30-85)
   I.   TVRO's on Roofs: The installation of TVRO's on roofs in an M-1 District
may be allowed as a special use; provided, however, that the procedures and
standards for granting such special use shall be those procedures and standards
set forth under the terms of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village for granting a
special use. (Ord. 0-91-394, 10-10-91)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
2 2. See Section
  8-1-4-1 of this Code.
8-5-4: EXISTING TVRO'S:
Those TVRO's installed prior to the effective date hereof shall be brought into
compliance with the provisions hereof on or before September 1, 1985. (Ord. 0-
85-220, 5-30-85)
8-5-5: VARIANCES:
A variation from the terms of this Chapter may be granted by the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village; provided, that the
procedures and standards for granting such variation shall be those procedures
and standards set forth under the terms of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village
for variations from the provisions of such Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 0-85-220, 5-
30-85)
8-5-6: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of this Chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day or part thereof on which a violation occurs or
continues or is permitted to occur or continue. (Ord. 0-85-220, 5-30-85)
CHAPTER 6
STORMWATER DETENTION
SECTION:
8-6-1: Stormwater Detention Requirements
8-6-1: STORMWATER DETENTION REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to initiate the erection of any building
unless there is compliance with requirements set forth in title 12, chapter 2
of this code. (Ord. 0-2015-1058, 3-19-2015)
CHAPTER 7
LAWN SPRINKLING SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Purpose
8-7-2: Definitions
8-7-3: Permit Required
8-7-4: Permit Application
8-7-5: Fees And Deposit
8-7-6: Plans And Specifications
8-7-7: Compliance With The Code
8-7-8: Approval Of Application
8-7-9: Request For Inspection
8-7-10: Certificate Of Inspection
8-7-11: Backflow Prevention
8-7-12: Cross Connections Prohibited
8-7-13: Use Of The System
8-7-14: Freezing
8-7-15: Location Of System
8-7-16: Exemption Of Owner
8-7-17: Responsibility Of Agents And Employees
8-7-18: Administration
8-7-19: Penalty
8-7-20: Penalty Nonexclusive
8-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
   A.   Protect the potable water supply of residents of the village by
isolating the resident's potable water system from the resident's lawn
sprinkling system, thus preventing contamination or pollution from the
resident's lawn to the potable water system from contamination caused by the
backflow of contaminants through the water supply connection;
   B.   Maintain the backflow prevention program by eliminating both potential
and existing cross connections between the potable water system and nonpotable
water systems within the resident's premises. (Ord. 99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
BACKFLOW: The flow of any water, foreign liquids, gases or other substances
back into the distribution pipes of the potable water system.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device which prevents backflow into a potable
water system. All devices used for backflow prevention must meet the standards
of the Illinois plumbing code and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of the potable water
system and the lawn sprinkling system whereby there may be a flow from one
system into the other.
LAWN SPRINKLING SYSTEM: Any irrigation system of lawn, shrubbery and other
vegetation from any water source, whether or not potable. Such system includes,
without limitation, the water supply piping, valves and sprinkler heads or
other irrigation outlets. Lawn sprinkling system does not include an irrigation
system used primarily for agricultural purposes.
PLUMBER: Any licensed person authorized to perform plumbing as defined in the
Illinois plumbing license law, but does not include retired plumbers as defined
in the Illinois plumbing license law.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative
code 604 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
POTABLE WATER SYSTEM: All mains, pipes and structures through which potable
water is obtained and distributed to the persons for use, including wells, and
well structures, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or
severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing
potable water for drinking or general domestic use.
WATER SUPPLY CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the potable water system through which water is supplied to the lawn
sprinkling system. (Ord. 99-572, 4-13-1999)
8-7-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, replace or
repair a lawn sprinkling system within the village without having first
obtained a permit therefor pursuant to this chapter. This permit shall be in
addition to any other permit required by this code. No permit shall be required
for the making of minor repairs to the system downstream from the water supply
connection unless a section of the water line is cut, removed or replaced.
(Ord. 99-572, 4-13-1999)
8-7-4: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Application for a permit hereunder shall be made in writing to the village
clerk on forms provided therefor and shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-5: FEES AND DEPOSIT:
The fees and deposit shall be paid at the time of making application for a
permit. Such fees and deposits are as provided in chapter 1, "Building Code",
of this title. (Ord. 2008-863, 8-14-2008)
8-7-6: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by or include plans and
specifications in duplicate showing the nature, extent and location of the
proposed system and shall include a plan view and diagram showing all features
thereof from the connection to the water source to the sprinkler heads,
including, but not limited to, the piping layout, pipe size and grade, location
of septic field, lot lines and structures located on the lot. Symbols used
thereon shall be in accordance with standard design engineering practice. (Ord.
99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-7: COMPLIANCE WITH THE CODE:
No lawn sprinkling system shall be designed, installed, replaced or repaired
unless such design, installation, replacement or repair complies with all
ordinances of the village and with the applicable provisions of the Illinois
plumbing code. All design, installation, replacement or repair work shall be
performed in a good and workmanlike manner according to accepted standards and
practices only by plumbers licensed under the provisions of the Illinois
plumbing license law. (Ord. 99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-8: APPROVAL OF APPLICATION:
All applications, plans and specifications required to be submitted by this
chapter shall be examined and, if found to be in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter, approved by the plumbing inspector. Upon approval, provided
that the required fees and deposits have been paid, the plumbing inspector
shall issue a permit to the applicant. (Ord. 99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-9: REQUEST FOR INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of any person, firm or corporation doing any lawn
sprinkling system installation, replacement or repair work under a lawn
sprinkling system permit, to report to the plumbing inspector that the work is
ready for inspection and testing. The plumbing inspector shall inspect the work
and perform such tests as necessary following being notified of its readiness
for inspection. All installation, replacement or repair work of the lawn
sprinkling system shall remain exposed until approved by the plumbing
inspector. (Ord. 99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-10: CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION:
Whenever the plumbing inspector shall have inspected and tested the lawn
sprinkling system work and if the work complies with the requirements of this
chapter, he shall issue a certificate of inspection certifying that the work
has been properly inspected, tested and is ready for use. If the work does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter, the plumbing inspector shall
order such changes as may be necessary for the work to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. Until the plumbing inspector shall have issued a
certificate of inspection, it shall be unlawful for any person to bury, cover
or conceal any pipes, fixtures or sprinkler heads. (Ord. 99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-11: BACKFLOW PREVENTION:
The water supply connection between the potable water system and the lawn
sprinkling system shall contain a shutoff valve and backflow prevention device
immediately downstream from the shutoff valve. The backflow prevention device
shall be installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper operation at all
times. (Ord. 99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-12: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
Cross connections, other than a water supply connection maintained in
compliance with section
8-7-11 of this chapter, between the potable water system and the lawn
sprinkling system are prohibited. (Ord. 99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-13: USE OF THE SYSTEM:
Whenever a lawn sprinkling system is installed, replaced or repaired requiring
a permit under this chapter, the water to the system shall be left off by the
plumber doing the work and it shall be unlawful for any person to turn on the
water and use the system until a certificate of inspection is issued by the
plumbing inspector. (Ord. 99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-14: FREEZING:
The lawn sprinkling system shall be installed so that the water throughout the
entire system can be evacuated to adequately protect the system from freezing.
(Ord. 99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-15: LOCATION OF SYSTEM:
   A.   On lots served by a septic system, the lawn sprinkling system shall not
be designed or installed over or within twenty five feet (25') of any portion
of the septic system, within fifteen feet (15') of any property line that is
adjacent to another zoned buildable lot or extend into the public right of way.
   B.   On lots served by a sewer utility, the lawn sprinkler system shall not
be designed or installed over or within five feet (5') of any property line
that is adjacent to another zoned buildable lot or extend into the public right
of way.
   C.   A lawn sprinkling system, owned and/or operated by a management or
owners' association, connected to a water source not supplied through a
habitable building may be designed or installed in areas on nonresidential
lots, outlots, and in the public right of way approved by the village engineer.
Such installation is subject to the following: title 7, "Public Ways And
Property", chapter 5, "Construction Of Utility Facilities In The Rights Of
Way", of this code. (Ord. 2008-863, 8-14-2008)
8-7-16: EXEMPTION OF OWNER:
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the owner/occupant or lessee/occupant
of a single-family residence, or the owner of a single-family residence under
construction for his or her occupancy, from planning, installing, altering, or
repairing the lawn sprinkling system of such residence, provided that: a) such
work shall comply with the minimum standards for plumbing contained in the
Illinois state plumbing code, the requirements of this chapter and shall be
subject to inspection by the village plumbing inspector; and b) such owner,
owner/occupant or lessee/occupant shall not employ other than a plumber
licensed pursuant to the Illinois plumbing license law to assist him or her.
For purposes of this subsection, a person shall be considered an "occupant" if
and only if he or she has taken possession of and is living in the premises as
his or her bona fide sole and exclusive residence, or, in the case of an owner
of a single- family residence under construction for his or her occupancy, he
or she expects to take possession of and live in the premises as his or her
bona fide, sole and exclusive residence, and he or she has a current intention
to live in such premises as his or her bona fide, sole and exclusive residence
for a period of not less than six (6) months after the completion of the
plumbing work performed, pursuant to the authorization of this subsection, or,
in the case of an owner of a single-family residence under construction for his
or her occupancy, for a period of not less than six (6) months after the
completion of construction of the residence. Failure to possess and live in the
premises as a sole and exclusive residence for a period of six (6) months or
more shall create a rebuttable presumption of a lack of such intention. (Ord.
99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-17: RESPONSIBILITY OF AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any permittee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
permittee; and such violation shall be punishable in the same manner as if such
act or omission had been done or omitted by the permittee personally. (Ord. 99-
572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-18: ADMINISTRATION:
The building officer shall be charged with the administration and shall have
the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter, except as provided below.
The building officer, if he determines that the permittee has violated any of
the provisions of this chapter, may issue a stop work order and suspend any
permit issued under the provisions of this chapter until all violations are
eliminated and all work not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter
is corrected. Such stop work order if oral shall be followed by a written stop
work order within twenty four (24) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays. It shall be unlawful to do or perform any work in violation of such
stop work order.
The village engineer shall be charged with the administration and shall have
the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter as it pertains to lawn
sprinkling systems installed in accordance with subsection 8-7-15C of this
chapter. (Ord. 2008-863, 8-14-2008)
8-7-19: PENALTY:
In lieu of or in addition to a stop work order and suspension of a permit, the
plumbing inspector may instead issue a citation for the levy of a fine on the
permittee. The fine imposed shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
   A.   No such permittee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the
village president or his designee, with a minimum seven (7) day written notice
to the permittee, affording the permittee an opportunity to appear and defend
against the charges contained in such notice. For purposes of this section, the
notice period shall begin the day following delivery of the notice of hearing
by certified mail or by personal service.
   B.   If the village president or his designee determines after such hearing
that the permittee should be fined, a written order stating the reason for such
determination and the amount of the fine, shall be entered, and a copy of such
order shall be served upon the permittee at or after the hearing.
   C.   In addition to any fine or suspension, any permittee determined to have
violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall reimburse the village for
the costs of the hearing on such violation. The village president shall
determine the costs incurred by the village for said hearing, including, but
not limited to, court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records,
attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all
other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the
village president may allow.
   D.   The permittee shall pay said fines and costs to the general corporate
fund of the village within thirty (30) days of the entry of said written order.
Failure to pay said fines and costs within thirty (30) days of the entry of
such written order shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter and
may be cause for permit suspension or revocation, or the levy of an additional
fine. (Ord. 99-572, 5-13-1999)
8-7-20: PENALTY NONEXCLUSIVE:
The penalties provided in this chapter shall be in addition to any other
penalty provided for in this code. (Ord. 99-572, 5-13-1999)
CHAPTER 8
FLAG POLES
SECTION:
8-8-1: Permit Requirements
8-8-2: Rules And Regulations
8-8-3: Penalties
8-8-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to install a free standing flag
pole in the Village without first obtaining a building permit.
   B.   Application for Permit: Each application for a permit to install a flag
pole shall include all items required for the issuance of the permit plus the
following:
      1.   Site Plan or plat indicating the proposed location of the flag pole
structure. Note that all structures must be located within the building setback
area.
      2.   Plans and specifications for the installation including foundation
details, mounting plates and bolts specifications.
      3.   Specifications for the flag pole.
      4.   Size of flag to be flown.
      5.   Illumination details.
   C.   Permit Fee:
      An application for a building permit for a flag pole must be submitted
for review and approval at the Village Hall. The permit fee is one hundred
fifty ($150.00) Dollars. (Ord. 2019-1219; 12-12-2019)
8-8-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to install or maintain a flag pole within the Village
except in compliance with the following:
   A.   Size and Height: Flag pole height above adjacent ground shall not
exceed twenty-five feet (25').
   B.   Location:
      1.   The flag pole and any surrounding patio must be fully located within
the Building Setback Area.
      2.   The flag pole cannot be located in the septic field or over septic
system components such as septic tanks and lift stations.
   C.   Construction and Installation: Footing/foundation minimum depth shall
be forty-eight inches (48") below grade. Pole installation shall be per
manufacturers' directions.
   D.   Flags Flown:
      1.   The flag of the United States of America shall always be flow at the
top of the pole and shall be properly displayed per Federal Guidelines.
      2.   Banners and Advertising: No banners, signs or advertising shall be
displayed or flown from the flag pole at any time. (Ord. 2019-1219, 12-12-2019)
8-8-3: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of this Chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part
thereof on which a violation occurs or continues or is permitted to occur or
continue. (Ord. 2019-1219, 12-12-2019)
TITLE 9
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
SECTION:
9-1-1: Plan Established
9-1-2: Adoption of Comprehensive Land Use and Policies Plan
9-1-3: Official Maps Adopted
9-1-4: Compliance With Plan
9-1-1: PLAN ESTABLISHED:
The Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village, copies of which are on file
with the Village Clerk, includes, but is not limited to, the following:
   A.   Official maps including the existing zoning map.
   B.   Plans for improvements of streets and parks.
   C.   The Zoning Ordinance hitherto established by the Village Board.
   D.   The Subdivision Control Ordinance hitherto established by the Village
Board 1 .
   E.   South Barrington 2005: A report detailing the future of the Village and
the commensurate Municipal service requirements, dated July 16, 1992.
Any reference to the Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village shall be taken
to mean and include all of the foregoing. (Ord. 0-94-445, 10-13-94)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 11 of this Code.
9-1-2: ADOPTION OF COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE AND POLICIES PLAN:
   A.   The 2023 Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village of South
Barrington, copies of which are on file with the Village Clerk, is hereby
adopted as part of the Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village.
   B.   The officers, employees, and/or agents of the Village shall take all
action necessary or reasonably required to carry out and give effect to the
intent of this section. The Village Clerk is directed to place the 2023
Comprehensive Plan on file, and the 2023 Comprehensive Plan and related
ordinances shall be available at all times during business hours for public
inspection and copying. The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to
file with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds (which is now the Cook County
Clerk’s Office) notice of the adoption of the 2023 Comprehensive Plan. The 2023
Comprehensive Plan shall be effective ten (10) days after the date of filing
said notice with the Cook County Clerk’s Office. (Ord. 0-85-221, 6-13-85; amd.
Ord. 2023-1259, 4-13-2023)
9-1-3: OFFICIAL MAPS ADOPTED:
The maps listed in subsection 9-1-1A of this Chapter are hereby designated and
adopted as the official maps of the Village. (Ord. 0-75-36A, 1-9-75)
9-1-4: COMPLIANCE WITH PLAN:
No plan of subdivision or plan for the construction and layout of streets shall
be approved unless the same complies fully with the requirements of the
Official Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 0-75-36A, 1-9-75)
TITLE 10
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Authority
10-1-3: Effective Date
10-1-4: Applicability And Jurisdiction
10-1-5: Exempt Utilities
10-1-6: Purposes
10-1-7: Minimum Requirements
10-1-8: Compliance Required
10-1-9: Conflicting Provisions
10-1-10: Rules Of Language And Construction
10-1-11: Zoning Map
10-1-12: Transitional Provisions
10-1-13: Safe Harbor Authorization
10-1-14: Zoning Official
10-1-15: Severability
10-1-1: TITLE:
This Title (Title 10 of the South Barrington Code of Ordinances) is officially
known and may be cited as the "Village of South Barrington Zoning Ordinance."
For convenience, it is referred to herein as the "zoning ordinance." (Ord.
2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-1-2: AUTHORITY:
This zoning ordinance is adopted pursuant to the powers granted and limitations
imposed by Illinois law. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-1-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions of this zoning ordinance become effective on DATE TO BE
INSERTED, except as otherwise expressly stated. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-1-4: APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION:
The provisions of this zoning ordinance apply to all public and private use and
development of properties within the corporate limits of the Village of South
Barrington, except as provided by state or federal law or as otherwise
expressly stated in this zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-1-5: EXEMPT UTILITIES:
The provisions of this zoning ordinance do not apply to the type, location, or
use of poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves
or any other similar transmission or distribution equipment (except substations
or other similar structures erected above ground level) of a public utility
under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission or a municipally
owned utility, provided that the installation of such facilities must conform
with all other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-1-6: PURPOSES:
This zoning ordinance is adopted for the purposes of:
   A.   Protecting and promoting the public health, safety, and general
welfare; and
   B.   Implementing the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan and other
relevant, officially adopted plans of the village. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-1-7: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The provisions of this zoning ordinance are the minimum requirements
deemed necessary to carry out the zoning ordinance's stated purposes.
   B.   In addition to the requirements of this zoning ordinance, all uses,
buildings and structures must comply with all other applicable ordinances,
laws, and regulations.
   C.   All references in this zoning ordinance to other governmental
regulations are for informational purposes only and do not constitute a
complete list of such regulations. These references do not imply any
responsibility for the village to enforce regulations imposed by other
government authorities. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-1-8: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Land may not be used for any purpose other than one that is allowed by
the provisions of this zoning ordinance.
   B.   A building or structure may not be erected, located, moved,
reconstructed, extended, or structurally altered except as allowed by this
zoning ordinance.
   C.   Buildings, structures, and land may be used and occupied only in
compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance.
   D.   All lots created or modified must comply with all applicable provisions
of this zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-1-9: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Conflict with State or Federal Regulations: If the provisions of this
zoning ordinance are inconsistent with state or federal law, the more
restrictive provision governs, to the extent allowed by law. The more
restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.
   B.   Conflict with Other Village Regulations: If the provisions of this
zoning ordinance are inconsistent with one another or if they conflict with
provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the village, the
more restrictive provision governs unless otherwise expressly stated. The more
restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.
   C.   Conflict with Private Agreements and Covenants: This zoning ordinance
does not interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easement, covenant, deed
restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of
this zoning ordinance impose a greater restriction than imposed by an agreement
or covenant among private parties, the provisions of this zoning ordinance
govern. The village is not responsible for monitoring or enforcing agreements
or covenants among private parties. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-1-10: RULES OF LANGUAGE AND CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Meanings and Intent: Words and terms expressly defined in this zoning
ordinance including those defined in Chapter 16 have the specific meanings
assigned unless the context indicates another meaning. Words that are not
expressly defined in this zoning ordinance have their ordinary dictionary
meaning.
   B.   Computation of Time:
      1.   References to "days" are to calendar days unless otherwise expressly
stated. References to "business days" are references to regular village
government working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays observed by
village government.
      2.   The time in which an act is to be completed is computed by excluding
the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday
or holiday observed by village government, that day is excluded.
      3.   A day concludes at the close of business and any materials received
after that time will be considered to have been received the following day.
   C.   Tenses and Usage:
      1.   Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the
plural include the singular.
      2.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The
reverse is also true.
      3.   The words "must," "will," "shall" and "may not" are mandatory.
      4.   The word "may" is permissive, not mandatory or required.
      5.   When used with numbers, "up to x," "not more than x" and "a maximum
of x" all include "x."
      6.   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, limited liability company, trust, or corporation, as well as an
individual.
      7.   The words "used" and "occupied" include "intended, designed or
arranged to be used or occupied."
   D.   Conjunctions: Unless the context otherwise expressly indicates,
conjunctions have the following meanings:
      1.   "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and
      2.   "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singularly or in combination.
   E.   Headings and Illustrations: Headings and illustrations are provided for
convenience and reference only and do not define or limit the scope of any
provision of this zoning ordinance. In case of any difference of meaning or
implication between the text of this zoning ordinance and any heading, drawing,
table, figure or illustration, the text governs.
   F.   Versions and Citations: All references in this zoning ordinance to
other village, state or federal regulations are to be construed as referring to
the most up-to-date version and citation for those regulations, unless
otherwise expressly indicated.
   G.   Lists and Examples: Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of
items or examples that use "including," "such as," or similar terms are
intended to provide examples only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive
lists of all possibilities.
   H.   Delegation of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or another officer or employee of the village to perform
an act or duty, that provision will be construed as authorizing the department
head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have
authority. Delegation of authority is not allowed when the provisions of this
zoning ordinance expressly prohibit such delegation.
   I.   Public Officials and Agencies: Unless otherwise expressly stated, all
employees, public officials, boards, commissions, committees, bodies, and
agencies to which references are made are those of the Village of South
Barrington or individuals or agencies legally authorized to act on behalf of
the Village of South Barrington.
   J.   Commentaries: Commentaries are sometimes included in this zoning
ordinance as a means of clarifying provisions or providing supplemental
information thought to be useful for ordinance users. Text marked as
"commentary" has no regulatory effect. It is intended solely as a guide for
administrative officials and the public.
   K.   Commentary: Commentaries have this appearance. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-
2025)
10-1-11: ZONING MAP:
   A.   Establishment: The location and boundaries of the zoning districts
defined in this zoning ordinance must be established by ordinance and shown on
the village's official zoning map, which must be maintained under the direction
of the zoning official.
   B.   Maintenance, Updates, and Publishing: The zoning official is
responsible for directing revisions to the official zoning map to reflect its
amendment as soon as possible after the effective date of zoning map amendments
(rezonings). The zoning map must be published, as required by law.
   C.   District Boundaries: Zoning district boundary lines must be described
by legal description or by a map that accompanies the ordinance establishing
the district or amending the district boundaries. When a legal description is
used, the zoning district boundary is deemed to extend to the centerline of
abutting streets. When a map is used, district boundary lines must be
established by dimensions, property lines, recorded lot lines, or the
centerline of abutting streets, alleys, or railroad rights-of-way, as those
features were of record at the time of adoption.
   D.   Map Interpretations: Where any uncertainty exists about a zoning
boundary that was established by legal description, the legal description
accompanying the amending ordinance governs. In other cases, the zoning
official is authorized to make an interpretation in accordance with the
following criteria:
      1.   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following lot
lines or other lot boundaries will be construed as following such lot lines or
lot boundaries.
      2.   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a
street or railroad right-of-way line will be construed as following the actual
centerline of the street or railroad right-of-way.
      3.   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following the
boundary of an adjacent municipality will be construed as following the actual
municipal boundary.
      4.   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately parallel to, or
as an apparent extension of, a feature described above will be construed as
parallel to, or as an extension of, the subject feature.
   E.   Zoning of Annexed Land: When land is annexed or otherwise brought into
the zoning jurisdiction of the village, it will automatically be classified as
within the A-1 district. Such land may later be rezoned in accordance with the
procedures of Section
10-12-1 F.1. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-1-12: TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this section address the transition to this zoning ordinance
from the zoning regulations in effect immediately preceding the effective date
specified in Section
10-1-3.
   A.   Applications, Permits and Approvals:
      1.   Any building, development or structure for which a building permit
was issued or a complete building permit application had been accepted for
processing before the effective date specified in Section
10-1-3 may be completed in conformance with the issued building permit and
other applicable permits and conditions, even if such building, development or
structure does not comply with provisions of this zoning ordinance. If the
building, development, or structure is not commenced and completed within the
time allowed under the original building permit and any authorized permit
extension, the building, development or structure may be constructed, completed
and occupied only if it complies with the regulations of this zoning ordinance.
      2.   Complete applications for special use permits, variances, planned
unit developments and other zoning-related approvals that are pending approval
on the effective date specified in Section
10-1-3 must be reviewed wholly under the terms of the applicable regulations in
effect immediately preceding the effective date specified in Section
10-1-3. Building permits for construction and development approved under such
zoning approvals may be issued in accordance with Section
10-1-12 A.3.
      3.   The zoning official is authorized to issue building permits for
construction or development approved before the effective date specified in
Section
10-1-3 and for developments pending approval under Section
10-1-12 A.2, even if such building, development or structure does not fully
comply with provisions of this zoning ordinance. If building is not commenced
and completed within the time allowed under the building permit and any
authorized permit extension, then the building, development or structure may be
constructed, completed, and occupied only if it complies with the regulations
of this zoning ordinance.
      4.   When a use classified as a special use under this zoning ordinance
exists as an approved special use or permitted use on the effective date
specified in Section
10-1-3, that use will be considered a lawfully established special use under
this zoning ordinance. When any amendment to this zoning ordinance changes the
classification of a permitted use to a special use, any use lawfully
established before such amendment will be considered a lawfully established
special use after the effective date of the amendment. A lawfully established
existing use that is not allowed as a special use or permitted use in the
district in which the use is now located is considered a nonconforming use and
is subject to all applicable regulations of Chapter 13.
   B.   Permit or License Pending Change in Zoning:
      1.   When a proposal to amend this title is initiated by the board of
trustees, no permit or license may be issued for any use or activity that would
violate the proposed amendment for three (3) months after the date that the
ordinance amendment is initiated; provided, that if within this three (3)-month
period the board of trustees takes final action with reference to adopting the
proposed amendment, the proposed amendment is considered to be in force and
such permit may be issued if otherwise in compliance with all provisions of
this zoning ordinance. If the board of trustees does not take final action on
the proposed amendment within three (3) months of the date of initiation of the
proposed ordinance amendment, the permit may be issued if it otherwise complies
with this zoning ordinance. If within such three (3)-month period the board of
trustees adopts an amendment to this zoning ordinance that prohibits such
building, structure or use, no permit or license approving such building,
structure or use may be issued.
      2.   If a permit for any building or structure, or a license for the
conduct of any such business or use, has been issued before a proposed
ordinance amendment has initiated by the board of trustees, but the business or
use has not been established, or no substantial part of the construction has
been completed at the time that the ordinance amendment is initiated, such
license or permit is suspended and no action may be taken on such license or
permit for a period of three (3) months after the proposed ordinance amendment
has been initiated. If final action by the board of trustees is not taken on
the proposed amendment within three (3) months, the rights under the permit or
license may be exercised. If within such three (3)-month period the board of
trustees adopts an ordinance amendment prohibiting the use of building or
structure on the site involved, no permit or license approving such building,
structure or use may be issued.
   C.   Violations: The adoption of this zoning ordinance does not affect any
pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate, violations of the
previous zoning ordinance that occurred before the effective date specified in
Section
10-1-3. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-1-13: SAFE HARBOR AUTHORIZATION:
The board of trustees is expressly authorized to avoid the preemptive force of
any provision of the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act
(RLUIPA) by any one or more of the following actions:
   A.   Changing the policy or practice that results in a substantial burden on
religious exercise;
   B.   Retaining the policy or practice and exempting the substantially
burdened religious exercise;
   C.   Providing exemptions from the policy or practice for applications that
substantially burden religious exercise; or
   D.   Using any other means to eliminate the substantial burden on religious
exercise. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-1-14: ZONING OFFICIAL:
The zoning official has the following powers and duties:
   A.   Interpreting and administering the provisions of this zoning ordinance;
   B.   Conducting needed inspections of structures and uses of land to
determine compliance with this zoning ordinance;
   C.   Notifying persons responsible for violating this zoning ordinance;
   D.   Taking appropriate actions to ensure compliance with this zoning
ordinance and remedying violations of its provisions, including:
      1.   Ordering discontinuance of any illegal use of land or structures;
      2.   Ordering removal of illegal structures and additions or alterations
thereto;
      3.   Ordering discontinuation of work being done in violation of zoning
ordinance provisions;
   E.   Maintaining permanent and current records of this zoning ordinance,
including all zoning map, amendments, planned unit developments, special use
permits, and variances;
   F.   Maintaining a records of permits, certificates, and copies of notices
of violation and orders of discontinuances or removal for such time as
necessary to ensure continuous compliance with zoning ordinance provisions;
   G.   Receiving and processing all applications for permits and development
approvals under this zoning ordinance;
   H.   Providing technical assistance and support to the board of trustees,
and the plan commission/zoning board of appeals; and
   I.   Exercising other powers and performing other duties as specified or
necessarily implied by the provisions of this zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2025-
1446, 10-9-2025)
10-1-15: SEVERABILITY:
Each portion of this zoning ordinance is considered separable. If any portion
of this zoning ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, that portion is to be deemed severed from the zoning
ordinance and in no way affects or diminishes the validity of the remainder of
the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
CHAPTER 2
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-2-1: The Districts
10-2-2: Purposes
10-2-3: Uses
10-2-4: Building Types
10-2-5: Detached Houses
10-2-6: Nonresidential Buildings
10-2-7: Other Relevant Regulations
10-2-1: THE DISTRICTS:
The residential zoning districts are listed in Table 2-1. When this zoning
ordinance refers to "residential" zoning districts or "A" districts, it is
referring to these districts.
 
Table 2-1: Residential (A) Zoning Districts
Map Symbol District Name
A-1        Single-Family (5 Acres)
A-2        Single-Family (2.5 Acres)
A-3        Single-Family (1 Acre)
A-4        Single-Family (30,000 sq. ft.)
 
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-2-2: PURPOSES:
Residential zoning districts are primarily intended to create, maintain, and
promote a variety of housing opportunities for individual households and to
maintain and promote the desired physical character of existing and developing
areas of the village. While the districts primarily accommodate residential
uses, some nonresidential uses are also allowed. The A districts are primarily
differentiated on the basis of allowed building types, density and lot and
building regulations. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-2-3: USES:
Uses are allowed in A districts in accordance with the use regulations of
Section
10-5-1. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-2-4: BUILDING TYPES:
   A.   Allowed residential uses must occupy residential buildings, which are
allowed in A districts in accordance with Table 2-2.
   B.   Allowed nonresidential uses (e.g., public and civic uses) may occupy
nonresidential buildings, which are allowed in A districts in accordance with
Table 2-2.
 
Table 2-2: Allowed Building Types (A Districts)
Building Type           District        Regulations
                        A-1 A-2 A-3 A-4
Detached House          P   P   P   P   10-2-5
Nonresidential Building P   P   P   P   10-2-6
   P = Permitted
 
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-2-5: DETACHED HOUSES:
   A.   Description: A detached house is a principal residential building that
contains only one dwelling unit and is located on a single lot that is not
occupied by other principal buildings.
   B.   Lot and Building Regulations:
      1.   Detached houses are subject to compliance with the lot and building
regulations of Table 2-3. These regulations are not to be interpreted as a
guarantee that allowed densities and development yields can be achieved on
every lot or subdivision. Other factors, such as central water and sewer
service availability, environmental constraints, and other requirements of this
ordinance and the village code may sometimes work to further limit development
potential.
      2.   General exceptions to these regulations and rules for measuring
compliance can be found in Chapter 15. Regulations governing accessory uses and
structures can be found in Chapter 6.
Table 2-3: Detached House Lot and Building Regulations
Lot and Building Regulations Zoning District
                             A-1 A-2 A-3 A-4
Table 2-3: Detached House Lot and Building Regulations
Lot and Building            Zoning District
Regulations                 A-1                A-2         A-3   A-4
Minimum Lot Area            5 ac.              2.5 ac. [1] 1 ac. 30,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width (feet)    300                150 [1]     125   125
Minimum Street Frontage     20                 20          20    20
(feet)
Building Setbacks (feet)
Minimum front/street side   125                100 [2]     75    40
Minimum interior side       35                 25 [2]      25    25
Minimum rear                35                 35 [2]      25    25
Maximum Impervious Coverage 15                 20          25    30
(% of lot area)
Maximum Height (feet)       35                 35          35    35
Minimum House Size (square  2,400              2,400       2,400 2,400
feet) [3]
Required Garage Size/Type   3-car attached [4]
 
   C.   Table Notes1: The following notes refer to the bracketed numbers
(e.g.," [1]") in Table 2-3:
      1   Commentary: Nearly all A-2-zoned lots in existence on the effective
date of this zoning ordinance (see Section
10-1-3) were "approved with variance." Variances to minimum lot area, lot
width, or setback regulations may be considered in the future on a case-by-case
basis, when such variances are consistent with surrounding lot and building
patterns.
         [1]:   Minimum lot area and lot width requirements for the A-2 zoning
district are as shown in Table 2-3 or as indicated on a plat of the subject lot
recorded on or before the effective date of this zoning ordinance (see Section
10-1-3), whichever area or dimension is less. A-2-zoned lots lawfully recorded
on or before the effective date of this zoning ordinance are deemed to comply
with the minimum lot area and lot width requirements of this zoning ordinance.
         [2]:   Minimum building setback requirements for lots in the A-
2 zoning district are as shown in Table 2-3 or as indicated on a plat of the
subject lot recorded on or before the effective date of this zoning ordinance
(see Section
10-1-3), whichever dimension is less. Principal buildings lawfully established
on A-2-zoned lots on or before the effective date of this zoning ordinance are
deemed to comply with the minimum building setback requirements of this zoning
ordinance.
         [3]:   Floor area calculations include total floor area of heated and
finished living space on first, second and third floors only (measured from the
outside of exterior walls). Floor area calculations expressly exclude
basements, cellars, garages, porches, breezeways, balconies, and other spaces
not used for living, eating, or sleeping purposes.
         [4]:   Garages must be rear- or side-loaded so that the vehicle
entrance does not face the street. Windows must comprise at least fifteen
percent (15%) of any street-facing, exterior garage wall. Detached garages must
be connected to the principal building by a roofed structure.
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-2-6: NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
   A.   Description: A nonresidential building is a principal building occupied
by a nonresidential use.
   B.   Lot and Building Regulations:
      1.   Nonresidential buildings are subject to compliance with the lot and
building regulations of Table 2-4. These regulations are not to be interpreted
as a guarantee that allowed development yields can be achieved on every lot.
Other factors, such as central water and sewer service availability,
environmental constraints, and other requirements of this ordinance and the
village code may sometimes work to further limit development potential.
      2.   General exceptions to these regulations and rules for measuring
compliance can be found in Chapter 15. Regulations governing accessory uses and
structures can be found in Chapter 6.
Table 2-4: Nonresidential Building Lot and Building Regulations
Lot and Building Regulations Zoning District
                             A-1 A-2 A-3 A-4
Table 2-4: Nonresidential Building Lot and Building Regulations
Lot and Building Regulations          Zoning District
                                      A-1    A-2     A-3    A-4
Minimum Lot Area                      5 ac.  2.5 ac. 1 ac.  30,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width (feet)              300    200     125    125
Minimum Street Frontage (feet)        20     20      20     20
Building Setbacks (feet)
Minimum front/street side             125    100     75     40
Minimum interior side                 35     25      25     25
Minimum rear                          35     35      25     25
Maximum Impervious Coverage (% of lot 15     20      25     30
area)
Maximum Height (feet)                 45 [1] 45 [1]  45 [1] 45 [1]
 
   C.   Table Notes: The following notes refer to the bracketed numbers (e.g.,"
[1]") in Table 2-3:
      [1]:   Towers and steeples may be up to seventy-five feet (75') in
height.
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-2-7: OTHER RELEVANT REGULATIONS:
Uses and structures in residential zoning districts may be subject to other
regulations and standards, including the following.
   A.   Accessory Uses and Structures: See Chapter 6.
   B.   Parking: See Chapter 8.
   C.   Landscaping and Screening: See Chapter 9.
   D.   Signs: See Chapter 10.
   E.   Nonconformities: See Chapter 13. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
CHAPTER 3
OFFICE, BUSINESS, AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-3-1: The Districts
10-3-2: Purposes
10-3-3: Uses
10-3-4: Lot And Building Regulations
10-3-5: Other Relevant Regulations
10-3-1: THE DISTRICTS:
The village's office, business, and industrial districts are listed in Table 3-
1. When this zoning ordinance refers to "office" or "business," or "industrial"
zoning districts, respectively, it is referring to these districts.
 
Table 3-1: Office, Business, and Industrial Zoning Districts
Map Symbol District Name
L-O        Limited Office
O-R        Office Research
B-1        Limited Retail
M-1        Manufacturing
 
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-3-2: PURPOSES:
   A.   L-O District: The L-O district is primarily intended to accommodate
small office uses, and to provide a transition from lower intensity residential
districts to higher intensity nonresidential districts.
   B.   O-R District: The O-R district is primarily intended to accommodate
architecturally integrated office, hotel, and entertainment development on
relatively large sites.
   C.   B-1 District: The B-1 district is primarily intended to accommodate
small neighborhood-serving retail and service uses.
   D.   M-1 District: The M-1 district is primarily intended to accommodate
commercial and low-intensity industrial/manufacturing uses. (Ord. 2025-1446,
10-9-2025)
10-3-3: USES:
Uses are allowed in office, business, and industrial districts in accordance
with the use regulations of Section
10-5-1. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-3-4: LOT AND BUILDING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Table of Regulations: The lot and building regulations of Table 3-
2 apply to all principal uses and structures in office, business, and
industrial districts, except as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning
ordinance. General exceptions to lot and building regulations and rules for
measuring compliance can be found in Chapter 15. Additional regulations
governing accessory uses and structures can be found in Chapter 6.
Table 3-2: Office, Business, and Industrial District Lot and Building
Regulations
Regulations L-O O-R B-1 M-1
Table 3-2: Office, Business, and Industrial District Lot and Building
Regulations
Regulations                               L-O    O-R         B-1        M-1
Minimum Contiguous District Area (acres)  10     40          NA         NA
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
With public water and sewer               60,000 5 acres     20,000     NA
Without public water and/or sewer         60,000 5 acres [1] 40,000 [2] NA
Minimum Lot Width (feet)                  110    250         NA         NA
Minimum Street Frontage (feet)            20     20          20         20
Building Setbacks (feet)
Minimum front/street side                 65     150         25         35
Minimum interior side                     25     50          NA         35
Minimum rear                              35     150         50         15 [3]
Max. Building Coverage (% of lot)         15     15          NA         40
Minimum Open Space (% of lot)             50     35 [4]      NA         NA
Regulations                               L-O    O-R         B-1        M-1
Max. Building Height (feet)               35     55 [5]      35         45
Maximum Number of Buildings               1      NA          NA         NA
Maximum Building Floor Area (square feet) 12,000 NA          NA         NA
 
   B.   Table Notes: The following notes refer to the bracketed numbers (e.g.,"
[1]") in Table 3-2:
      [1]:   May be reduced with special use permit approval.
      [2]:   Lots without public water or public sewer service require minimum
one hundred and fifty-foot (150') street frontage.
      [3]:   Minimum setback of thirty feet (30') when abutting A zoning
district. Also, no storage or parking allowed within fifteen feet (15') of an A
zoning district.
      [4]:   May be increased to twenty percent (20%) with special use permit
approval.
      [5]:   Maximum height of office buildings may be increased to fifty-five
feet (55') with special use permit approval. Maximum height of hotels may be
increased to eighty-five feet (85') with special use permit approval.
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-3-5: OTHER RELEVANT REGULATIONS:
Uses and development in office, business, and industrial zoning districts may
be subject to other regulations and standards, including the following.
   A.   Accessory Uses and Structures: See Chapter 6.
   B.   Parking: See Chapter 8.
   C.   Landscaping and Screening: See Chapter 9.
   D.   Signs: See Chapter 10.
   E.   Nonconformities: See Chapter 13. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
CHAPTER 4
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-4-1: General
10-4-2: GU, Governmental Use District
10-4-3: PUD, Planned Unit Development District
10-4-1: GENERAL:
   A.   Purpose: Special purpose zoning districts are tools for dealing with
unique uses or areas or accomplishing special planning and zoning goals.
   B.   Establishment: Except as otherwise expressly stated, special districts
may be established, amended, or removed only in accordance with the zoning map
amendment procedures of Section
10-12-1F.1. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-4-2: GU, GOVERNMENTAL USE DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The GU (Governmental Use) district is intended to accommodate
public, civic, and institutional uses, including parks and open spaces on
relatively large sites.
   B.   Mapping:
      1.   The GU zoning district designation may be applied regardless of
ownership of the land on which the use is located. Land owned by a governmental
or institutional entity but used for non-governmental service or non-
institutional use may not be classified in the GU district.
   C.   Allowed Uses: Principal uses are allowed in GU districts in accordance
with Table 5-1.
   D.   Lot and Building Regulations:
      1.   Table of Regulations: The lot and building regulations of Table 4-
1 apply to all principal uses and structures in the GU district, except as
otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance. General exceptions to lot
and building regulations and rules for measuring compliance can be found in
Chapter 15. Additional regulations governing accessory uses and structures can
be found in Chapter 6.
Table 4-1: Governmental Use District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulations GU
Table 4-1: Governmental Use District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulations                              GU
Minimum Contiguous District Area (acres) 10
Minimum Lot Width (feet)                 500
Minimum Street Frontage (feet)           20
Building Setbacks (feet)
Minimum front/street side                150
Minimum interior side                    50
Minimum rear                             150
Maximum Building Coverage (% of lot)     15 [1]
Minimum Open Space (% of lot)            35 [2]
Maximum Building Height (feet)           45
 
      2.   Table Notes: The following notes refer to the bracketed numbers
(e.g.," [1]") in Table 4-1:
         [1]:   May be increased to twenty percent (20%) with special use
permit approval.
         [2]:   Does not apply to an individual zoning lot that is part of an
overall development that complies with the thirty-five percent (35%)
requirement for the overall development.
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-4-3: PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   General: The PUD, Planned Unit Development overlay district is
intended to accommodate uses and development proposals that would not be
possible under otherwise applicable zoning regulations of this zoning ordinance
and that result in public benefits that are at least commensurate with the
degree of development flexibility provided. Examples of the types of
development that may be appropriate for PUD approval include the following:
         a.   Enhanced Protection of Natural Resource Areas: Developments that
offer enhanced protection of natural resources and sensitive environmental
features.
         b.   Energy Efficiency/Resiliency: Developments that achieve high
levels of energy conservation and sustainability, as evidenced by commitment to
use of alternative energy sources, green infrastructure, (stormwater) best
management practices, and other strategies to combat or mitigate the effects of
climate change.
         c.   Housing Variety: Developments that offer housing options to meet
the needs of different age groups and household types.
         d.   Mixed- and Multi-use Developments: Developments that contain a
complementary mix of residential and nonresidential uses or that provide for a
range of land use types.
         e.   Economic Development: Developments that are consistent with and
help advance the village's economic development and fiscal management goals.
         f.   High-Quality, Innovative Design: Developments that employ site
and building designs that positively impact the village's physical character
and appearance.
      2.   Objectives: Different types of PUDs will achieve different planning
goals. In general, however, all PUDs should include elements that further some
or all of the following objectives:
         a.   Implementation of and consistency with the comprehensive plan and
other relevant village plans and policies;
         b.   Flexibility and creativity in responding to changing social,
economic and market conditions allowing greater public benefits than could be
achieved through strict compliance with conventional zoning and development
regulations;
         c.   Efficient and economical provision of public facilities and
services;
         d.   High-quality buildings and improvements that are compatible with
surrounding areas, as determined by their arrangement, massing, form, character
and landscaping;
         e.   Protection and enhancement of open space amenities and natural
resource features;
         f.   A safe and efficient transportation system that includes
facilities for motorized and non-motorized travel;
         g.   The incorporation green infrastructure to maximize the aesthetic
and water quality benefits of best practices in stormwater management; and
         h.   Attractive, high-quality landscaping, lighting, architecture and
signage that reflects the character of the village.
   B.   General Regulations:
      1.   Authority to File: Applications for PUD zoning approval may be
initiated by the board of trustees, the owner of the property that is the
subject of the proposed PUD zoning map amendment, or by the subject property
owner's authorized agent.
      2.   Ownership and Control: All property owner-initiated planned unit
developments must be under single ownership and/or unified control at the time
of application and approval of the PUD preliminary and final plan.
      3.   Procedure: PUDs must be reviewed and approved in accordance with the
procedures of Section
10-12-3.
      4.   Zoning Map: Approved PUDs must be identified on the zoning map by
appending the map symbol "PUD" as a suffix to the base zoning district
classification, as in "A-4/PUD."
      5.   Regulations and Standards Eligible for Modification: Unless
otherwise expressly approved by the board of trustees as part of the PUD
approval process, PUDs are subject to all applicable regulations of this zoning
ordinance and the village code. The board of trustees is authorized to approve
PUDs that include uses that are not expressly allowed under this zoning
ordinance and developments that do not comply with otherwise applicable zoning,
subdivision and other village regulations and development standards. The PUD
development plan must specify any proposed deviations from otherwise applicable
regulations.
      6.   Inspection of Infrastructure Improvements: Construction of all
required infrastructure improvements must be completed within the time schedule
approved by the board of trustees. All work must comply with the approved plans
and specifications and be in accordance with sound engineering and construction
practices. The village has the right to inspect work at any time to determine
compliance with village standards.
      7.   Maintenance of Improvements: The applicant is responsible for the
maintenance and repair of all public improvements for a period of one year
after the date of acceptance by the board of trustees. In addition, wherever
land improvements are to be completed in phases, the applicant is responsible
for the maintenance and repair of storm water drainage and/or detention
improvements for a period of two (2) years after the date of acceptance by the
board of trustees of all public improvements in areas tributary to the storm
drainage and/or detention improvements, or two (2) years after the completion
of landscaping improvements in areas tributary to the storm drainage and/or
detention facilities, whichever is later. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
CHAPTER 5
PRINCIPAL USES
SECTION:
10-5-1: Use Regulations
10-5-2: Use Categories Generally
10-5-3: Residential Use Category
10-5-4: Public, Civic, And Institutional Use Category
10-5-5: Commercial Use Category
10-5-6: Storage And Distribution Use Category
10-5-7: Manufacturing Use Category
10-5-8: Other Use Category
10-5-1: USE REGULATIONS:
Principal uses are allowed in accordance with Table 5-1.
   A.   Use Classification System: Uses are listed in the first column of Table
5-1. This zoning ordinance classifies uses into categories and subcategories,
which are defined in Chapter 5. In some cases, specific use types and building
types are listed in addition to the use categories and subcategories. Building
types are also defined in Chapter 5.
   B.   Permitted Uses: Uses identified with a "P" are permitted as-of-right in
the subject zoning district, subject to compliance with any supplemental
regulations referenced in the final column of Table 5-1 and with all other
applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance.
   C.   Uses Permitted on Upper Floors: Uses identified with a "U" are
permitted as-of-right in the subject zoning district but only when located
above the ground floor. Such uses are subject to compliance with any
supplemental regulations referenced in the final column of Table 5-1 and with
all other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance.
   D.   Special Uses: Uses identified with an "S" may be allowed if reviewed
and approved in accordance with the special use permit procedures of Section
10-12-4. Special uses are subject to compliance with any supplemental
regulations referenced in the final column of Table 5-1 and with all other
applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance.
   E.   Prohibited Uses: Uses identified with an "-" are expressly prohibited.
Uses that are not listed in the table and that cannot be reasonably interpreted
(as stated in Section10-5-2D) to fall within any defined use category are also
prohibited.
   F.   Supplemental Regulations: The "supplemental regulations" column of
Table 5-1 references additional regulations that apply to some uses. Unless
otherwise expressly stated, compliance with these regulations is required
regardless of whether the use is permitted as-of-right or requires special use
permit approval.
   G.   Accessory Uses: Accessory uses, such as home occupations, are not
regulated by Table 5-1. Customary accessory uses are allowed in conjunction
with principal uses permitted by right or by special use permit, subject to
compliance with all applicable accessory use regulations of Chapter 6.
Table 5-1: Use Regulations
Use Category Zoning Districts           Supplemental Regulations
             A1 A2 A3 A4 LO OR B1 M1 GU
Table 5-1: Use Regulations
Use Category               Zoning Districts           Supplemental Regulations
                           A1 A2 A3 A4 LO OR B1 M1 GU
Subcategory (clickable hyperlink to definition)
   Specific use
RESIDENTIAL
   Household Living     P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  10-2-4
   Group Living
      Convent or monaPtePy P  P  -  -  -  -  -  10-5-3B.1.a
      Group home, smaPl P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  10-5-3B.2.c
      Group home, lar-e -  -  -  -  -  S  -  -  10-5-3B.2.c
      Sheltered Care -  -  S  -  -  -  S  -  -  10-5-3B.3.a
PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL
   Community Assembly
      Non-secular    P  P  P  P  -  S  S  -  S  10-5-4A.3
      Secular        -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -  -  10-5-4A.3
   Hospital             -  -  -  -  -  S  -  -  -
   Library or Cultural  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  P
Exhibit
   Natural Resource     P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Preservation
   Parks and Recreation S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  P
   Safety Service       -  -  -  -  S  S  S  S  P
   School               S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -
 
Use Category Zoning Districts           Supplemental Regulations
             A1 A2 A3 A4 LO OR B1 M1 GU
                                            Zoning Districts           Supplemental
Use Category                                A1 A2 A3 A4 LO OR B1 M1 GU Regulations

   Utilities and Public Service Facility
      Minor                           P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P
      Major                           -  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  S
COMMERCIAL
   Animal Service   
      Boarding or shelter             -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -
      Veterinary                      -  -  -  -  -  -  S  P  -
   Commercial Service
      Building service                -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -
      Business support service        -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -
      Consumer Maintenance and Repair -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -
Service
      Personal improvement service    -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -
      Research service                -  -  -  -  S  :  P  -  P  -
   Day Care                              -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -
   Eating and Drinking Places
      Bar                             -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -  -
      Restaurant                      -  -  -  -  S  S  P  -  -
   Entertainment and Events, Spectator   -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  S
   Financial Service                     -  -  -  -  S  S  -  -  -
   Fitness or Instructional Service      -  -  -  -  S  S  P  -  -
   Lodging
      Hotel or motel                  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  -  -
      Short-term rental               P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  10-5-5I.2
   Office                                -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  P
 
Use Category Zoning Districts           Supplemental Regulations
             A1 A2 A3 A4 LO OR B1 M1 GU
                                              Zoning Districts           Supplemental
Use Category                                  A1 A2 A3 A4 LO OR B1 M1 GU Regulations

   Retail Sales
      Convenience goods                 -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -
      Consumer shopping goods           -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -
      Building supplies and equipment   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -
   Self-service Storage Facility           -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -
   Vehicle Sales and Service
      Fueling station                   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -
      Personal vehicle repair and mainte-an-e -  -  -  -  -  P  -
      Personal vehicle sales and rentals-  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -
      Vehicle body and paint finishing s-op-  -  -  -  -  -  P  -
STORAGE & DISTRIBUTION
   Limited Warehouse                       -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  10-5-6A
   Data Center                             -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -
MANUFACTURING
   Artisan Manufacturing                   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -
   Low-Impact Manufacturing and Industry   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -
OTHER
   Drive-through Facility                  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -  10-5-8B
   Cannabis Business Establishment         -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -
   Video Gaming                            -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -
   Wireless Communication Facility
      Freestanding tower                -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  Chapter 7
      Tower-mounted or building-mounted -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  P  Chapter 7
antenna
 
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-5-2: USE CATEGORIES GENERALLY:
This section establishes and describes the use categorization system used to
classify principal uses in this zoning ordinance.
   A.   Use Categories: This zoning ordinance classifies principal land uses
into 8 major groupings (described in Sections
10-5-3 through
10-5-8). These major groupings are referred to as "use categories." The use
categories are as follows:
      1.   Residential. See Section
10-5-3.
      2.   Public, Civic and Institutional. See Section
10-5-4.
      3.   Commercial. See Section
10-5-5.
      4.   Storage & Distribution. See Section
10-5-6.
      5.   Manufacturing. See Section
10-5-7.
      6.   Other. See Section
10-5-8.
   B.   Use Subcategories: Each use category is further divided into more
specific "subcategories." Use subcategories classify principal land uses and
activities based on common functional, product or physical characteristics,
such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents,
and how goods or services are sold or delivered and site conditions.
   C.   Specific Use Types: Some use subcategories are further broken down to
identify specific types of uses that are regulated differently than the use
subcategory generally.
   D.   Determination of Use Categories and Subcategories:
      1.   The zoning official is authorized to classify proposed uses into the
most similar and appropriate use category and subcategory descriptions of this
chapter after considering:
         a.   The types of activities that will occur in conjunction with the
use;
         b.   The types of equipment and processes to be used;
         c.   The existence, number and frequency of residents, customers, or
employees;
         d.   Parking demands associated with the use; and
         e.   Other factors deemed relevant to a similar use determination.
      2.   Proposed uses that cannot be reasonably assigned to a similar and
appropriate use category or subcategory are deemed prohibited, unless approved
by special use permit. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-5-3: RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORY:
This category includes uses that provide living accommodations for one or more
persons. The residential use subcategories are as follows.
   A.   Household Living: Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a single
household. When dwelling units are rented, tenancy is arranged for a minimum of
four (4) months. Uses where tenancy may be arranged for a shorter period are
not considered residential; they are considered a form of lodging. Household
living uses must occupy an allowed residential building type, as identified in
Table 2-2.
   B.   Group Living: Residential occupancy of a building or any portion of a
building by a group other than a household. Group living uses typically provide
communal kitchen/dining facilities. Examples of group living uses include group
homes, convents, monasteries, nursing homes, and memory care assisted living
facilities.
      1.   Convent or Monastery: A community of individuals bound by vows to a
religious life under.
         a.   Supplemental Use Regulations: A convent or monastery occupied by
more than eight (8) individuals requires special use permit approval.
      2.   Group Home: A detached house shared by persons with disabilities who
live together as a single housekeeping unit in a long-term, household-like
environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation
in community activities for the residents with a primary goal of enabling the
resident to live as independently as possible. Group homes do not include pre-
release, work-release, probationary, or other programs that serve as an
alternative to incarceration.
         a.   Small Group Home: A group home for eight (8) or fewer
individuals, plus supervisory or oversight personnel.
         b.   Large Group Home: A group home for more than eight (8)
individuals, plus supervisory or oversight personnel.
         c.   Supplemental Use Regulations: Group homes are subject to the
following supplemental use regulations:
         (1)   Group homes must be licensed or certified by the state;
         (2)   Group homes must be separated by a distance of at least two
thousand five hundred feet (2,500') from any another group home (measured in
straight line from lot line to lot line) unless this minimum distance
requirement is waived through the special use permit process of Section
10-12-4; and
         (3)   Group homes must have the same general exterior appearance as
other detached houses on the same blockface.
      3.   Sheltered Care: A "long-term care facility," as defined in 210 ILCS
45/1-113, that provides maintenance and personal care but not skilled nursing
care. Also known as "assisted living facilities."
         a.   Supplemental Use Regulations: Sheltered care facilities are
subject to the following supplemental use regulations:
         (1)   Minimum lot area: three and a half (3.5) acres;
         (2)   Maximum building coverage: twenty percent (20%) of subject lot;
and
         (3)   Water and sewer service: Village of South Barrington. (Ord.
2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-5-4: PUBLIC, CIVIC, AND INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORY:
This category includes public, quasi-public and private uses that provide
unique services that serve and provide benefits to the public at-large. The
public, civic and institutional subcategories are as follows.
   A.   Community Assembly: Uses that provide gathering places for secular or
non-secular assembly or entertainment events. Community assembly uses may
provide incidental food or beverage service.
      1.   Non-secular Assembly and Entertainment: Non-secular assembly and
entertainment uses are those that are primarily centered on religious or
spiritual matters, such as customarily occur in churches, synagogues, temples,
mosques, and other facilities used for religious worship.
      2.   Secular Assembly and Entertainment: Secular assembly and
entertainment uses are those that are not primarily centered on religious or
spiritual matters. Typical uses include fraternal organizations, private
(member-based) clubs, and community centers.
      3.   Supplemental Use Regulations: Community assembly uses in any
residential zoning district require a minimum lot area of ten (10) acres and
may not exceed thirty percent (30%) total building coverage. In all other
zoning districts, the minimum lot area is two (2) acres, and the maximum
building coverage is forty percent (40%).
   B.   Hospital: Uses providing medical or surgical care to patients requiring
on-site stay of overnight or longer.
   C.   Library or Cultural Exhibit: Museum-like preservation and exhibition of
objects in one or more of the arts and sciences, gallery exhibition of works of
art or library collections of books, manuscripts and similar materials for
study and reading. Includes aquariums and planetariums.
   D.   Natural Resource Preservation: Undeveloped land left in a natural state
for specific use as visual open space or environmental purposes. Typical uses
include nature preserves, arboretums, wetlands, flood management projects and
reservoirs.
   E.   Parks and Recreation: Recreational, social, or multi-purpose uses
associated with public parks and open spaces, including playgrounds,
playfields, play courts, and other facilities typically associated with public
parks and open space areas. Also includes public and private golf courses and
tennis clubs.
   F.   Safety Service: Establishments that provide fire, police, or life
protection, together with the incidental storage and maintenance of necessary
vehicles. Typical uses include fire stations, police stations, ambulance
services and storm or civil defense shelters.
   G.   School: Public and private schools at the primary, elementary, middle
school or high school level that provide basic, compulsory education.
   H.   Utilities and Public Service Facility:
      1.   Minor: Infrastructure services that need to be located in or close
to the area where the service is provided. Minor utilities and public service
facilities generally do not have regular employees at the site and typically
have few if any impacts on surrounding areas. Typical uses include water and
sewer pump stations; gas regulating stations; underground electric distribution
substations; electric transformers; water conveyance systems; stormwater
facilities and conveyance systems; telephone switching equipment and emergency
communication warning/broadcast facilities.
      2.   Major: Infrastructure services that typically have substantial
visual or operational impacts on nearby areas. Typical uses include but are not
limited to water and wastewater treatment facilities, high-voltage electric
substations, utility-scale power generation facilities (including wind, solar
and other renewable and nonrenewable energy sources), and utility-scale water
storage facilities, such as water towers and reservoirs. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-
2025)
10-5-5: COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORY:
The commercial use category includes uses that provide a business service or
involve the selling, leasing, or renting of merchandise to the general public.
The commercial use subcategories are as follows.
   A.   Animal Service: Uses that provide goods and services for care of
animals, including the following specific use types:
      1.   Boarding or Shelter: Animal shelters, care services and kennel
services for dogs, cats, and small animals, including boarding kennels, pet
resorts/hotels, pet adoption centers, dog training centers, animal rescue
shelters and zoos and animal sanctuaries. Also includes animal hospitals and
clinics with outdoor boarding or outdoor kennel facilities.
      2.   Veterinary: Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics with no outdoor
boarding or outdoor kennel facilities. All animal hospitals and clinics with
outdoor boarding or outdoor kennel facilities are classified as boarding or
shelter uses.
   B.   Commercial Service: Uses that provide for consumer or business services
and for the repair and maintenance of a wide variety of products. Examples of
commercial service uses include the following:
      1.   Building Service: Uses that provide maintenance and repair services
for all structural and mechanical elements of structures, as well as the
exterior spaces of premises. Typical uses include janitorial, landscape
maintenance, carpet cleaning, chimney sweeps, extermination, plumbing,
electrical, HVAC, roofing, window cleaning and similar services.
      2.   Business Support Service: Uses that provide personnel services,
printing, copying, package (delivery) drop-off, photographic services or
communication services to businesses or consumers. Typical uses include
employment agencies, copy and print shops, delivery/courier service drop-off
location for consumers, and photo developing labs.
      3.   Consumer Maintenance and Repair Service: Uses that provide
maintenance, cleaning, and repair services for consumer goods on a site other
than that of the customer (i.e., customers bring goods to the site of the
repair/maintenance business). Typical uses include laundry and dry-cleaning
pick-up shops, tailors, dressmakers, shoe repair, picture framing shops,
locksmiths, vacuum repair shops, electronics repair shops and similar
establishments. Business that offer repair and maintenance service for large
equipment or technicians who visit customers' homes or places of business are
classified as a "building service."
      4.   Personal Improvement Service: Uses that provide personal grooming,
cosmetic or health and well-being-related services. Typical uses include
barbers, hair, and nail salons, tanning salons, day spas, and health clubs.
Tattoo and body piercing establishments, as defined in 410 ILCS 54/1, are
classified as personal improvement service uses but are expressly prohibited in
the village regardless of zoning designation:
      5.   Research Service: Uses engaged in scientific research and testing
services leading to the development of new products and processes. Such uses
resemble office buildings or campuses and do not involve the mass production,
distribution, or sale of products. Research service uses do not produce odors,
dust, noise, vibration, or other external impacts that are detectable beyond
the property lines of the subject property.
   C.   Day Care: Uses providing care, protection and supervision for children
on a regular basis away from their primary residence for less than twenty-four
(24) hours per day. Examples include state-licensed childcare centers,
preschools, nursery schools, head start programs, and after-school programs.
Day care expressly includes state-accredited facilities for childcare, as
defined in the Illinois Child Care Act.
   D.   Eating and Drinking Places:
      1.   Bar or Tavern: Uses that cater primarily to adults, twenty-one (21)
years of age and older and that sell and serve intoxicating beverages and/or
beer as their principal business. Typical bar uses include bars, taverns, and
brewpubs.
      2.   Restaurant: An establishment that serves food for on- or off-
premises consumption as its principal business. Typical examples of restaurant
uses include restaurants, cafés, cafeterias, ice cream/yogurt shops, donut
shops and coffee shops. A restaurant may include a bar area for service of
alcohol if the restaurant employs at least one full-time cook, has a menu and
fully equipped kitchen for cooking and preparation of meals.
   E.   Entertainment and Events, Spectator: Provision of cultural,
entertainment, athletic, and other events to spectators other than those
expressly described under the community assembly use category of Section
10-5-4A. Typical uses include entertainment and sports venues, live theaters,
and cinemas. Off-track wagering locations (as defined in 230 ILCS 5/1) are
included in the spectator entertainment and events use subcategory but are
expressly prohibited in the village regardless of zoning designation.
   F.   Financial Service: Uses related to the exchange, lending, borrowing and
safe keeping of money. Automatic teller machines, kiosks and similar facilities
that do not have on-site employees or amplified sound are not classified as
financial service uses if they meet the criteria for classification as an
accessory use (see Section
10-6-1B).Typical examples of financial service use types are banks and credit
unions. The following types of are also classified as financial service uses
but are expressly prohibited in the village regardless of zoning designation:
      1.   Pawnshops and pawn brokers (as defined in 205 ILCS 510);
      2.   Establishments that provide (vehicle) title-secured loans or payday
loans (as defined in 815 ILCS 122) and similar services; and
      3.   Establishments primarily engaged in buying gold or other precious
metals (e.g., cash-for-gold businesses).
   G.   Fitness or Instructional Service: Uses in an enclosed building that
focus on providing individual or group instruction or training in fine arts,
music, dance, drama, fitness, language, or similar activities. Also includes
dance studios, ballet academies, yoga studios, martial arts instruction,
tutoring, artist studios and photography studios.
   H.   Funeral and Mortuary Service: Uses that provide services related to the
death of a human or domestic, household pet, including funeral homes and
mortuaries.
   I.   Lodging: Uses that provide temporary lodging by transient guests or
occupants. Lodging uses sometimes provide food or entertainment, primarily to
registered guests. Examples of specific lodging use types include:
      1.   Hotel/Motel: An establishment, other than a short-term rental, in
which temporary lodging is offered for compensation. A hotel/motel may include
an accessory use bar.
      2.   Short-Term Rental: The use or occupancy of all or part of a
principal building for a period of less than four (4) months pursuant to a
written or oral agreement that permits and/or provides for occupancy of all or
part of such building by any person other than the owner thereof, or an
immediate family member of the owner thereof, and whether or not such occupancy
is in exchange for consideration.
         a.   Supplemental Use Regulations: Short-term rentals are subject to
the following supplemental use regulations:
         (1)   These supplemental use regulations are intended to protect and
preserve the quiet enjoyment of residential properties and neighborhoods within
the village and to mitigate and/or eliminate adverse secondary effects the
village and its residents have experienced by reason of short-term rentals of
certain residential structures in the village, including gatherings that have
been characterized by excessive noise, overcrowded parking, and suspected
illegal activity.
         (2)   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this zoning ordinance,
leasing, renting, offering or inviting the leasing or renting, or otherwise
permitting the short-term rental or occupancy of any dwelling or accessory
structure located within the village for less than four (4) consecutive months
at a time is prohibited, with the exception of a hotel or similar establishment
duly licensed by the village. Such conduct is prohibited, whether engaged in or
participated in by the owner of the property, one or more agents of the
property owners, or by any persons leasing, or seeking to lease as a lessors,
or renting or seeking to rent as lessees or otherwise occupy a premises as
tenant or temporary occupant thereof.
         (3)   The term of any lease or occupancy agreement that satisfies the
minimum term required by these regulations may be extended on a month-to-month
basis on the condition that the tenants remain the same.
         (4)   Dwellings may not be leased or otherwise occupied by other than
the same tenant, more than two (2) times during any consecutive twelve (12)-
month period unless the subject rental agreement has been terminated by reason
of a tenant default.
         (5)   The restrictions of this section apply whether the rental
premises comprise all or a part of the principal building.
         (6)   Whether or not consideration is exchanged for the lease or
rental of a premises, does not affect the fact that the occupancy of the
premises is treated as a short-term rental for the purposes of this zoning
ordinance.
         (7)   The property owner remains responsible for compliance with all
applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance and all other applicable village
regulations during the term of any rental or occupancy agreement and during the
term of any occupancy of the rental premises by persons other than the property
owner.
         (8)   Temporary structures may not be used for a short-term rental.
         (9)   The prohibition on short-term rentals do not apply when the
immediately preceding owner of a property maintains possession of the dwelling
unit after closing on a real estate transaction for the sale thereof and leases
such property back from the successor owner pursuant to a written agreement.
         (10)   Notwithstanding anything otherwise provided to the contrary in
this zoning ordinance or the village code, any persons found guilty of
violating any short-term rental provisions of this section are subject to a
mandatory fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day, nor
more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day. Each day a principal
structure or any accessory structure is offered for rent as a short-term
rental, is leased or rented as a short-term rental and each day a principal
structure or any accessory structure is occupied as a short-term rental
constitutes a separate violation under this section. Without any limitation on
the foregoing, each day a violation of this section occurs or continues is a
separate offense, and each such offense is subject to not less than the minimum
mandatory daily fine.
         (11)   A license must be obtained from the village before establishing
a short-term rental or engaging in short-term rental of property. Required
short-term rental licenses must be renewed annually.
   J.   Office: Uses in an enclosed building, customarily performed in an
office, that focus on providing executive, management, administrative,
professional or medical services. Examples of specific office use types
include:
      1.   Business and Professional Office: Offices of companies and
organizations. Examples include corporate office, law offices, architectural
firms, insurance companies and other executive, management or administrative
offices for businesses and organizations.
      2.   Medical, Dental and Health Practitioner Office: Office uses related
to diagnosis and treatment of human patients' illnesses, injuries and physical
maladies that are scheduled in advance and can be performed in an office
setting with no overnight care. Typical uses include offices of physicians,
dentists, psychiatrists, psychologists, and chiropractors. Surgical and medical
centers that do not involve overnight patient stays are included in this use
subcategory, as are medical and dental laboratories, unless otherwise expressly
indicated. Ancillary sales of medications and medical products are allowed in
association with a medical, dental or health practitioner office.
   K.   Retail Sales: Uses involving the sale, lease, or rental of new or used
goods to the ultimate consumer. Examples of specific retail use types include:
      1.   Convenience Goods:
         a.   Retail sales uses that sell or otherwise provide:
         (1)   Sundry goods;
         (2)   Products for personal grooming and for the day-to-day
maintenance of personal health; or
         (3)   Food or beverages for off-premise consumption, including grocery
stores, retail bakeries and similar uses that provide incidental and accessory
food and beverage service as part of their primary retail sales business.
         b.   Typical uses include convenience stores, drug stores, grocery and
specialty food stores, wine or liquor stores, gift shops, newsstands, and
florists.
      2.   Consumer Shopping Goods: Retail sales uses that sell or otherwise
provide wearing apparel, fashion accessories, furniture, household appliances
and similar consumer goods, large and small, functional, and decorative, for
use, entertainment, comfort, or aesthetics. Typical uses include clothing
stores, appliance stores, TV and electronics stores, bike shops, book stores,
stationery stores, art galleries, hobby shops, furniture stores, pet supply
stores, shoe stores, toy stores, sporting goods stores, variety stores, musical
instrument stores, medical supplies, office supplies and office furnishing
stores.
      3.   Building Supplies and Equipment: Retail sales uses that sell or
otherwise provide goods to repair, maintain, or visually enhance a structure or
premises. Typical uses include hardware stores, home improvement stores, paint
and wallpaper supply stores and garden supply stores.
   L.   Self-service Storage Facility: A building or open-air use that provides
separate, small-scale, self-service storage facilities leased or rented to
individuals or small businesses. Such uses are expressly prohibited in the
village.
   M.   Vehicle Sales and Service: Uses that provide for the sale, rental,
maintenance, or repair of new or used vehicles and vehicular equipment. The
vehicle sales and service use subcategory includes the following specific use
types:
      1.   Fueling Station (for Personal, Consumer Vehicles): Uses engaged in
retail sales of vehicle fuels for personal vehicles, other than fleet fueling
facilities and truck stops. Fueling stations may dispense conventional vehicle
fuels and/or alternative vehicle fuels.
      2.   Personal Vehicle Repair and Maintenance: Uses that repair, install,
or maintain the mechanical components of automobiles, small trucks or vans, ,
or motorcycles or that wash, clean, or otherwise protect the exterior or
interior surfaces of these vehicles.
      3.   Personal Vehicle Sales and Rentals: Uses that provide for the sale
or rental of new or used autos, small trucks or vans, trailers, or motorcycles.
Typical examples include automobile dealers, auto malls, car rental agencies.
      4.   Vehicle Body and Paint Finishing Shop: Uses that primarily conduct
motor vehicle body work and repairs or that apply paint to the exterior or
interior surfaces of motor vehicles by spraying, dipping, flow-coating or other
similar means. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-5-6: STORAGE AND DISTRIBUTION USE CATEGORY:
This category includes uses that store and distribute goods, including
establishments that store, process, and distribute electronic data. The storage
and distribution subcategories are as follows:
   A.   Warehouse, Limited: Indoor storage of goods, products, or materials.
      1.   Supplemental Use Regulations:
         a.   Limited warehouse facilities may not include more than two (2)
truck loading bays.
         b.   Outdoor storage is prohibited.
   B.   Data Center: A building used primarily for the storage, management,
processing, and transmission of digital data and that houses computer or
network equipment, systems, servers, appliances, and other associated
components related to digital data storage and operations. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-
9-2025)
10-5-7: MANUFACTURING USE CATEGORY:
This category includes uses that produce goods and products, including the
design, storage and handling of these products and the materials from which
they are produced. The manufacturing subcategories are:
   A.   Artisan Manufacturing: On-site production of goods by hand
manufacturing, involving the use of hand tools and small-scale, light
mechanical equipment in a completely enclosed building with no outdoor
operations or storage. Typical uses include woodworking and cabinet shops,
ceramic studios, jewelry manufacturing and similar types of arts and crafts or
very small-scale manufacturing uses that have no negative external impacts on
surrounding properties.
   B.   Low-Impact Manufacturing and Industry: Manufacturing or refurbishing of
finished parts or products, primarily from previously prepared materials.
Typical uses include: catering establishments, craft brewing and distilling (as
defined and regulated by ILCS Ch. 235), printing and related support
activities; machinery manufacturing; food processing and manufacturing;
computer and electronic product manufacturing/assembly; electrical equipment,
appliance, component manufacturing/ assembly; furniture and related product
manufacturing/assembly; and other manufacturing and production establishments
that typically have very few, if any, negative external impacts on surrounding
properties. Also includes "artisan industrial" uses that do not comply with the
enclosed building or outside operations/storage criteria that apply to such
uses. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-5-8: OTHER USE CATEGORY:
This category includes uses that do not fit the other use categories. The
subcategories of "other" uses are as follows:
   A.   Cannabis Business Establishment: A cannabis dispensary, cannabis
cultivation center, cannabis craft grower, cannabis infuser, cannabis
transporter, cannabis processor, on-premises cannabis consumption
establishment, and such other cannabis business establishments authorized under
the under the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
      1.   Cannabis Consumption Establishment, On-Premises: A cannabis
dispensary, or retail tobacco store (as defined in Section 10 of the Smoke Free
Illinois Act), authorized or permitted to allow the on-premises consumption of
cannabis.
      2.   Cannabis Craft Grower: A "craft grower," as defined in Section 1-10
of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
      3.   Cannabis Cultivation Center: A "cultivation center," as defined in
Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
      4.   Cannabis Dispensary: A "dispensing organization" and "dispensary,"
as defined in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
      5.   Cannabis Infuse: An "infuser organization" or "infuser," as defined
in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
      6.   Cannabis Processor: A "processing organization" or "processer," as
defined in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
      7.   Cannabis Transporter: A "transporting organization" or
"transporter," as defined in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act.
   B.   Drive-through Facility: A component or feature of an allowed use that
by design, physical facilities, service procedures, or packaging procedures,
encourages or permits customers to receive services or obtain goods while
remaining in motor vehicles. Typical drive-through facility uses include, but
are not limited to, drive-through restaurants, drive-through banks, car washes,
and drive-through pharmacies. Establishments that provide services to customers
remaining in a motor vehicle while it is parked in a parking space designated
for curbside pickup are not designated as drive-through facilities.
      1.   Supplemental Use Regulations: Drive-through facilities are subject
to the following supplemental regulations:
         a.   A traffic study, including an analysis of vehicle stacking
(queuing) demand, must be included with the special use permit application.
         b.   All drive-through lanes must be designed so that they do not
interfere with parking movements or safe pedestrian circulation and must be
located and designed to ensure that they do not adversely affect traffic
circulation on adjoining streets. Drive-through lanes on corner lots may not
route exiting traffic into residential neighborhoods.
         c.   Site plans must show the location of drive-through windows and
associated facilities (for example: communications systems and access aisles),
as well as adjacent residential uses.
         d.   Sound attenuation walls, landscaping or other mitigation measures
may be required to ensure that drive-through facilities will not have adverse
noise- or air-quality-related impacts on residential uses located within two
hundred feet (200') of the lot containing the drive-through facility.
         e.   All restaurant drive-through facilities must have an escape
("bail-out") lane with a minimum width of ten feet (10') to allow other
vehicles to pass those waiting to be served. A drive aisle may serve as the
escape lane if it meets the requirements of this section. Escape lane
requirements can be waived during the special use permit approval process when
the applicant demonstrates that such a waiver will not result in an adverse
effect on public safety or customer convenience.
         f.   All vehicle stacking lanes must be clearly identified, through
such means as striping, landscaping, pavement design, curbing and/or signs.
   C.   Video Gaming: Any establishment that includes one or more video gaming
terminals, as defined in 230 ILCS 40/5.
   D.   Wireless Communication Facility: Towers, antennas, equipment, equipment
buildings and other facilities used in the provision of wireless communication
services.
      1.   Freestanding Tower: A monopole structure intended to support
equipment that is used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications signals,
but not including guyed or lattice construction steel structures.
      2.   Building or Tower-Mounted Antenna: The physical device that is
attached to a freestanding tower, nonresidential building or other structure,
through which electromagnetic, wireless telecommunications signals authorized
by the Federal Communications Commission are transmitted or received.
      3.   Supplemental Use Regulations: Wireless communication facilities are
subject to the regulations of Chapter 7. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
CHAPTER 6
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
10-6-1: Generally Applicable Regulations
10-6-2: Accessory Dwelling Units
10-6-3: AC Compressors And Standby Power Generators
10-6-4: Alternative Energy Systems
10-6-5: Electric Vehicle Charging Stations
10-6-6: Flagpoles
10-6-7: Home Occupations
10-6-8: Private Residential Recreational Structures
10-6-9: Swimming Pools And Hot Tubs
10-6-10: Vehicle Parking And Storage
10-6-1: GENERALLY APPLICABLE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Accessory Uses Allowed: Accessory uses and structures are allowed only
in connection with lawfully established principal uses.
   B.   Allowed Uses and Structures:
      1.   Allowed accessory uses and structures are limited to those expressly
regulated in this chapter as well as those that, in the determination of the
zoning official, satisfy all the following criteria:
         a.   They are customarily found in conjunction with the subject
principal use or principal structure;
         b.   They are subordinate and clearly incidental to the principal use
of the property; and
         c.   They serve a necessary function for or contribute to the comfort,
safety, or convenience of occupants of the principal use.
      2.   Detached garages and sheds are expressly prohibited in the village
unless attached to the principal building by a roofed structure and constructed
of the same exterior building materials as the principal building.
      3.   Fences and walls are prohibited as accessory structures except as
otherwise expressly allowed or required by specific provisions of this zoning
ordinance (e.g., swimming pool fences and pool equipment).
   C.   Time of Construction and Establishment:
      1.   Accessory uses may be established only after the principal use of
the property is in place.
      2.   Accessory structures may be established in conjunction with or after
the principal building or use. They may not be established before the principal
building or use is in place.
   D.   Location: Accessory uses and structures must be located on the same lot
as the principal use to which they are accessory, unless otherwise expressly
stated.
   E.   Compliance with Lot and Building Regulations: Unless otherwise
expressly stated, accessory uses and structures are subject to the same lot and
building regulations as apply to principal uses and buildings. See also the
provisions governing allowed yard obstructions (Section
10-15-6C) and exceptions to height limits (Section
10-15-8B). (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-6-2: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   General Regulations: All accessory dwelling units (ADUs) must comply
with the regulations of this subsection.
      1.   Zoning District Regulations: Accessory dwelling units are subject to
all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which they are located,
unless otherwise expressly stated in this section.
      2.   Where Allowed: Accessory dwelling units are allowed only on lots
occupied by a detached house.
      3.   Occupancy: Accessory dwelling units may be occupied only by members
of the family who occupy the principal dwelling unit or by caregivers or
employees of the family who occupy the principal dwelling unit.
      4.   Number: No more than one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per lot.
      5.   Methods of Creation: Accessory dwelling units must be located within
the principal building (house), and may be created through any of the following
methods:
         a.   Converting existing floor area within the interior of a principal
dwelling unit (e.g., attic or basement) into an ADU;
         b.   Adding floor area to an existing dwelling unit to accommodate an
ADU;
         c.   Constructing a new principal dwelling unit that contains an
accessory dwelling unit.
      6.   Location of Entrances: Only one entrance door to a house containing
an accessory dwelling unit may be located on the façade of the house that faces
a street unless the house had an additional street-facing entrance before the
accessory dwelling unit was created.
      7.   Size: The floor area of an ADU may not exceed the gross floor area
of the principal dwelling unit on the subject lot (excluding any garage), or
one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is less.
      8.   Parking: No additional parking is required for an accessory dwelling
unit. Any existing required parking for the principal dwelling unit must be
maintained or replaced on-site.
      9.   Building Permit Approval: Before the issuance of a building permit
for the construction of a new accessory dwelling unit, plans must be reviewed
and approved by the building official to determine compliance with all
applicable building and life safety codes.
   B.   Building Additions: The regulations of this subsection apply to all
building additions proposed to be occupied by ADUs.
      1.   Exterior Finish Materials: The exterior finish material must be the
same or visually match in type, size and placement, the exterior finish
material of the remainder of the house.
      2.   Roof Pitch: The roof pitch must be the same as the predominant roof
pitch on the remainder of the house.
      3.   Trim: Trim elements on the building addition to must be the same in
type, size and location as the trim used on the remainder of the house.
      4.   Setbacks: Building additions are subject to compliance with all
applicable building setback requirements.
   C.   Deed Restriction:
      1.   Before issuance of a building permit to establish an accessory
dwelling unit, the owner of the subject property must file an affidavit with
the village administrator and record a deed restriction stating that the owners
of the subject property agree:
         a.   To comply with the rental prohibition and other applicable
restrictions of this chapter; and
         b.   To notify all prospective purchasers of such requirements.
      2.   The deed restriction runs with the land and is binding upon the
property owner, their heirs and assigns, and upon any parties subsequently
acquiring any right, title, or interest in the property. The affidavit and deed
restriction must be in a form prescribed by the village administrator. (Ord.
2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-6-3: AC COMPRESSORS AND STANDBY POWER GENERATORS:
Air conditioner compressors and generators used for purposes of standby
(emergency backup) electrical power are permitted in all zoning districts
subject to the following regulations:
   A.   AC compressors and generators must be located within an interior side
yard or rear yard and may project into required interior side or rear setbacks
if such equipment is located within five feet (5') of the side or rear wall of
the principal building. However, compressors and generators may not encroach
more than five feet (5') into a required side setback or ten feet (10') into a
required rear setback.
   B.   Compressors and generator cabinets must be screened from view of public
rights-of-way and abutting lots with year-round landscaping material.
   C.   Standby power generators must be enclosed by a sound attenuation box or
cabinet that does not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area or five feet (5')
in height. Any noise reducing mufflers provided by the manufacturer must be
utilized. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-6-4: ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS:
   A.   General:
      1.   Regulations: It is unlawful to install any form of alternative
energy system other than one permitted by the terms of this ordinance in the
zoning district wherein such premises, building or structure is located.
      2.   Building Permit Required: A building permit must be obtained before
the installation of any alternative energy system.
      3.   Location And Manner of Installation: All alternative energy systems
must be installed in a location and manner so as not to be objectionable to the
property occupants, adjoining property owners. Objectionable criteria include:
         a.   Appearance: Must be integrated in architecture of building.
         b.   Sound: Sound may not exceed fifty (50) dB at lot line.
         c.   Odor: No noxious odor detectable at lot line.
         d.   Discharge: No toxic discharge and all other waste products to be
diluted in accordance with IEPA and OSHA rules and regulations.
         e.   Vibration: No measurable vibration at the lot line.
         f.   Documentation: Compliance with the above criteria must be
demonstrated by acceptable scientific and engineering data and/or reports and
are subject to verification testing by the village or its authorized agent.
      4.   Inoperable or Damaged Equipment: When any alternative energy system
equipment has become inoperable or damaged for a period of one hundred and
eighty (180) days or more, or otherwise violates the requirements of this
ordinance, it is deemed abandoned. The owner of abandoned alternative energy
system equipment must remove the alternative energy system equipment within
thirty (30) days following the mailing of written notice that removal is
required. If the abandoned facility is not removed within the time period
required the village may remove all structures at the owner's expense. In the
case of removal the village has the right to file a lien for reimbursement, for
any and all expenses incurred by the village, without limitation, including
attorney fees and accrued interest. Upon removal the site must be restored to
the condition that existed before installation of the equipment.
   B.   Solar Energy Collection Panels and Solar Water Heating Systems (Solar
Panels):
      1.   Solar systems are allowed on side or rear roof surfaces as set forth
herein in any zoning district as permitted accessory uses. Freestanding and/or
ground mounted solar panels and panel arrays are prohibited in all zoning
districts.
      2.   Solar systems must be parallel to the roof, not extend beyond the
roofline, and be integrated with the structure's architecture. Solar panels may
not be located on a street-facing roof surface.
      3.   Solar surfaces may cover any amount of a side or rear roof surface,
provided that they are incorporated into and made to appear as part of the
roof, and do not cause glare to reflect onto neighboring properties.
      4.   All frame and visible structural parts of a solar panel must
coordinate with the roof color.
      5.   Solar systems may not be artificially illuminated.
      6.   A building permit is required prior to erecting any solar collector
system. Mounting for such solar systems must be in conformance with all
electrical codes and building codes to ensure wind and weight loading
requirements are met. Plans must be prepared and stamped by a licensed
architect, professional engineer or structural engineer, and inspected by the
building officer.
      7.   An emergency direct current (DC) disconnect switch must be provided
in a location accessible outside near the electric meter to shut off such
system in the event of an emergency.
      8.   Solar systems must be used primarily to generate energy for the
property where it is located. This provision is not intended to restrict
connection to or providing excess electricity to the utility provider.
   C.   Ground Source Heat Pump Systems (Geothermal Systems):
      1.   Open Loop Systems: Open loop systems are prohibited.
      2.   Closed Loop Systems: Geothermal heat pump systems are limited to a
maximum below-ground depth of twenty feet (20').
      3.   System Testing: Pipes for geothermal systems permitted under this
section must be tested hydrostatically at 1.5 times the maximum system design
pressure, but not less than 100 psi (689 kPa), for a duration of not less than
fifteen (15) minutes. All geothermal systems must be pressure checked by a
licensed geothermal system contractor every five (5) years from the date of its
initial successful test. Results must be filed with the building officer. If
the test results show the system fails to meet these requirements, system
shutdown and repairs must be made at the direction of the building officer.
      4.   Drilling: Any and all drilling associated with the installation of a
ground source heat pump system must be performed by a certified geothermal
drill operator.
   D.   Special Uses: Subject to the conditions and requirements of this
section and upon special use permit approval, other future alternative energy
systems may be considered for approval by the village. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-
2025)
10-6-5: ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS:
   A.   General:
      1.   Private (restricted-access) electric-vehicle (EV) charging stations
are permitted as accessory uses to lawfully established principal uses in all
zoning districts.
      2.   Public EV charging stations are permitted as accessory uses to
lawfully established principal nonresidential uses in all zoning districts.
   B.   Parking: Electric vehicle charging stations may be counted toward
satisfying minimum off-street parking space requirements only if approved by
the village.
   C.   Equipment: Vehicle charging equipment must be designed and located to
not impede pedestrian, bicycle or wheelchair movement or create safety hazards
on sidewalks.
   D.   Signage: Public electric vehicle charging stations must be posted with
signage indicating that the space is reserved for electric vehicle charging
purposes only. For purposes of this provision, "charging" means that an
electric vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is
connected to the battery charging station equipment. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-
2025)
10-6-6: FLAGPOLES:
Flagpoles must be setback from lot lines a minimum distance equal to the height
of the pole and sited so that the flag does not extend beyond any lot line. In
no case may flagpoles exceed the maximum allowed building height regulation of
the subject zoning district or forty feet (40'), whichever is greater. (Ord.
2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-6-7: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Description: Home occupations are jobs or professions conducted as an
accessory use to a residential dwelling unit the operation of which, under
normal circumstances, would not be perceptible to residents of the neighboring
area.
   B.   Purpose: The home occupation regulations of this section are intended
to allow South Barrington residents to engage in customary home-based work
activities, while also helping to ensure that neighbors are not subjected to
adverse operational and land use impacts (e.g., excessive noise or traffic or
public safety hazards) that are not typical of residential neighborhoods. The
regulations seek to balance the objective of allowing residents to use their
primary place of residence for limited work or business activities while
protecting the subject neighborhood's residential character and neighborhood
residents' quality of life.
   C.   Allowed Uses: The home occupation regulations of this section establish
performance standards for all home occupations rather than listing specific
home occupation uses that are allowed. Uses that comply with the home
occupation standards of this section and are not expressly prohibited are
allowed as of right.
   D.   Prohibited Uses: The following uses are expressly prohibited as home
occupations:
      1.   Any type of assembly, cleaning, maintenance, painting or repair of
vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines or of large appliances
(such as washing machines, clothes dryers, or refrigerators);
      2.   Dispatch centers or other businesses where employees come to the
site and are dispatched to other locations;
      3.   Car rental businesses;
      4.   Equipment or supply rental businesses;
      5.   Taxi, limo, van, or bus services;
      6.   Tow truck services;
      7.   Taxidermists;
      8.   Restaurants;
      9.   Funeral or interment services;
      10.   Animal care, grooming or boarding businesses;
      11.   Any use involving the use or storage of vehicles, products, parts,
machinery or similar materials or equipment outside of a completely enclosed
building; and
      12.   Any use that does not comply with regulations of this section.
   E.   Where Allowed: Home occupations are permitted as of right as an
accessory use to a principal use in the household living use category.
   F.   General Regulations: All home occupations are subject to the following
regulations.
      1.   Home occupations must be accessory and subordinate to the principal
residential use of the property.
      2.   Home occupations that change the character of the residential
building they occupy or that adversely affect the character of the surrounding
neighborhood are prohibited. Home occupations may not, for example, produce
light, noise, vibration, odor, parking demand, or traffic impacts that are not
typical of a residential neighborhood in South Barrington. Home occupations
must be operated so as not to create or cause a nuisance.
      3.   Any tools or equipment used as part of a home occupation must be
operated in a manner or sound-proofed so as not to be audible beyond the lot
lines of the subject property.
      4.   External structural alterations or site improvements that change the
residential character of the lot upon which a home occupation is located are
prohibited. Examples of such prohibited alterations include construction of
parking lots, the addition of commercial-like exterior lighting, the addition
of a separate building entrance that is visible from abutting streets, or the
exterior display of signs.
      5.   Home occupations and all related activities, including storage
(other than the lawful parking of passenger vehicles), must be conducted
entirely within the principal residential building or an allowed accessory
building.
      6.   At least one individual engaged in the home occupation must reside
in the dwelling unit in which the home occupation is located as their primary
place of residence. No more than one non-resident employee is allowed with a
home occupation. For the purpose of this provision, the term "nonresident
employee" includes an employee, contractor, business partner, co-owner or any
other person affiliated with the home occupation, who does not live at the
site, but who visits the site as part of the home occupation.
      7.   No exterior storage or display of equipment or material is allowed.
      8.   No refuse in excess of the amount allowable for regular residential
pick-up may be generated by any home occupation.
      9.   Only articles produced on-site by household members or employees
engaged in the home occupation may be displayed within the dwelling unit.
Direct sales and/or rentals of products off display shelves or racks is
prohibited. However, a person may pick up an order previously made online or by
other means.
      10.   No visitors in conjunction with the home occupation (e.g., clients,
patrons, pupils, salespersons, etc.) are allowed between the hours ten o’clock
(10:00) P.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. on Monday through Saturday. No
visitors are allowed on Sunday. Additionally, no more than three (3) visitors
per hour may avail themselves of a service provided by a home occupation, nor
may more than six (6) visitors avail themselves during a twenty-four (24)-hour
period, nor may more than twelve (12) visitors receive service in any single
week.
      11.   No deliveries other than by mail, customary household delivery
service (e.g., UPS, FedEx, Amazon) or other non-commercial vehicles may occur
in conjunction with a home occupation. Neighborhood traffic circulation
restricted by deliveries to a home occupation. Deliveries are limited to the
hours of nine o’clock (9:00) A.M to five o’clock (5:00) P.M. Monday through
Saturday.
      12.   No commercial vehicle may be parked otherwise present on the
premises on which a home occupation is being conducted.
      13.   No parking associated with the conduct of a home occupation may
occur in the public right of way above the level that is customarily associated
with a residential use. Parking may not occur in a manner or frequency causing
disturbance to the normal traffic flow of the existing neighborhood.
      14.   Home occupations may not involve construction features or the use
of electrical or mechanical equipment that would change the level of fire
hazard of the structure. No mechanical or electrical equipment may be used if
such equipment is not customarily used for purely domestic, household, hobby or
recreational purposes.
      15.   No home occupation and/or equipment used in conjunction with the
home occupation may result the discharge of any odors, fluids, gases,
particulate or solid waste material into the air or water or onto the land or
any septic system or storm drain, swale or sewer other than those normally
occurring in residential use, nor may a home occupation involve the use or
storage of any pollutant, toxic chemical, poison, accelerant or any other
chemical not normally used in a residence.
      16.   In addition to all other application regulations of this section,
home occupations may not cause or create any nuisance, or cause or create any
substantial or undue adverse impact on any adjacent property or the character
of the area, or threaten the public health, safety or welfare. Home occupations
must also comply with all applicable local, state and/or federal regulations.
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-6-8: PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL RECREATIONAL STRUCTURES:
   A.   Treehouse structures accessory to a residential dwelling unit are
allowed in rear yards only and are subject to the following requirements:
      1.   The area of the treehouse structure, measured around the entire
perimeter, may not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
      2.   The total height of any portion of the treehouse structure may not
exceed twenty feet (20') from grade to the topmost part of the structure, and
the lowest platform of the treehouse structure may not exceed the lower one-
third of the height of the tree on which it is mounted.
      3.   A minimum setback of twenty feet (20') is required from any property
line.
      4.   Treehouse structures that are visible from streets are prohibited.
   B.   Swing sets, jungle gyms and similar open-air (unenclosed) recreational
equipment accessory to residential dwelling units are allowed in rear yards
only and are subject to the following requirements:
      1.   The area of all such recreational equipment may not exceed one
hundred and fifty (150) square feet, as measured around the entire perimeter.
      2.   The total height of any portion of the equipment may not exceed
fifteen feet (15').
      3.   A minimum setback of ten feet (10') is required from any property
line, as measured from any projecting element, including the arc of a swing or
other movable portion of the equipment.
      4.   Recreational equipment visible must be located so that it is not
visible from a street. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-6-9: SWIMMING POOLS AND HOT TUBS:
The regulations of this section apply to all private residential swimming pools
and hot tubs.
   A.   General: Private, in-ground residential swimming pools and in-ground
and above-ground hot tubs are subject to the regulations of Title 8, Chapter 4
of the village code ("Swimming Pools"). Above-ground swimming pools are
prohibited.
   B.   Location:
      1.   Private residential swimming pools, hot tubs, and pool barrier
fences must be located behind the principal building (house). They are
prohibited within any portion of a street yard or side yard and must comply
with the minimum rear setback requirements of the zoning district in the
property is located.
      2.   Private residential swimming pools must be located within twenty
feet (20') of the foundation of the principal house building and be set back at
least thirty feet (30') from all property lines and at least twenty-five feet
(25') from the nearest septic field absorption line and septic tank. All pool
location measurements must be taken from or to the edge of the swimming pool
water.
      3.   Spas and hot tubs:
         a.   Must be located so that the water's edge is within twelve feet
(12') of the foundation of the principal house building.
         b.   May not exceed eight feet by eight feet by thirty-nine inches (8'
x 8' x 39") in dimension. Any hot tub with a dimension greater than eight feet
by eight feet by thirty-nine inches (8' x 8' x 39") is prohibited at grade
level and is required to be installed in-ground.
         c.   May be located within a pergola or pavilion if the edge of the
water is within twelve feet (12') of the principal building's foundation.
         d.   Must be screened from view from adjacent property by masonry,
hardscape materials and/or landscaping materials. The minimum height of at-
grade hot tub screening must equal or exceed the height of the hot tub skirt.
Masonry screening may not exceed four feet (4') in height.
         e.   All hot tubs must have a lockable cover capable of supporting a
weight of at least two hundred pounds (200 lbs.)
         f.   Each hot tub installation permit application must first be
approved by subject property owner's association and the Village Architectural
Control Committee.
   C.   Swimming Pool Enclosures:
      1.   All private residential swimming pools must be completely enclosed
by a fence or similar barrier that complies with the regulations of Title 8,
Chapter 4 of the village code. A principal residential building located on the
same property as the swimming pool may be used as one or more of the sides of
the required swimming pool enclosure.
      2.   Pool enclosure fences or walls must be located within sixteen feet
(16') of the edge of the required four-foot (4') walk area surrounding the
pool.
      3.   The total ground area contained within the swimming pool enclosure,
excluding the swimming pool and the required four-foot (4') walk area, may not
exceed one thousand two hundred and fifty (1,250) square feet.
      4.   Swimming pool fences must be located behind the principal building
(house).
   D.   Swimming Pool and Hot Tub Equipment:
      1.   Swimming pool and hot tub equipment (e.g., pumps, filters, heaters,
pool water disinfection and purification equipment) must be located within the
rear yard or an interior side yard. Such equipment may encroach up to five feet
(5') into a required side setback or up to ten feet (10') into a required rear
setback, but only if the equipment is located within five feet (5') of the side
or rear wall of the principal building.
      2.   Above-ground equipment must be screened from view of public rights-
of-way and abutting lots with year-round landscaping material or by a wood
fence not exceeding four feet (4') in height and not located more than eighteen
inches (18") from the outer perimeter of the equipment being screened from
view. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-6-10: VEHICLE PARKING AND STORAGE:
   A.   Commercial Vehicles and Equipment: Commercial trucks, trailers and
contractors' equipment or tools may not be parked or stored, except in an
enclosed garage on any residential premises classified in a residential zoning
district, except when making an active delivery, actively rendering a service,
or parked in a fully enclosed garage at such premises.
   B.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles may be temporarily parked
or stored in a residential zoning district only in accordance with section 6-4-
3, "Recreational Vehicles" of the South Barrington village code. Longer term
parking and storage of boats or recreational vehicles is allowed in residential
zoning districts only if such parking or storage occurs within a completely
enclosed garage, provided that boats may be stored on private lakes designed
for such purposes or on the shoreline of such private lakes if:
      1.   Such boats are in sound operating condition;
      2.   On-shore storage does not include a boat trailer;
      3.   Any boats stored on-shore are set back no more than five feet (5')
from the shoreline; and
      4.   On-shore boat storage is screened from view of abutting lots and
rights-of-way by dense year-round landscape material.
   C.   Temporary Construction Office or Shelter: Mobile homes may be used for
temporary offices or shelters incidental to construction or development of
parcels within a subdivision. Such mobile home may be placed within the
subdivision boundary only during the time construction or development is
actively underway, and in no event may such mobile home be located on the
premises for a period of more one year unless a special use permit is granted
by the board of trustees. No more than one mobile home for such purpose is
permitted within any subdivision. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
CHAPTER 7
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
SECTION:
10-7-1: Purpose
10-7-2: Applicability
10-7-3: Freestanding Wireless Telecommunications Towers
10-7-4: Wireless Telecommunications Antennas
10-7-1: PURPOSE:
The regulations of this chapter establish regulations for wireless
telecommunication facilities, including freestanding wireless
telecommunications towers ("wireless telecommunications towers") and building-
and tower-mounted antennas. The village recognizes the value of wireless
telecommunications and the public's need for its safety, convenience and
productivity. The village also recognizes the need to comply with the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended from time to time, and recognizes
that the village's zoning and other regulations may not prohibit or have the
effect of prohibiting wireless telecommunication facilities within the village
and may not unreasonably discriminate among providers or functionally
equivalent services. However, the village must weigh the public benefit of
wireless telecommunications against the need of the village to protect land
uses from the potential adverse impacts, including, but not limited to, adverse
visual impacts, of wireless telecommunication facilities. The village desires
specifically to keep the erection of new wireless telecommunications towers to
a minimum and to maximize the use of existing wireless telecommunications
towers. To that end, the village encourages new wireless telecommunications
antennas to be located on existing buildings, existing structures, or existing
wireless telecommunications towers. Additionally, the village requires co-
location of wireless telecommunications antennas whenever possible. (Ord. 2025-
1446, 10-9-2025)
10-7-2: APPLICABILITY:
The regulations of this chapter apply to all wireless telecommunications
facilities, as defined in Section
10-5-8 D. The regulations do not apply to any of the following:
   A.   Amateur radio antennas;
   B.   Receive-only antennas, including satellite dish antennas; or
   C.   Small wireless facilities, as defined in 50 ILCS 835. (Ord. 2025-1446,
10-9-2025)
10-7-3: FREESTANDING WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS:
   A.   Where Allowed:
      1.   New or reconstructed wireless telecommunications towers and any
enlargements or re-configurations of an existing wireless telecommunications
tower are allowed only as indicated in Table 5-1.
      2.   Applicants requesting approval of a special use permit for a
wireless telecommunications tower must demonstrate that it complies with the
regulations of this chapter and special use permit criteria of Section
10-12-4.
      3.   Wireless telecommunications towers are expressly prohibited in
designated wetlands and floodplains.
   B.   Setbacks and Yards:
      1.   Wireless telecommunications towers must be set back at a distance
equal to the height of the tower from any lot line and from any principal
building on the lot, excluding telecommunications equipment sheds and other
accessory structures.
      2.   Wireless telecommunications towers with designed break-away features
may be allowed to have a setback less than the height of the tower if such a
reduced setback is expressly approved as part of the special use permit.
      3.   Wireless telecommunications towers and all related wireless
telecommunications antennas, equipment and buildings are allowed in the rear
yard or side yard only. They are expressly prohibited in front yards and side
yards abutting a street.
   C.   Location on Lots with Existing Principal Uses:
      1.   Wireless telecommunications towers may be located on a lot with an
existing principal use as long as all other requirements of this chapter are
met.
      2.   Wireless telecommunications towers may be located within an easement
area on a lot or parcel of record.
   D.   Separation Distances Between Wireless telecommunications towers: Any
new proposed wireless telecommunications tower greater than fifty feet (50') in
height must maintain a separation distance of at least one thousand five
hundred feet (1,500') from any other existing wireless telecommunications
tower. Any new proposed wireless telecommunications tower that is fifty feet
(50') in height or less must maintain a separation distance of at least five
hundred feet (500') from any other existing wireless telecommunications tower.
   E.   Height: The height of a proposed wireless telecommunications tower must
be the minimum height required to fill a significant gap in coverage, but in no
event may the height exceed one hundred and fifty feet (150'). The burden is on
the applicant to justify the proposed height of the proposed wireless
telecommunications tower.
   F.   Extensions: Lateral extensions or arms on wireless telecommunications
towers are discouraged. If proven by an applicant to be necessary for co-
location purposes or other valid reasons, lateral extensions or arms extending
no more than twelve feet (12') in length may be approved.
   G.   Landscaping, Fencing and Equipment Structures:
      1.   The base of wireless telecommunications towers must be screened and
protected by a six-foot (6') tall solid, privacy-style fence with locked gate.
The required fence may not conflict with any setback or sight triangle
(intersection visibility) requirements. The required fence must be screened by
a hedge or shrubbery with an ultimate height of at least four feet (4') and
planted at an initial height of at least two feet (2'). The required fence and
landscaping must be continuously maintained and repaired or replaced as
necessary.
      2.   Equipment and structures associated with a wireless
telecommunications tower:
         a.   Must be located at the base of the tower structure and within the
required solid fence;
         b.   May not exceed one hundred and forty-four feet (144') in area;
         c.   May not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height; and
         d.   Any proposed generator must comply with all applicable
regulations of the village, including, but not limited to, fire code
regulations, and may require appropriate sound mitigation measures.
   H.   Wireless Telecommunications Tower Construction:
      1.   New wireless telecommunications towers are discouraged, and
necessary wireless telecommunications antennas must be located on existing
structures or co-located on existing wireless telecommunications towers
whenever possible. When an applicant demonstrates that location on existing
structures or co-location on existing wireless telecommunications towers is not
feasible, then new wireless telecommunications towers may be approved.
      2.   New wireless telecommunications towers must be able to accommodate
at least three (3) wireless telecommunications antenna arrays of separate
licensed telecommunication carriers, unless a smaller stealth tower is proposed
and co-location is not feasible, and must be of one of the following types of
construction, listed in order of preference:
         a.   Stealth towers;
         b.   Monopole towers; or
         c.   Guyed towers or lattice towers.
      3.   The applicant must demonstrate the need for the proposed type of
wireless telecommunications tower construction and must demonstrate why
preferred alternatives are not feasible.
   I.   Illumination and Lighting: Wireless telecommunications towers may not
be artificially illuminated except as may be required for minimum security and
human safety purposes (at or around ground level) or as required by the Federal
Aviation Administration. Ground-level buildings, equipment and fencing may
contain be illuminated only as necessary for security and human safety purposes
and must be downcast and shielded to prevent spillover light beyond the lot
lines of the subject property.
   J.   Color and Concealment:
      1.   Wireless telecommunications towers must be a neutral color that
blends as much as possible with the existing landscape and surrounding
structures.
      2.   Where reasonably feasible based on the wireless telecommunications
tower construction, all cables and equipment (excluding wireless
telecommunications antennas) must be enclosed within the tower and not visible
(excluding ground equipment and structures). Any approved exterior cables and
equipment located on a wireless telecommunications tower must be painted or
otherwise colored to match the color of the wireless telecommunications tower.
   K.   Signs and Advertising:
      1.   The use of any portion of a wireless telecommunications tower for
signs or advertising purposes, including, without limitation, company name,
banners, or streamers, is expressly prohibited.
      2.   Safety and warning signs, such as "no trespassing", are permitted on
the fence surrounding the wireless telecommunications tower.
      3.   A sign listing the name and phone number to contact the owner.
manager and/or licensed wireless carrier is required and must be provided on
the gate of the fence enclosing the wireless telecommunications tower and
related structures and equipment.
   L.   Licensed Wireless Carriers: Wireless telecommunications towers will
only be considered for special use permit approval when constructed for one or
more licensed wireless carriers, who must co-sign the village's zoning
application, and who must locate on the proposed wireless telecommunications
tower. Towers must be constructed to accommodate a minimum of three (3) co-
located carriers, unless a smaller stealth tower is proposed and co-location is
not feasible. Wireless telecommunications towers for which there are no
specific licensed wireless carriers proposed are expressly prohibited.
   M.   Maintenance: The applicant must continuously maintain the appearance
and structural integrity of the wireless telecommunications tower.
   N.   Application Requirements: In order to request a special use permit for
a wireless telecommunications tower, the applicant must complete the village's
zoning application. In addition to providing all information required by the
zoning application, an applicant must also submit the following documentation
and evidence. Failure of the applicant to submit any of the following
information constitutes grounds for denial of the special use permit request:
      1.   A copy of the applicant's FCC license, or if the applicant is not an
FCC license holder, a copy of the FCC license of the proposed licensed wireless
carrier who will utilize the wireless telecommunications tower.
      2.   A commitment of a licensed wireless carrier to locate on the
proposed wireless telecommunications tower, signed by the licensed wireless
carrier.
      3.   A certification signed by the applicant and supported by evidence
explaining why existing wireless telecommunications towers or locations on
existing structures cannot satisfy the needs and requirements of the applicant
instead of constructing a new wireless telecommunications tower. This
certification must list all existing towers, facilities and reasonably-
potential structures within a two (2)-mile radius of the proposed wireless
telecommunications tower site. Reasons for not co-locating a needed wireless
telecommunications antenna on an existing wireless telecommunications tower or
on an existing structure may include, but not be limited to the following:
         a.   There are no existing towers or suitable structures that would
accommodate co-location and provide effective telecommunication service
coverage within a two (2)-mile radius of the proposed wireless
telecommunications tower;
         b.   Existing wireless telecommunications towers or structures do not
have sufficient structural strength to support the proposed wireless
telecommunications antennas and related equipment, and modifications to such
existing wireless telecommunications towers or structures are economically
unfeasible or unfeasible from an engineering standpoint;
         c.   The location of the proposed wireless telecommunications antennas
and equipment on an existing wireless telecommunications tower or structure
would cause undue radio frequency interference with other existing equipment
located within the immediate vicinity that cannot be unreasonably prevented;
         d.   Unwillingness of the owners of existing wireless
telecommunications towers or structures to entertain a reasonable co-location
proposal; or
         e.   Existing wireless telecommunications towers or structures do not
provide an acceptable location for requisite coverage for the applicant's
communication network.
      4.   A description of the type of construction of the wireless
telecommunications tower proposed. If a preferred construction type is not
being utilized (e.g., stealth tower), a certification signed by the applicant
must be provided with evidence demonstrating all factors to justify the type of
construction method proposed.
      5.   A certification supported by evidence and signed by the applicant
justifying the height of the proposed wireless telecommunications tower. In
this regard, the applicant must utilize the lowest height possible in order to
obtain the requisite coverage for the applicant's communication network.
      6.   A site plan, drawn to scale, depicting the details of the proposed
wireless telecommunications tower (including all wireless telecommunications
antennas, cables, equipment, ground structures or buildings. and ground
equipment), the site boundaries, existing structures on the site, existing
structures on neighboring properties (or such other nearby properties if within
the height of the proposed tower), parking and access roads, and the zoning of
immediately adjacent properties.
      7.   A landscape plan, drawn to scale, depicting the required fencing and
required and other proposed landscaping on the site.
      8.   Color elevations of the proposed wireless telecommunications tower
(including accessory buildings or structures, fencing, landscaping, etc.). and
including a color perspective drawing or photo simulation from at least two (2)
locations (at one hundred and eighty-degree (180°) increments) from between two
hundred feet (200') to six hundred feet (600') away from the wireless
telecommunications tower showing the relationship of the wireless
telecommunications tower against the massing of surrounding structures, trees,
and other intervening land masses.
      9.   A written statement summarizing how the proposed wireless
telecommunications tower meets the requirements for a special use permit.
      10.   A certification signed by the applicant, supported by evidence,
demonstrating a significant coverage gap for the proposed licensed carrier and
demonstrating how the proposed wireless telecommunications tower at the
proposed location and at the proposed height will substantially close the
significant coverage gap and provide needed cellular service. In this regard,
one hundred percent (100%) coverage is not the goal and occasional dead spots
or areas of noncoverage are deemed acceptable in determining whether there is
substantial coverage.
      11.   A certification signed by the applicant that the proposed wireless
telecommunications tower may not interfere with any public safety
communication.
      12.   A signed report from a structural engineer certifying that the
proposed wireless telecommunications tower meets all of the structural loading
and wind loading requirements of applicable national standards. Included in
this report, or attached as a separate report, must be a certification that the
soils of the site are suitable for the construction of the proposed wireless
telecommunications tower.
      13.   Such other information, documents and evidence as reasonably
required by the village or as deemed necessary by the applicant. If a special
use permit is approved, the applicant must obtain a building permit before
construction and additional information will be required at that time.
   O.   Other Regulations:
      1.   In addition to complying with all other applicable regulations of
this chapter, wireless telecommunications towers must also comply with all
other applicable sections of this zoning ordinance, all other ordinances and
codes of the village, and all other applicable federal and state laws and
regulations.
      2.   In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter
and the other provisions of this zoning ordinance or other ordinances and codes
of the village, the provisions of this chapter govern unless determined
otherwise by the board of trustees.
      3.   Upon approval of a special use permit, the applicant must obtain a
building permit and any other required permits before commencing construction
of the wireless telecommunications tower.
   P.   Abandonment, Removal and Bond:
      1.   If the use of all wireless telecommunications antennas and other
permitted antennas or devices on a wireless telecommunications tower is
discontinued or abandoned, or if such wireless telecommunications antennas or
other permitted antennas or devices become non-operational, the applicant must
immediately notify the village of such discontinued/abandoned use or non-
operability. If such discontinued use/non-operation continues for a consecutive
period of at least twelve (12) months, the wireless telecommunications tower is
deemed abandoned and the entire wireless telecommunications tower and all
related equipment and structures must be promptly demolished and removed, and
the site must be restored, at the applicant's expense. The applicant must
obtain a demolition permit within sixty (60) days of such abandonment and must
demolish and remove the wireless telecommunications tower and all related
equipment and structures, and restore the site, within sixty (60) days after
receiving the demolition permit. If the applicant fails to cause the timely
demolition and removal of the abandoned wireless telecommunications tower and
all related equipment and structures, and restore the site, the village may
cause such demolition, removal and site restoration pursuant to its police
powers and on grounds of public safety, health and welfare and recover its
costs of demolition, removal and restoration from the applicant. The village
may use any bond posted by the applicant to cover its demolition, removal and
restoration costs. Upon the abandonment of the wireless telecommunications
tower, the special use permit for such wireless telecommunications tower
automatically terminates.
      2.   Upon approval of a special use permit, and as a condition for
issuance of a building permit, the property owner, or the applicant on behalf
of the property owner, must post either a cash bond, surety bond, or letter of
credit in favor of the village to cover the reasonable costs of demolition and
removal of the wireless telecommunications tower upon the abandonment of the
wireless telecommunications tower, along with site restoration costs, in the
event of the failure of the applicant to demolish and remove the wireless
telecommunications tower and restore the site within the time parameters set
forth in this chapter. The property owner, or the applicant on behalf of the
property owner, must submit evidence demonstrating the reasonable amount of the
demolition, removal and restoration costs, and thus justifying the amount of
the bond to be posted. The village may require a bond or letter of credit in a
greater amount than proposed by applicant upon evidence justifying a greater
amount. If the amount of the bond is insufficient to cover the village's
demolition. removal and restoration costs, the village may recover the
deficiency from the applicant. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-7-4: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS:
   A.   Building-mounted Wireless telecommunications antennas:
      1.   Where Allowed: Building-mounted wireless telecommunications antennas
are allowed only as indicated in Table 5-1 as long as such wireless
telecommunications antennas comply with all other applicable provisions of this
chapter. Co-location on existing wireless telecommunications towers is strongly
preferred over locating wireless telecommunications antennas on buildings.
      2.   Location on Building: Wireless telecommunications antennas must be
roof-mounted. The height of proposed wireless telecommunications antennas may
not exceed the height required to fill a significant gap in coverage, and in no
event may the height of such wireless telecommunications antennas and related
equipment exceed fifteen feet (15') above the building's height. The burden is
on the applicant to justify the height of the proposed wireless
telecommunications antenna.
      3.   Associated Equipment: Equipment associated with a wireless
telecommunications antenna must be roof-mounted where feasible. Where an
applicant demonstrates that roof-mounted equipment is not feasible, ground-
mounted equipment is allowed. Ground-mounted equipment is expressly prohibited
in front yards and side yards adjoining a street.
      4.   General Regulations: Building-mounted antennas are subject to
compliance with the general regulations for wireless telecommunications
antennas, as indicated in Section
10-7-4C.
   B.   Tower-mounted Wireless telecommunications antennas:
      1.   Where Allowed: Tower-mounted wireless telecommunications antennas
are permitted as an accessory use on existing wireless telecommunications
towers and on wireless telecommunications towers that have received a special
use permit as required by this chapter, provided that, in either case, such
wireless telecommunications antennas comply with all other applicable
provisions of this chapter.
      2.   General Regulations: Tower-mounted antennas are subject to
compliance with the general regulations for wireless telecommunications
antennas, as indicated in Section
10-7-4C.
   C.   General Regulations for All (Building- and Tower-Mounted) Wireless
telecommunications antennas:
      1.   Lateral Extensions: Lateral extensions or arms extending from a
building or tower are discouraged. If proven by an applicant to be necessary
for co-location purposes or other valid reasons, such lateral extension or arm
may not exceed twelve feet (12') in length and may not extend beyond the width
of the building or tower to which the wireless telecommunications antenna is
mounted.
      2.   Equipment Screening: Equipment structures associated with a wireless
telecommunications antenna must be screened as follows:
         a.   Roof-mounted equipment must be screened with a solid screen as
approved by the zoning administrator;
         b.   Ground-mounted equipment must be screened and protected by a
solid fence at least six feet (6') in height.
      3.   Illumination: Wireless telecommunications antennas may not be
artificially illuminated except as may be required for minimum security and
human safety purposes (at or around ground level) or as required by the Federal
Aviation Administration.
      4.   Color and Concealment: All cables must be enclosed within a chase to
the extent possible. All wireless telecommunications antennas and equipment on
a building, to the extent reasonably practical, must be painted or otherwise
colored to match the building or tower color, or must be painted or otherwise
colored a neutral color.
      5.   Signs and Advertising: The use of any portion of wireless
telecommunications antennas for signs or advertising purposes, including,
without limitation, company name, banners, or streamers, is expressly
prohibited.
      6.   Licensed Wireless Carriers: Wireless telecommunications antennas
will only be considered when constructed for one or more specific licensed
wireless carriers, who must co-sign the village's building permit application.
      7.   Maintenance: The applicant must continuously maintain the appearance
and structural integrity of the wireless telecommunications antennas and
related equipment and fencing/screening.
      8.   Other Regulations: In addition to complying with all other
applicable regulations of this chapter, wireless telecommunications antennas
must also comply with all other applicable sections of this zoning ordinance,
all other ordinances and codes of the village, and all other applicable federal
and state laws and regulations. In the event of a conflict between the
provisions of this chapter and the other provisions of this zoning ordinance or
other ordinances and codes of the village, the provisions of this chapter
govern unless determined otherwise by the village board of trustees. An
applicant must obtain a building permit and any other required permits before
commencing construction of any wireless telecommunications antennas.
   D.   Application Requirements: In addition to providing all information
required for a building permit, an applicant must also submit the following
documentation and evidence:
      1.   A copy of the applicant's FCC license, or if the applicant is not an
FCC license holder, a copy of the FCC license of the proposed licensed wireless
carrier who will utilize the wireless telecommunications antennas.
      2.   A commitment of a licensed wireless carrier, signed by the licensed
wireless carrier.
      3.   For proposed building-mounted wireless telecommunications antenna: A
certification signed by the applicant and supported by evidence explaining why
existing wireless telecommunications towers or locations on existing structures
cannot satisfy the needs and requirements of the applicant instead of
constructing a new wireless telecommunications tower. This certification must
list all existing towers, facilities and reasonably-potential structures within
a two (2)-mile radius of the proposed wireless telecommunications tower site.
Reasons for not co-locating a needed wireless telecommunications antenna on an
existing wireless telecommunications tower or on an existing structure may
include, but not be limited to the following:
         a.   There are no existing towers or suitable structures within a two
(2)-mile radius of the proposed wireless telecommunications tower;
         b.   Existing wireless telecommunications towers or structures do not
have sufficient structural strength to support the proposed wireless
telecommunications antennas and related equipment, and modifications to such
existing wireless telecommunications towers or structures are economically
unfeasible or unfeasible from an engineering standpoint;
         c.   The location of the proposed wireless telecommunications antennas
and equipment on an existing wireless telecommunications tower or structure
would cause undue radio frequency interference with other existing equipment
located within the immediate vicinity that cannot be unreasonably prevented;
         d.   Unwillingness of the owners of existing wireless
telecommunications towers or structures to entertain a reasonable co-location
proposal; or
         e.   Existing wireless telecommunications towers or structures do not
provide an acceptable location for requisite coverage for the applicant's
communication network.
      4.   Color elevations of the proposed wireless telecommunications antenna
as it will appear on either a tower or a building, as applicable.
      5.   If new accessory buildings or structures, fencing, landscaping, or
other improvements are proposed in conjunction with the wireless
telecommunications antenna application, a site plan with elevations and a
landscaping plan for these improvements is also required.
      6.   A certification signed by the applicant, supported by evidence,
demonstrating a significant coverage gap for the proposed licensed carrier and
demonstrating how the proposed wireless telecommunications antennas at the
proposed location and at the proposed height will substantially close the
significant coverage gap and provide needed cellular service. In this regard,
one hundred percent (100%) coverage is not the goal and occasional dead spots
or areas of noncoverage are deemed acceptable in determining whether there is
substantial coverage.
      7.   A certification signed by the applicant that the proposed wireless
telecommunications antenna may not interfere with any public safety
communication.
      8.   A signed report from a structural engineer certifying that the tower
or building, along with the proposed wireless telecommunications antenna, meets
all of the structural loading and wind loading requirements of applicable
national standards.
      9.   Such other information, documents and evidence as reasonably
required by the village or as deemed necessary by the applicant.
   E.   Abandonment and Removal Wireless telecommunications antennas: If the
use of a wireless telecommunications antenna on a tower or building is
discontinued or abandoned, or if such wireless telecommunications antenna
becomes non-operational, the applicant must immediately notify the village of
such discontinued/abandoned use or non-operability. If such discontinued use/
non-operation continues for a consecutive period of at least twelve (12)
months, the wireless telecommunications antenna is deemed abandoned and the
wireless telecommunications antenna and all related equipment and structures
must be promptly demolished and removed, and the site restored, at the
applicant's expense. The applicant must obtain a building permit within sixty
(60) days of such abandonment and must remove the wireless telecommunications
antenna and all related equipment and structures, and restore the site, within
sixty (60) days after receiving the building permit. If the applicant fails to
cause the timely removal of the abandoned wireless telecommunications antenna
and all related equipment and structures, and restore the site, the village may
cause such removal and site restoration pursuant to its police powers and on
grounds of public safety, health and welfare and recover its costs of removal
and restoration from the applicant. The Village may use any bond posted by the
applicant to cover its removal and restoration costs. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-
2025)
CHAPTER 8
PARKING
SECTION:
10-8-1: Purpose
10-8-2: Applicability
10-8-3: Minimum Motor Vehicle Parking Ratios
10-8-4: Calculation Of Required Parking
10-8-5: Shared Parking
10-8-6: Location Of Off-Street Parking
10-8-7: Use Of Off-Street Parking Areas
10-8-8: Parking Area Design
10-8-9: Accessible Parking For People With Disabilities
10-8-10: Off-Street Loading
10-8-1: PURPOSE:
The regulations of this chapter are intended to help ensure provision of off-
street motor vehicle parking facilities, bicycle parking and other motorized
and non-motorized transportation circulation facilities in rough proportion to
the generalized demands of different land uses. By requiring such facilities,
it is the intent of these regulations to help avoid the negative impacts
associated with spillover parking into adjacent areas, while at the same time
avoiding the negative environmental and visual impacts that can result from
unnecessarily large parking and vehicular use areas. The provisions of this
chapter are also intended to provide flexible methods of responding to the
transportation and access demands of various land uses in the village. (Ord.
2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-8-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   General: Unless otherwise expressly stated, the regulations of this
chapter apply to all districts and uses.
   B.   New Uses and Development: Unless otherwise expressly stated, the
regulations of this chapter apply to all new buildings constructed and all new
uses established in all zoning districts.
   C.   Enlargements and Expansions: Unless otherwise expressly stated, the
regulations of this chapter apply whenever an existing building or use is
enlarged or expanded to include a fifteen percent (15%) or greater increase in
dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity, employees or other units of
measurement used for establishing off-street parking requirements. In the case
of enlargements or expansions that trigger requirements for additional parking,
additional spaces are required only to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not
the entire building or use. In other words, there is no requirement to address
a lawful, existing parking deficit.
   D.   Change of Use: When the use or occupancy of property changes,
additional off-street parking and loading facilities must be provided to serve
the new use or occupancy only when the number of parking or loading spaces
required for the new use or occupancy exceeds the number of spaces required for
the use that most recently occupied the building, based on the standards of
this zoning ordinance. In other words, "credit" is given to the most recent
lawful use of the property for the number of parking spaces that would be
required under this zoning ordinance, regardless of whether such spaces are
actually provided. A new use is not required to address a lawful, existing
parking deficit.
   E.   Existing: Existing off-street parking and loading areas may not be
eliminated, reduced or modified below the minimum requirements of this chapter.
When a building or use that has been destroyed or damaged is re-established,
off-street parking and loading facilities must also be re-established or
continued in operation in an amount equal to the number maintained at the time
of such damage or destruction. It is not necessary, however, to restore or
maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of the minimum requirements of
this zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-8-3: MINIMUM MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING RATIOS:
   A.   Off-street motor vehicle parking must be provided in an amount to
ensure motor vehicle parking does not occur on any street as a result of the
use's normal activity.
   B.   The off-street motor vehicle parking space requirements established in
Table 8-1 are deemed to satisfy Section
10-8-3A unless an alternative minimum requirement is imposed or approved at the
time of special use permit approval.
Table 8-1: Minimum Motor Vehicle Parking Requirements
Use Minimum Motor Vehicle Parking Requirement
Table 8-1: Minimum Motor Vehicle Parking Requirements
Use                         Minimum Motor Vehicle Parking Requirement
Residential Dwelling Units  3 per dwelling unit (must be in enclosed garage)
Office, Retail, or Service  3 per 1,000 square feet
Eating or Drinking Place    5 per 1,000 square feet or 0.33 per seat, whichever
                            is greater
Assembly Space              0.25 per seat
Industrial or Manufacturing 1 per employee
Other                       See 10-8-4G
 
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-8-4: CALCULATION OF REQUIRED PARKING:
The following rules apply when calculating the required number of off-street
parking spaces:
   A.   Multiple Uses: Unless otherwise expressly allowed in accordance with
the shared parking regulations of Section
10-8-5, lots containing more than one use must provide parking in an amount
equal to the total of the requirements for all uses on the lot.
   B.   Fractions: When measurements of the number of required spaces result in
a fractional number, any fraction of less than one-half (0.5) is rounded down
to the next lower whole number, and any fraction of one-half (0.5) or more is
rounded up to the next higher whole number.
   C.   Area Measurements: Unless otherwise expressly stated, all area-based
(square footage) parking standards must be computed based on the sum of the
total building floor area occupied by a use requiring off-street parking. The
following areas are not counted as floor area for the purpose of calculating
off-street parking and loading requirements: floor space devoted primarily to
the housing of mechanical or electrical equipment, elevator shafts, stairwells,
storage (except as otherwise noted), off-street parking or loading facilities,
or basement floor space.
   D.   Bench Seating: Each twenty inches (20") of seating area in bleachers,
pews or similar bench-seating arrangement counts as one seat for the purpose of
calculating seating-based parking requirements. See
Figure 8-1.
Figure 8-1: Bench Seating Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3093.png]
   E.   Occupancy- or Capacity-based Standards: For the purpose of computing
parking requirements based on employees, students, members, residents or
occupants, calculations must be based on occupancy standards established by the
building code.
   F.   Unlisted Uses: Upon receiving a development application for a use not
listed in Table 8-1, the board of trustees or zoning official is authorized to
apply the off-street parking ratio for the listed use that is deemed most
similar to the proposed use or establish a minimum off-street parking
requirement for the proposed use in accordance with Section
10-8-4G.
   G.   Establishment of Other Parking Ratios: The board of trustees or zoning
official is authorized to establish required minimum off-street parking ratios
for unlisted uses. Such ratios may be established based on a similar use/
parking determination (as described in Section
10-8-4F), on parking data provided by the applicant or information otherwise
available to the board of trustees or zoning official. Parking data and studies
provided by applicants must include estimates of parking demand based on
reliable data collected from comparable uses or on external data from credible
research organizations (e.g., Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or
American Planning Association [APA]). Parking studies must document the source
of all data used to develop recommended requirements. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-
2025)
10-8-5: SHARED PARKING:
   A.   Purpose: Sharing parking among different users can result in overall
reductions in the amount of motor vehicle parking required. Shared parking is
encouraged as a means of conserving land resources, reducing stormwater runoff,
reducing the heat island effect caused by large paved areas and improving
village appearance.
   B.   Applicability: Shared parking facilities are allowed for mixed-use
projects and for multiple uses with different periods of peak parking demand,
subject to approval by the plan commission/zoning board of appeals. Required
residential parking and accessible parking spaces (for persons with
disabilities) may not be shared and must be located on site.
   C.   Methodology: The number of parking spaces required under a shared
parking arrangement must be based on the latest edition of the Urban Land
Institute's or the Institute of Transportation Engineer's shared parking model
or on studies prepared by professional transportation planner or traffic
engineer. The shared parking analysis must demonstrate that the peak parking
demands of the subject uses occur at different times and that the parking area
will be large enough for the anticipated demands of the shared parking users.
   D.   Location: Shared parking may be located on-site or off-site. Off-site
parking is subject to the regulations of Section
10-8-6B. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-8-6: LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING:
   A.   General: Except as otherwise expressly stated, required off-street
parking spaces must be located on the same lot and under the same control as
the building or use they are required to serve.
   B.   Off-Site Parking:
      1.   When Allowed: All or a portion of required off-street parking for
nonresidential use may be provided off-site, as provided in this section.
Required accessible parking spaces and parking required for residential uses
may not be located off site.
      2.   Location:
         a.   Off-site parking areas for uses in nonresidential districts must
be located within a eight hundred-foot (800') radius of the use served by such
parking, measured between the entrance of the use to be served and the outer
perimeter of the furthest parking space within the off-site parking lot. Off-
site parking lots are allowed only in zoning districts that permit the
principal use to be served by the off-site parking spaces, unless approved as a
special use permit. See
Figure 8-2.
Figure 8-2: Off-Site Parking Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3095.png]
         b.   Off-site parking areas for nonresidential uses in A districts
must be located on a lot that abuts or is directly across the street from the
lot to be served by the off-site parking.
      3.   Design: Off-site parking areas must comply with all applicable
parking area design and parking lot landscape regulations of this zoning
ordinance.
      4.   Control of Off-Site Parking Area: The property to be occupied by the
off-site parking facilities must be under the same ownership as the lot
containing the use to be served by the parking. The off-site parking area may
be under separate ownership only if an agreement is provided, in a form
approved by the village attorney, guaranteeing the long-term availability of
the parking, commensurate with the use served by the parking. Off-site parking
privileges will continue in effect only as long as the agreement, binding on
all parties, remains in force. If an off-site parking agreement lapses or is no
longer valid, then parking must be provided as otherwise required by this
zoning ordinance.
   C.   Setbacks and Yard: Off-street parking spaces in nonresidential
districts may be located in yard areas but may not be located in required front
or street setbacks. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-8-7: USE OF OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS:
   A.   Required off-street parking facilities may be used only for the
temporary parking of licensed passenger motor vehicles by residents, tenants,
patrons, employees, or guests of the principal use. Off-street parking spaces
required by this zoning ordinance must be maintained for the life of the
principal use.
   B.   Off-street parking facilities may not be used for the parking of
vehicles for the purpose of displaying such vehicles for sale or lease unless
the principal use of the property on which the parking facility is located is
in a zoning district that allows motor vehicle sales.
   C.   No vehicle repair or service of any kind is allowed in conjunction with
off-street parking facilities in a residential or business zoning district,
except for minor repairs or service on vehicles owned by an occupant or
resident of the premises. The sale of gasoline and motor oil in conjunction
with off-street parking facilities is not permitted in any residential zoning
district.
   D.   Parking spaces may be used for electric vehicle charging. (Ord. 2025-
1446, 10-9-2025)
10-8-8: PARKING AREA DESIGN:
   A.   Stall Sizes and Parking Lot Geometrics:
      1.   Off-street parking areas must be designed and constructed in
accordance with the regulations of Table 8-2. See also
Figure 8-3. All parking spaces must have an overhead vertical clearance of at
least seven feet (7').
 
Table 8-2: Parking Area Dimensions
                    Angle of Parking
                    0°                        45°60°90°
                    (Parallel)
Stall Width (feet)  7                          9   9   9
Stall Length (feet) 24                         18  19  18
Aisle Width (feet)  14 (one-way), 24 (two-way) 14  15  24
Note: Dimensions must be measured from the centerline of the stripe
delineating the space.
Figure 8-3: Parking Area Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3097.png]
   B.   Striping: In all parking lots containing five (5) or more parking
spaces, striping consisting of parallel lines, four inches (4") in width must
be provided for each parking space. Striping must be yellow or white.
Accessible parking spaces must be painted with the standard ADA white symbol on
blue background. See
Figure 8-4.
Figure 8-4: Parking Lot Markings
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3099.png]
   C.   Surfacing: All outdoor parking spaces and driveways providing access to
such spaces must be properly engineered and improved with a compacted stone
base and surfaced with asphaltic concrete, or other comparable all-weather,
dustless material. Plans and materials must be approved by the zoning official.
Parking spaces that can only be accessed by vehicle movements across unpaved
areas are prohibited.
   D.   Striping: In all parking lots containing five (5) or more parking
spaces, striping consisting of parallel lines, four inches (4") in width must
be provided for each parking space. Striping must be yellow or white.
Accessible parking spaces must be painted with the standard ADA white symbol on
blue background. See
Figure 8-5.
Figure 8-5: Parking Lot Markings
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3101.png]
   E.   Wheel Stops: In all parking lots containing five (5) or more parking
spaces, wheel stops must be installed where necessary to prohibit vehicle
overhang onto adjacent pedestrian ways or landscape areas. Plans must be
approved by the zoning official.
   F.   Valet Parking Arrangements: Parking areas must be designed and
constructed to allow unobstructed movement into and out of required parking
spaces without interfering with fixed objects or vehicles except in the case of
allowed valet parking, which may be used to satisfy minimum off-street parking
requirements for nonresidential uses if an attendant is present during all
hours of operation. Valet parking arrangements may involve the stacked parking
of vehicles (i.e., requiring one or more vehicles to be moved to obtain access
to other parked vehicles). Valet parking is not subject to the off-site parking
distance limit of Section
10-8-6B.2.
   G.   Landscaping: See Sections
10-9-3 and
10-9-4.
   H.   Lighting: See Section
10-11-1.
   I.   Driveways and Access:
      1.   All off-street parking must be designed with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner that will least interfere
with motorized and non-motorized traffic.
      2.   Each required off-street parking space must open directly upon an
aisle or driveway with a width and design that provides safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to the parking space. Driveways must comply with the
construction requirements in Sec.
8-2-5 of the village code.
      3.   Single-approach driveways serving residential dwelling units must be
at least twelve feet (12') in width and may not exceed twenty feet (20') in
width, as measured at the property line, past the driveway apron.
      4.   Dual-approach driveways (sometimes referred to as "horseshoe" or
"circular" driveways) must be at least twelve feet (12') in width and may not
exceed fourteen feet (14') in width, as measured at the property line, past the
driveway apron.
      5.   Driveways serving nonresidential uses may not exceed twenty-five
feet (25'), as measured at the property line, past the driveway apron.
      6.   Driveways must be set back at least two feet (2') from side property
lines and may not be located within easements
      7.   Driveways may not be constructed before the principal building is in
place on the subject property or before permits have been issued for the
principal building, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-8-9: ACCESSIBLE PARKING FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES:
Accessible parking spaces must be provided and designed in accordance with the
Illinois Accessibility Code. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-8-10: OFF-STREET LOADING:
   A.   All uses engaged in receiving or shipping goods by truck or large
delivery vehicles must provide off-street loading and unloading facilities, in
an amount determined by the zoning official.
   B.   Loading spaces must have minimum dimensions of twelve feet (12') by
fifty feet (50') for uses in the storage and distribution and use categories
and twelve feet (12') by thirty-five feet (35') for uses in all other
categories. All loading spaces must have a minimum overhead clearance of
fifteen feet (15').
   C.   Vehicle maneuvering areas and loading and unloading activities must
occur on-site (outside the public right-of-way), unless approved by special use
permit.
   D.   All loading spaces must be posted with signs prohibiting engine idling
for more than five (5) minutes.
   E.   All loading areas and access drives must be surfaced and maintained
with an asphaltic or Portland cement binder concrete or other dustless, all-
weather surface approved by the village.
   F.   Off-street loading areas are subject to the vehicular use area
screening requirements of Section
10-9-3. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
CHAPTER 9
LANDSCAPE AND SCREENING
SECTION:
10-9-1: Purposes
10-9-2: Applicability
10-9-3: Vehicular Use Area Screening
10-9-4: Interior Parking Lot Landscaping
10-9-5: Trash, Recycling and Mechanical Equipment Screening
10-9-6: Landscape and Screening Elements
10-9-7: Installation and Maintenance
10-9-8: Landscape Plans
10-9-9: Alternative Compliance
10-9-1: PURPOSES:
The landscape and screening regulations of this chapter establish minimum
requirements for landscaping and screening in nonresidential zoning district.
The regulations are intended to advance the general purposes of this zoning
ordinance and to help:
   A.   Maintain and enhance the village's appearance;
   B.   Mitigate possible adverse impacts of higher intensity land uses
abutting lower intensity land uses;
   C.   Reduce the impacts of noise and glare.
   D.   Maintain and improve air quality;
   E.   Protect surface water quality and reduce the negative impacts of
stormwater runoff by providing vegetated areas that filter and absorb
stormwater;
   F.   Moderate heat by providing shade; and
   G.   Encourage preservation and replacement of existing trees and
vegetation. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-9-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The landscape and screening regulations of this chapter apply to in
nonresidential zoning districts.
   B.   The following are expressly exempt from compliance with the landscape
and screening regulations of this chapter:
      1.   Household living (residential) uses;
      2.   Agricultural uses;
      3.   Public parks, open spaces, or natural resource areas;
      4.   Reconstruction of any building that is damaged or destroyed by fire,
natural disaster or other means beyond the reasonable control of the property
owner; and
      5.   Any other uses, site features or activities that are expressly
exempted under this zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-9-3: VEHICULAR USE AREA SCREENING:
   A.   Purpose: A "vehicular use area" is an outdoor area on a lot that is
used for storage and operation of motor vehicles, including parking lots,
vehicle storage areas, vehicle display areas, loading areas, driveways, and
drive-through lanes. The vehicular use area screening regulations of this
section are intended to help mitigate the visual and operational impacts of
vehicular use areas located near streets or residential zoning districts.
   B.   Applicability: The vehicular use area screening requirements of this
section apply when a new building or vehicular use area is established. When
the area of any existing vehicular use area is expanded screening must be
provided for the expanded area.
   C.   Street Frontage Screening Requirements:
      1.   When Required: The street frontage screening requirements of this
section apply to vehicular use areas located within fifty feet (50') of any
street right-of-way. The requirements do not apply if there are buildings or
other site features that effectively block views of the vehicular use area from
the right-of-way.
      2.   Required Screening: Screening must be installed and maintained
between the vehicular use area and the street as follows:
         a.   Minimum width of landscaped area: ten feet (10').
         b.   Plants required in landscaped area: four (4) low shrubs or eight
(8) ornamental grasses per ten (10) linear feet.
         c.   Minimum number of canopy trees required: one (1) per twenty-five
(25) linear feet.
      3.   Existing Vehicular Use Areas: When street frontage screening
requirements are triggered by repaving or reconstruction, a change in the use
being screened or a substantial improvement to an existing building, the
minimum width of the landscaped area required may be reduced by up to fifty
percent (50%) if necessary to maintain existing pavement.
Figure 9-1: Street Frontage Screening (Vehicular Use Areas)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3103.png]
      4.   Vehicular Use Area Visibility: In order to promote visibility and
surveillance of vehicular use areas and public streets, low shrubs or
ornamental grasses may not be allowed to grow taller than four feet (4'). Trees
must be maintained so that the lowest branches are at least six feet (6') above
the ground beneath the tree.
      5.   Tree Placement: Canopy trees required along street frontage
screening areas may be planted at regular or irregular intervals, but in no
case may trees be spaced more than seventy-five feet (75') on center. Trees
adjacent to the vehicular use area may be counted as part of required screening
if they are within twenty feet (20') of the right-of-way line and within twenty
feet (20') of the vehicular use area.
      6.   Public Amenities: Public amenities, such as shelters, benches,
bicycle racks, sculptures, fountains and similar features, may be integrated as
part of the required screening. Screening requirements may be reduced as needed
to accommodate such public amenities and streetscape features.
      7.   Materials, Installation and Maintenance: See Sections
10-9-6 and
10-9-7.
   D.   A District Screening Requirements:
      1.   When Required: The A district screening requirements of this section
apply to vehicular use areas located within twenty-five feet (25') of any A-
zoned lot. The requirements do not apply if there are buildings or other site
features that effectively block views of the vehicular use area from the A-
zoned lot.
      2.   Vacant Lots: Screening is required regardless of whether a building
exists on the A-zoned lot that triggers the requirement for A district
screening.
      3.   Required Screening: Screening must be installed and maintained
between the vehicular use area and the A-zoned lot as follows:
         a.   Minimum width of landscaped area: ten feet (10').
         b.   Plants required in landscaped area: four (4) low shrubs or eight
(8) ornamental grasses per ten (10) linear feet.
         c.   Minimum number of evergreen trees required: one (1) per twenty-
five (25) linear feet.
Figure 9-2: A District Screening Options (Vehicular Use Areas)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3105.png]
      4.   Materials, Installation and Maintenance: See Sections
10-9-6 and
10-9-7. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-9-4: INTERIOR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Purpose: The interior parking lot landscaping regulations of this
section are intended to help mitigate the visual and stormwater runoff impacts
of parking lots and provide shade for parked vehicles and pedestrians.
   B.   Applicability: The interior parking lot landscaping requirements of
this section apply when a vehicular use area is established or expanded. In the
case of vehicular use area expansions, the requirements apply only to the
expanded area.
   C.   When Required: The interior parking lot landscaping regulations of this
section apply as stated in Section
10-9-2.
   D.   Trees and Landscape Areas Required: A minimum of one canopy tree and
one hundred (100) square feet of landscape area is required for every four (4)
motor vehicle parking spaces or fraction thereof.
   E.   Location and Distribution: Trees, landscaped areas and green
infrastructure used to meet the requirements of this chapter must be located
within fifty feet (50') of the parking lot. No portion of a parking lot may be
more than one hundred feet (100') from an interior or perimeter landscaped area
or more than one hundred and fifty feet (100') from an interior or perimeter
canopy tree.
   F.   Landscape Areas: Landscaped areas must be planted with low shrubs or
ornamental grasses. A minimum of four (4) low shrubs or eight (8) ornamental
grasses, are required per one hundred (100) square feet of landscaped area.
Equivalent combinations of plants may be used, with two (2) ornamental grasses
equivalent to one low shrub.
   G.   Green Infrastructure Incentives: The interior parking lot landscaping
requirement of this chapter may be reduced to not less than one tree and one
hundred (100) square feet of landscaped area per eight (8) parking spaces if
the following amounts of green infrastructure features are provided as a
substitute for trees and landscaped areas:
      1.   Permeable Paving: One hundred square feet of permeable paving may be
substituted for one tree and one hundred (100) square feet of landscaped area.
      2.   Rain Gardens: One hundred square feet of rain garden with a
rainwater catchment area of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet may be
substituted for one tree and one hundred (100) square feet of landscaped area.
      3.   Bioswales: Fifty (50) cubic feet (three hundred and seventy-five
(375) gallons) of bio-retention capacity with a rainwater catchment area of at
least one thousand (1,000) square feet may be substituted for one tree and one
hundred (100) square feet of landscaped area.
      4.   Existing Parking Lots: When interior parking lot landscaping
requirements are triggered by repaving or reconstruction, a change in the use
being screened or a substantial improvement to an existing building and
compliance with the requirements of this subsection would result in a loss of
more than ten percent (10%) of total parking spaces or would result in the
number of spaces being reduced to below the minimum number required for the
subject use, the amount of landscaping required by Section
10-9-4D may be reduced to a minimum of one tree and one hundred (100) square
feet of landscaped area per eight (8) parking spaces, and may be further
reduced to not less than one tree and one hundred (100) square feet of
landscaped area per sixteen (16) parking spaces through the use of green
infrastructure features as specified in Section
10-9-4G.
   H.   Elements, Installation and Maintenance: See Sections
10-9-6 and
10-9-7. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-9-5: TRASH, RECYCLING AND MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREENING:
   A.   Purpose: The trash, recycling and mechanical equipment screening
regulations of this section are intended to help mitigate the visual and
operational impacts of mechanical equipment, trash and recycling equipment and
dumpster storage areas.
   B.   Applicability: The landscaping requirements of this section apply
whenever trash, recycling or mechanical equipment is placed on a lot or the
area of such trash, recycling and mechanical equipment is expanded.
   C.   When Required: The trash, recycling and mechanical equipment screening
requirements of this section apply to trash, recycling and mechanical equipment
areas that are visible from any public street or abutting lot. The requirements
do not apply when there are buildings or other site features that effectively
block views of the trash, recycling and mechanical equipment areas from streets
or abutting lots.
   D.   Options: Screening must be installed and maintained between outdoor
storage areas and outdoor work areas and abutting non-industrial-zoned lots by
one of the options described in Table 9-1 or by a combination of those options.
 
Table 9-1: Trash, Recycling, and Mechanical Equipment Screening Options
Regulation                Option A                   Option B
Minimum width of          10                         5
landscaped area (ft)
Type and minimum number   1 evergreen tree or 2 tall 1 evergreen tree or 2 tall
of plants required        shrubs per 5 linear ft.    shrubs per 10 linear ft.
Fence/wall required       None                       Opaque Fence or Wall
Minimum fence/wall height None                       4
(ft)
Fence/wall opacity        None                       100% opaque
requirement
 
   E.   Elements, Installation and Maintenance: See Sections
10-9-6 and
10-9-7. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-9-6: LANDSCAPE AND SCREENING ELEMENTS:
   A.   Applicability: The landscape and screening element provisions of this
section apply to all trees, plant materials, and other materials and features
used to satisfy the landscaping and screening requirements of this zoning
ordinance.
   B.   Canopy Trees:
      1.   General: Canopy trees used to satisfy the requirements of this
chapter must be of a deciduous street tree variety with a leaf and branch
structure that creates a uniform crown and an opaque tree canopy.
         a.   Tree species are limited to those on the Village's preferred
species list (see Sec.
4-6-9-9 of the village code).
         b.   The planting of invasive species is expressly prohibited (see
Appendix A of Chapter 4-6).
         c.   Ornamental trees may be used to satisfy canopy tree requirements
if they meet the minimum size requirements. Ornamental trees must be set back
at least five feet (5') from all sidewalks. No more than fifty percent (50%) of
total trees provided may be ornamental trees.
      2.   Tree Size: Canopy trees must be at least 2.5-inch-caliper size at
the time of planting. Evergreen trees must be at least six feet (6') in height
at time of planting.
      3.   Planting Areas: Any area used for planting canopy trees must have a
surface area of at least one hundred (100) square feet and at least one hundred
and fifty (150) cubic feet of planting soil per tree. Planting areas for canopy
trees may include modular suspended pavement systems that contain healthy non-
compacted soil, and the permeable surface area of such systems may be counted
toward the minimum surface area required.
      4.   Credit for Existing Trees: An existing canopy tree on the subject
lot may be counted towards minimum canopy tree requirements if such tree
complies with the regulations of this subsection. In addition:
         a.   Any existing canopy tree with a diameter at breast height of more
than twelve inches (12") may be counted as two (2) trees; and
         b.   Any existing canopy tree with a diameter at breast height of more
than eighteen inches (18") may be counted as three (3) trees.
      5.   Tree Diversity: When a site requires ten (10) or more trees, no more
than twenty percent (20%) may be from any one family, genus, or species.
   C.   Landscaped Areas:
      1.   General: Landscaped areas consist of planting beds filled with low-
level or eye-level plants. Low-level plants include low shrubs and ornamental
grasses. Eye-level plants include tall shrubs. When used for screening, low-
level plants are intended to define spaces and allow for natural surveillance,
while eye-level plants are intended to obscure the view of the area being
screened.
      2.   Shrubs:
         a.   Low shrubs are deciduous shrubs or evergreen shrubs that are
expected to grow to a mature height of no more than four feet (4'). Ornamental
grasses may be substituted for required low shrubs at the rate of two (2)
ornamental grasses per one low shrub.
         b.   Tall shrubs are deciduous shrubs or evergreen shrubs that are
expected to grow to a mature height of at least six feet (6').
      3.   Planting Soil: Landscaped areas must have healthy non-compact
planting soil at least eighteen inches (18") deep.
      4.   Plant Combinations: When landscaped areas allow for multiple plant
types, any equivalent combination of the permitted plant types may be used.
      5.   Plant Size: Minimum and maximum plant sizes for plants are specified
in Table 9-2.
 
Table 9-2: Plant Sizes
                   Minimum Container Minimum Height at Time Maximum Height at
Plant Type         Size at Time of   of Planting            Maturity
                   Planting
Ornamental grasses 1 gallon          1 foot                 4 feet
Low shrubs         3 gallons         1.5 feet               4 feet
Tall shrubs        3 gallons         4 feet                 None
Evergreen trees    NA                6 feet                 None
 
   D.   Fences and Walls: Fences and walls are generally prohibited in the
village. In those limited instances where a wall or fence is expressly allowed
or required to meet the screening requirements of this chapter, such fence of
wall must be confined to the area required to be screened. . Fence and walls
designs require village approval.
   E.   Green Infrastructure: Green infrastructure is any combination of
landscaping, facilities, or equipment that captures rainwater at or near the
site where it falls by infiltration into the soil, evapotranspiration by
plants, or storage for reuse. The following green infrastructure features may
be used for interior parking landscaping, as described in 90-430.40:
      1.   Permeable Paving: Permeable paving is a surface paved with permeable
pavers, porous concrete or porous asphalt that allows water infiltration into
the soil.
      2.   Rain Garden: A rain garden is a landscaped area specifically
designed to capture and infiltrate storm water and filled with deep-rooted
plants.
      3.   Bioswale: A bioswale is a depressed area designed to capture and
infiltrate stormwater runoff and remove pollutants. Constructed wetlands and
other bio-retention facilities may also be considered bioswales for the
purposes of this chapter.
      4.   Rain Water Catchment Area: A rainwater catchment area is an area
from which rainfall flows into a rain garden, bioswale or other bio-retention
facility.
   F.   Other Landscaping and Screening Elements.
      1.   Berms: A berm may be used to meet the minimum screening requirements
of this chapter if expressly approved by the board of trustees or zoning
official.
      2.   Boulders: Boulders and other hard, round elements greater than
eighteen inches (18") in diameter with irregular surfaces meant to appear
eroded by nature are prohibited within street rights-of-way. Masonry objects
and structures with flat, finished surfaces are permitted to mark a gateway
condition, provide pedestrian seating, or to define a street edge. Retaining
walls consisting of boulders or stones are permitted, but may not be used to
meet the minimum screening requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-
2025)
10-9-7: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Installation:
      1.   Required landscaping must be installed in accordance with an
approved landscape plan.
      2.   All trees and plant material must be installed in accordance with
sound nursery practices, in a manner designed to encourage vigorous growth.
      3.   All landscaped areas that are adjacent to pavement must be protected
with curbs or equivalent barriers. Flush curbs, curb cuts, or other methods
must be used to direct stormwater to landscape areas that abut paved areas.
      4.   Landscaping may not obstruct traffic visibility at street
intersections or driveways and must comply with all applicable intersection
sight distance regulations.
      5.   When landscaping is placed or installed within the public right-of-
way, the village has no obligation to replace or repair such landscaping if
removed or damaged by village field operations or other governmental functions.
The village also has no obligation to maintain above-ground or below-ground
improvements or landscaping within the public right-of-way.
   B.   Encroachment into Right-of-Way: Landscaped areas may encroach into the
public right-of- way, but fences and walls used for screening may not be
constructed in the public right-of-way. No tree or shrub may be planted in the
public right-of-way unless such planting is authorized by the zoning official.
Plants or other landscaping elements may not obstruct or encroach on public
sidewalks.
   C.   Protection: All landscape areas provided to meet the requirements of
this zoning ordinance must be protected from potential damage by adjacent uses
and development, including parking and storage areas.
   D.   Timing of Installation: All required landscape and screening elements
must be installed as soon as practical, preferably prior to occupancy. A delay
in the installation of plantings may be authorized by the zoning official for
up to six (6) months after permit issuance.
   E.   Maintenance:
      1.   Required landscaping and screening must be continuously maintained,
including necessary watering; weeding; pruning; pest control; litter and debris
clean-up; and replacement of dead, diseased or damaged plant material.
      2.   Failure to comply with an approved landscaping plan, including
failure to maintain required landscaping and screening and failure to replace
dead, diseased or damaged landscaping, constitutes a violation of this zoning
ordinance.
      3.   The property owner is responsible for maintenance of trees and
landscaping in accordance with the approved landscape plan and the regulations
of this zoning ordinance. Any dead, diseased or damaged trees, landscaping or
screening materials must be removed and replaced by the property owner within
ninety (90) days of the date that written notice of the obligation to remove
and replace required landscaping is issued by the village. Property owners have
no obligation to replace or restore required landscaping that is damaged or
destroyed as a direct result of government action or lawful action of a
franchise utility provider. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-9-8: LANDSCAPE PLANS:
   A.   Required Information: All site plans and building permit applications
for sites requiring landscaping must include a landscape plan that complies
with the landscape plan submittal requirements specified by zoning official.
   B.   Administrative Review: After receipt of a complete landscape plan,
zoning official must:
      1.   Approve the landscape plan as complying with the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Approve the landscape plan with conditions of approval that will
bring it into compliance with the requirements of this chapter; or
      3.   Reject the landscape plan as failing to comply with the requirements
of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-9-9: ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE:
   A.   To accommodate creativity in landscape and screening design and to
allow for flexibility in addressing site-specific development/redevelopment
challenges, zoning official is authorized to approve alternative compliance
landscape plans sealed by a landscape architect licensed to practice in the
State of Illinois. In order to approve an alternative compliance landscape
plan, the zoning official must determine that one or more of the following
conditions or opportunities are present:
      1.   The subject site has space limitations, an unusual shape or other
factors that make strict compliance with applicable landscaping and screening
regulations impossible or impractical;
      2.   Physical conditions on or adjacent to the site such as topography,
soils, vegetation or existing structures or utilities are such that strict
compliance is impossible, impractical or of no value in terms of advancing the
general purposes of this chapter;
      3.   Safety considerations such as intersection visibility, utility
locations, etc., make alternative compliance necessary; or
      4.   Creative, alternative landscape plans will provide an equal or
better means of meeting the intent of the landscaping and screening regulations
of this chapter.
   B.   The zoning official is expressly authorized to approve alternative
compliance landscape plans for projects implementing low-impact development
practices or seeking sustainable development or green building certification
from nationally recognized organizations, such as the International Code
Council, the U.S. Green Building Council, the International Living Future
Institute, the U.S. Green Building Initiative or SITES. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-
2025)
CHAPTER 10
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-10-1: General
10-10-2: Prohibited Signs And Sign Characteristics
10-10-3: Sign Exceptions
10-10-4: Sign Regulations Of General Applicability
10-10-5: Signs In A (Residential) Zoning Districts
10-10-6: Signs In Office, Business, And Industrial Zoning Districts
10-10-7: Signs In GU And PUD Districts
10-10-8: Administration
10-10-9: Nonconforming Signs
10-10-10: Rules Of Measurement
10-10-1: GENERAL:
   A.   Purpose: The sign regulations of this section are intended to balance
the following sometimes competing goals:
      1.   To support the desired character of the village, as expressed in
adopted plans, policies, and regulations;
      2.   To promote an attractive visual environment;
      3.   To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication
for businesses, organizations, and individuals;
      4.   To provide a means of way-finding for visitors and residents;
      5.   To provide for reasonable business identification, advertising, and
communication;
      6.   To prohibit signs of such excessive size and number that they
obscure one another to the detriment of the economic and social well-being of
the village and its residents, property owners and visitors;
      7.   To protect the safety and welfare of the public by minimizing
hazards for motorized and nonmotorized traffic;
      8.   To minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public
and private property; and
      9.   To provide broadly for the expression of individual opinions through
the use of signs on private property.
   B.   Scope and Applicability: All signs within the village are subject to
the regulations of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this
zoning ordinance.
   C.   Content Neutrality; Substitution of Noncommercial Messages: Any sign
allowed under this chapter may contain, in lieu of any other sign message or
copy, any lawful noncommercial message if the sign complies with all size,
height, location, and other applicable requirements of this chapter. Such a
substitution of message does not require issuance of a sign permit. The purpose
of this "substitution" provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of
commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or the favoring of any one
noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. (Ord. 2025-1446,
10-9-2025)
10-10-2: PROHIBITED SIGNS AND SIGN CHARACTERISTICS:
The following signs and sign characteristics are prohibited except as otherwise
expressly stated:
   A.   Off-premises outdoor advertising signs;
   B.   Electronic signs;
   C.   Signs painted on building walls;
   D.   Feather signs;
   E.   Signs located in or that project into the public right-of-way unless a
license for such location is approved by the board of trustees;
   F.   Signs for which no required permit has been issued;
   G.   Signs located in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance;
   H.   Search lights, strobe lights, rotating beacon lights, flashing lights
that are visible from public right-of-way, except as otherwise expressly
allowed by this chapter or required by law;
   I.   Signs located in or obstructing a required parking or loading space, or
that otherwise obstruct vehicular or pedestrian access or circulation, or that
pose any other hazard to motorized or nonmotorized travel;
   J.   Signs that obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window or door
opening used as a means of egress;
   K.   Signs that interfere with an opening required for ventilation;
   L.   Signs affixed directly to a tree, utility pole or traffic control
device;
   M.   Signs that obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or
that may be confused with, any authorized traffic control sign, signal, or
device;
   N.   Sign displays with a brightness of such intensity or brilliance that
they impair the vision or endanger the safety and welfare of any pedestrian,
cyclist, or person operating a motor vehicle;
   O.   Roof signs;
   P.   Window border lights, such as LED light strips, and other forms of
lighting outlining the border of a window.
   Q.   Signs attached to or painted on an inoperable or unlicensed vehicle
(motorized or non-motorized) located in view of a street right-of-way; and
   R.   Signs attached to or painted on a licensed motor vehicle if the sign:
      1.   Directs attention to a business, service, commodity, or activity
offered or sold on the premises; and
      2.   If the vehicle is parked closer to the street than the nearest
building wall (does not apply to vehicles parked for the purpose of immediate
loading and unloading or to personal vehicles parked at the site of a
residence). (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-10-3: SIGN EXCEPTIONS:
The following signs are allowed as indicated and are not counted as signs for
purposes of determining the number of signs or total sign area on a lot. These
signs allowed as sign exceptions may not be illuminated unless such
illumination is approved through the special use permit process of Section
10-12-4.
   A.   Signs Adjacent to Driveways and Drive Aisles: Signs adjacent to
driveways and parking lot drive aisles are allowed in nonresidential zoning
districts, as follows:
      1.   One sign may be installed at each driveway providing access to the
lot. Such signs must be located within ten feet (10') of the intersection of
the driveway and the street right-of-way and may not exceed four (4) square
feet in area or three feet (3') in height.
      2.   Off-street parking areas with a capacity of more than eight (8)
vehicles may display a sign on the interior of the parking area. Such signs
must be located within twenty feet (20') of an internal drive aisle and may not
exceed four (4) square feet in area or ten feet (10') in height. Such signs
must be located to be visible from internal site drive aisles (rather than from
off-site).
   B.   Drive-through Signs: Drive-through signs are permitted in conjunction
with approved drive-through uses, in accordance with the following regulations.
      1.   Location: Drive-through signs must be located within ten feet (10')
of a drive-through lane.
      2.   Number and Dimensions: One primary drive-through sign not to exceed
thirty-six (36) square feet in area or eight feet (8') in height is allowed per
order station up to a maximum of two (2) primary drive-through signs per lot.
One secondary drive-through sign not to exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area
or 6 feet in height is allowed per lot.
      3.   Residential Separation: Drive-through signs must be set back at
least fifty feet (50') from A zoning districts.
      4.   Visibility: Drive-through signs must be oriented to be visible by
motorists in allowed drive-through lanes.
Figure 10-1: Drive-through Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3107.png]
   C.   Window Signs: Window signs are allowed in office, business and
industrial districts, provided they do not cover more than twenty percent (20%)
of the area of the individual window to which they are affixed.
   D.   Temporary Signs:
      1.   Temporary Signs on Lots Marketed for Sale, Rental or Lease” One
temporary, non-illuminated sign is allowed per public street frontage on a lot
or portion of a lot that is actively being marketed for sale, rental or lease.
Such signs are subject to the regulations in Table 10-1:
 
Table 10-1: Signs on Lots Marketed for Sale, Rental or Lease or on Active
Construction Sites
Regulation                  A districts All Other Districts
Maximum Sign Area (sq. ft.) 16          32
Maximum Sign Height (feet)  6           12
 
      2.   Temporary Sale Signs: One temporary, non-illuminated sign is allowed
in conjunction with an open house or occasional sale. Such signs are permitted
for a maximum duration of thirty-six (36) hours per week and must be removed no
later than one hour after conclusion of the open house or occasional sale. The
sign area and height limits of Table 10-1 apply.
      3.   Temporary Signs on Active Construction Sites: One temporary, non-
illuminated sign is allowed per public street frontage on a lot upon which
building or construction is actively occurring pursuant to a valid, unexpired
building permit. Such signs must be removed within thirty (30) days of
completion of the construction or development activity or upon revocation or
expiration of the building permit. The sign area and height limits of Table 10-
1 apply.
      4.   Subdivision Signs: Signs at entrances to residential subdivisions
may be approved as part of a landscape plan submitted at the time of
subdivision plat or special use permit approval. Size and height limitations
must be established by the board of trustees at the time of plan approval.
Replacement of existing subdivision signs requires review and approval in
accordance with the special use permit procedures of Section
10-12-4.
      5.   Banners:
         a.   Property owners in office, business and industrial districts may
request approval to display up to one banner for a period of fourteen (14) days
per calendar year.
         b.   The size, construction, material, and placement location of the
banner must be approved by the architectural control commission and zoning
official.
         c.   All banners must be safely and securely attached or secured to a
wall or other structure. No strings, ropes, or wooden slats for anchoring or
support purposes are permitted.
         d.   Banners may not project more than six inches (6") from the wall
to which they are attached.
         e.   Banners may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
         f.   No electrical devices are permitted within the banner.
         g.   Every applicant for banner must submit the required application
fee and other plans and information required by the zoning official.
      6.   Political Signs: Political signs are allowed on private property
with the consent of subject property owner.
      7.   Special Event Signs: Special event signs are subject to approval of
the board of trustees. Board of trustees-approved special event signs are not
subject to the sign regulations of this chapter unless otherwise expressly
stated at the time of approval.
   E.   Other Sign Exceptions: The following additional signs are also allowed
as sign exceptions:
      1.   Non-illuminated awnings with no more than 6 square feet of sign area
on the border of the awning;
      2.   Signs erected and maintained pursuant to the discharge of
governmental functions, or that are required by law, ordinance, or government
regulation, or that are required to be posted in order to effectuate a legal
right.
      3.   Flags that do not contain a commercial message.
      4.   Wall plaques and wall signs mounted flush with the wall of a
building that are not illuminated and that do not exceed four (4) square feet
in area. No more than one such wall plaque or wall sign is permitted per
building entrance.
      5.   Signs that are not legible from any public right-of-way or from
beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel;
      6.   Signs within completely enclosed buildings, provided that such signs
are oriented to be primarily visible from inside the subject building; and
      7.   Manufacturer or product labels and warning notices on equipment or
structures. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-10-4: SIGN REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Applicability: The regulations of this section apply to wall-mounted
and freestanding signs, except as otherwise expressly stated. These regulations
apply in addition to any other applicable regulations established in this
chapter.
   B.   Required Setbacks, Spacing and Separations: No portion of a
freestanding sign may be located within ten feet (10') of lot line or within
twenty-five feet (25') of an A-zoned lot.
   C.   Mounted Height of Wall Signs: Wall signs may not be mounted in a manner
that results in the highest point of the sign exceeding the height of the
building wall or parapet to which it is attached.
   D.   Illumination: Unless otherwise approved through the special use permit
approval process, signs may be illuminated only by light cast upon such signs
from a concealed light source.
   E.   Vertical Clearance: Signs that overhang a sidewalk or driveway must
have a minimum vertical clearance of nine feet (9') above the ground surface
below the sign. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-10-5: SIGNS IN A (RESIDENTIAL) ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Applicability: The regulations of this section apply to signs in all A
districts. See also the general regulations of Section
10-10-3E.1.
   B.   Residential Uses: Only those signs expressly allowed in Section
10-10-3 are allowed on A-zoned lots occupied by residential uses.
   C.   Nonresidential Uses: The following signs are allowed on A-zoned lots
occupied by nonresidential uses:
      1.   Wall Signs: Nonresidential uses in A districts are allowed a maximum
of one wall sign per public building entrance. No individual wall sign may
exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. For buildings with multiple public
building entrances, the sign area of all wall signs may not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet in the aggregate.
      2.   Freestanding Signs: Nonresidential uses in A districts are allowed a
maximum of one freestanding sign per street frontage. Allowed freestanding
signs are subject to a maximum height limit of six feet (6') and may not exceed
0.25 square feet of sign area per linear foot of street frontage or forty-eight
(48) square feet, whichever is less. The maximum sign area calculation must be
based on the street frontage to which the sign is oriented. (Ord. 2025-1446,
10-9-2025)
10-10-6: SIGNS IN OFFICE, BUSINESS, AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Applicability: The regulations of this section apply to signs in all
office, business, and industrial zoning districts. See also the general
regulations of Section
10-10-3E.1.
   B.   Signs Allowed: In addition to those signs expressly in Section
10-10-3, the following signs are allowed in all office, business, and
industrial zoning districts:
      1.   Wall Signs: A maximum of one wall sign is allowed per one hundred
feet of building frontage. The cumulative area of all wall signs may not exceed
0.5 square feet per linear foot of building frontage or one hundred and twenty
(120) square feet, whichever is less.
      2.   Freestanding Signs: A maximum of one freestanding sign is allowed
per public street frontage.
         a.   The maximum area of an allowed freestanding sign may not exceed
one square foot per linear foot of lot frontage or one hundred and twenty (120)
square feet, whichever is less.
         b.   Freestanding signs may not exceed eight feet (8') in height above
grade at the base of the sign.
         c.   All freestanding signs must be monument-style signs constructed
with a base that is at least fifty percent (50%) as wide as the overall sign
width; pole-mounted and pylon-mounted freestanding signs are prohibited.
         d.   Freestanding signs must prominently display the building
addresses (with numerals) that have a minimum height of six inches (6").
         e.   All newly constructed freestanding signs require a landscape plan
with the sign permit application and must be landscaped in accordance with the
following regulations:
         (1)   Freestanding signs must have a minimum landscaped area of five
feet (5') around the base of the sign.
         (2)   At least seventy-five percent (75%) of the landscape bed must be
planted with vegetation with a minimum height of twenty-four inches (24").
         (3)   Vegetation must include shrubs and ornamental grasses that
provide year-round interest.
         (4)   Freestanding signs in parking areas must be surrounded by
bollards or a masonry barrier.
         (5)   All plantings must be continuously maintained and replaced as
necessary. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-10-7: SIGNS IN GU AND PUD DISTRICTS:
Signs in GU and PUD districts are subject to the regulations established at the
time of development plan or site plan approval. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-10-8: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Any person proposing to erect any sign requiring a sign permit must
submit a sign permit application to the zoning official. Applications for such
permit must be accompanied by detailed plans, including scaled drawings of the
proposed sign, a detailed site plan and other information deemed necessary by
the zoning official to determine compliance with applicable regulations.
   B.   Sign permit fees must be paid prior to the issuance of a sign permit.
   C.   If the work associated with a sign permit has not been completed within
one hundred and eighty days (180) days of the date of the issuance of the
permit, such permit will lapse and become null and void. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-
2025)
10-10-9: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Description: A nonconforming sign is a sign that was lawfully
established but that no longer complies with applicable zoning ordinance
regulations because of the adoption or amendment of regulations after the sign
was established.
   B.   Regulations: Nonconforming signs may continue subject to the following
provisions:
      1.   Nonconforming signs must be maintained in good repair and safe
condition. No permits may be issued for upgrades or modifications of
nonconforming signs.
      2.   If a sign is nonconforming by reason of restrictions on its
brightness or illumination or its use of strobe or beacon lights, the sign must
be immediately removed or made to conform.
      3.   A window sign that is nonconforming by reason of restrictions on its
sign area must be immediately removed or made to conform.
      4.   If a nonconforming sign is damaged or partially destroyed to the
extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time of
damage, the sign must be removed or made to conform to all applicable
regulations within ninety (90) days of the date of the date of damage or
destruction.
      5.   If the sign is not used for advertising purposes for a period of one
hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days, the sign is deemed abandoned and
must be removed.
   C.   Strobe Lights and Beacons: Search lights, strobe lights and rotating
beacon lights that are visible from public right-of- way are prohibited and
must be removed immediately, except as otherwise required by law. (Ord. 2025-
1446, 10-9-2025)
10-10-10: RULES OF MEASUREMENT:
   A.   Sign Area:
      1.   Signs Enclosed in Frames or Cabinets: The area of a sign enclosed in
a frame or cabinet is determined based on the outer dimensions of the frame or
cabinet surrounding the sign face (see
Figure 10-2).
Figure 10-2: Sign Area Measurement (Signs in Cabinets or Frames)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3109.png]
      2.   Channel (individual) Letter Signs
         a.   The area of a sign comprised of individual letters or elements
attached to a building wall is determined by calculating the area of the
smallest geometric figure (e.g. square, rectangle, circle, polygon, etc.) that
can be drawn around the letters and/or elements (see
Figure 10-3).
         b.   Signs consisting of individual letters and/or elements will be
measured as one sign when the distance between the letters and/or elements is
less than the largest dimension of the largest sign letter (see
Figure 10-4).
Figure 10-3: Sign Area Measurement (Individual Letter Signs)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3111.png]
Figure 10-4: Sign Area Measurement (Single vs. Multiple Signs)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3113.png]
      3.   Multi-Sided Signs: Unless otherwise expressly stated, when the sign
faces of a multi-sided sign are parallel or within thirty degrees (30°) of
parallel, only one side is counted for the purpose of determining the area and
number of signs. If the sign faces are not parallel or within thirty degrees
(30°) of parallel, all sign faces are counted (see
Figure 10-5).
Figure 10-5: Multi-Sided Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3115.png]
      4.   Non-planar Signs: Spherical, free-form, sculptural or other non-
planar sign area is measured as fifty percent (50%) of the sum of the areas
using only the four (4) vertical sides of the smallest four (4)-sided
polyhedron that will encompass the sign structure. Signs with greater than four
(4) polyhedron faces are prohibited.
Figure 10-6: Non-Planar Sign Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3117.png]
   B.   Sign Height: The height of a sign is measured as the vertical distance
from curb level to the highest point of the sign.
Figure 10-7: Sign Height Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3119.png]
   C.   Building Frontage:
      1.   For buildings occupied by a single tenant or multiple tenants that
access the building via a common entrance, building frontage is the exterior
building wall that:
         a.   Is adjacent to a street or a parking area or other vehicle
circulation area that is accessory to and serves the subject building; and
         b.   Contains either windows or a public building entrance.
   Allowed wall sign area for a building that has two (2) or more building
frontages must be calculated on the basis of each individual building frontage.
      2.   On buildings housing more than one tenant where each tenant has
their own outside entrance, a tenant's building frontage is the exterior
building wall (or walls) that directly abut the tenant's interior floor space
and that:
         a.   Abuts, parallels, or is the nearest to parallel with a street or
a parking area or other vehicle circulation area that is accessory to and
serves the subject building; and
         b.   Contains either windows or a public building entrance.
   A tenant that has two (2) or more building frontages must calculate the
permitted sign area on the basis of each individual building frontage.
      3.   Regardless of the height or number of tenants in a building,
building frontage is determined by one measurement of the horizontal length of
the wall at finished grade. Building walls must be measured along a flat,
unbroken plane, regardless of the presence of recesses or projections along the
building wall.
      4.   As an alternative to the allocation of permitted sign area on the
basis of individual building frontages, a differing allotment of sign area may
be assigned to the various tenants upon receipt and approval by the zoning
official of written authorization from the building's owner or authorized
management firm. In no instance may the total combined sign area for all signs
exceed the maximum allowed sign area for the individual building frontages, as
determined in accordance with building frontage measurement rules of this
section. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
CHAPTER 11
GENERALLY APPLICABLE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Outdoor Lighting
10-11-1: OUTDOOR LIGHTING:
   A.   General: The general regulations of this subsection "A." apply to all
outdoor lighting.
      1.   Purposes: The outdoor lighting regulations of this section are
intended to help ensure adequate lighting for motorized and nonmotorized
travelers; provide for the efficient use of energy; and reduce the impacts of
sky glow, nuisance lighting, and glare on nearby areas.
      2.   Applicability and Exemptions: The outdoor lighting regulations of
this section apply to all outdoor lighting except the following:
         a.   Lighting fixtures with a light output of no more than 1,000
lumens per fixture;
         b.   Emergency lighting used by police, fire fighting, or medical
personnel;
         c.   Traffic control devices or streetlights installed by the village
or other governmental entity;
         d.   Aviation safety lights required by the FAA (e.g., warning lights
on radio, communication and navigation towers);
         e.   Underwater swimming pools lights that comply with all applicable
electrical codes;
         f.   Spotlighting of official government flags if the spotlighting is
contained within the area of the flag;
         g.   Outdoor lighting used for emergency equipment and work conducted
in the interest of law enforcement or for public health, safety or welfare;
         h.   Outdoor lighting used for village-authorized temporary uses or
events; and
         i.   Temporary holiday lighting (in place for no more than 90 days per
calendar year) and temporary seasonal decorations (in place for no more than
ninety (90) days per calendar year) using typical unshielded low-intensity
incandescent lamps.
      3.   Prohibited Lighting: The following types of outdoor lighting are
prohibited:
         a.   Any lighting that could interfere with the safe movement of motor
vehicles, bicycles, or pedestrians on public or private streets;
         b.   Searchlights and rotating beacons;
         c.   Laser, strobe, and or flashing light sources or any similar high
intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment;
         d.   Mercury vapor and low-pressure sodium lighting; and
         e.   Tower lighting, unless required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA).
      4.   Lighting Types and Efficiency:
         a.   Light sources must be color-correct types such as Halogen, LED,
or metal halide.
         b.   All lighting in A zoning districts must have a nominal correlated
color temperature (CCT) of no greater than three thousand degrees Kelvin
(3,000°K).
      5.   Reduced Lighting During Evening Hours: All outdoor light fixtures
must be turned off between eleven o’clock (11:00) p.m. and sunrise except for
security purposes or to illuminate walkways, driveways, equipment yards, and
parking lots.
      6.   Arrangement and Shielding;
         a.   All lighting fixtures, except motion detector-activated lighting,
must be fully shielded so that the lighting element is not visible to an
observer at any property line, as measured five feet (5') above grade.
         b.   Light-producing elements must be shielded with full cutoffs so
that no light emitted directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture is
projected at an angle of more than ninety degrees (90°) above nadir and no more
than ten percent (10%) of the light emitted directly from the lamp or
indirectly from the fixture is projected at an angle of more than eighty
degrees (80°) above nadir.
Figure 11-1: Full-Cutoff Light Fixture
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3121.png]
         c.   A light fixture may cast light upward only if all upward light is
reflected back down by a canopy, roof, or similar feature.
      7.   Measurement of Illumination and Light Trespass:
         a.   For purposes of administration and enforcement, light levels must
be measured with a direct-reading light meter, calibrated at least annually.
         b.   The meter's sensor must be on the property line at a height of
five feet (5') above finished grade and aimed towards the subject property in
horizontal position. Readings must be recorded after the value has stabilized.
         c.   Measurements must be made sundown with the light sources to be
measured illuminated, and then with those light sources extinguished. The
difference between these two (2) readings must be compared to the maximum
allowed illumination at the property line. In this way, contributions to light
levels by night sky and other ambient light sources are eliminated and the
light intensity from the subject light sources can be accurately determined.
   B.   Residential Lighting Standards: The regulations of this subsection "B."
apply to all residential uses in residential (A) zoning districts.
      1.   Light trespass along the lot line of the subject residential
property may not exceed 0.2 foot-candles when abutting a residential zoning
district or 0.5 foot-candles when abutting any other zoning district or public
right-of-way.
      2.   Unless approved through the special use permit process, light
fixtures mounted on freestanding poles may not exceed eight feet (8') in
height. Pole-mounted light fixtures must be directed toward the interior of the
property.
   C.   Nonresidential Lighting Standards: The regulations of this subsection
"C." apply to all nonresidential uses in all zoning districts.
      1.   Canopy Lighting: Light fixtures installed in canopies, pavilions,
drive-through bays, or similar structures must be flush-mounted or recessed
above the lower edge of the canopy and equipped with flat lenses that do not
project below the canopy ceiling. The canopy fascia may not be internally
illuminated.
Figure 11-2: Canopy Lighting
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3123.png]
      2.   Light Trespass: Light trespass along the lot line of the subject
nonresidential property may not exceed 0.5 foot-candles when abutting a
residential zoning district or 1.0 foot-candles when abutting any other zoning
district or public right-of-way.
Figure 11-3: Light Trespass Along Property Line
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3125.png]
      3.   Lighting Plans:
         a.   General: Outdoor lighting plans demonstrating compliance with the
regulations of this section are required with the submittal of a site plan. If
no outdoor lighting is proposed, a note must be placed on the face of the site
plan indicating that no outdoor lighting will be provided.
         b.   Contents of Lighting Plan: Applicants are required to submit a
photometric study in enough detail to demonstrate that all applicable outdoor
light regulations will be met. The photometric study must include at least the
following:
         (1)   A scale drawing of the site with all outdoor lighting locations
shown;
         (2)   Fixture specifications, including catalog cut-sheets or generic
standards;
         (3)   Lamp type and size;
         (4)   Fixture mounting heights, mounting orientation, and tilt angles
if applicable; and
         (5)   A representative point-by-point illumination array for the site
showing property lines and all off-site lighting impacts. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-
9-2025)
CHAPTER 12
REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-12-1: Common Provisions
10-12-2: Zoning Text and Map Amendments
10-12-3: Planned Unit Developments
10-12-4: Special Use Permits
10-12-5: Variances
10-12-6: Appeals of Administrative Decisions
   
10-12-1: COMMON PROVISIONS:
   A.   Applicability: The common provisions of this section apply to all the
review and approval procedures in this chapter unless otherwise expressly
stated.
   B.   Review and Decision-making Authority (Summary Table): Table 12-
1 provides a summary of the review and approval procedures of this chapter. In
the event of conflict between this summary table and the detailed procedures
contained elsewhere in this chapter, the detailed procedures govern.
Table 12-1: Review and Decision-making Authority Summary Table
Procedure Staff Plan Commission/ Zoning Board Board of Trustees Public Notice
                of Appeals
Table 12-1: Review and Decision-making Authority Summary Table
                          Plan Commission/
Procedure           Staff Zoning Board of  Board of Trustees Public Notice
                          Appeals
Zoning Text & Map   R     <R>              DM                N
Amendments
Planned Unit Developments
Preliminary Plans   R     <R>              DM                N,M,P
Final Plans         R     <R>              DM                N,M,P
Special Use Permits -     <R>              DM                N,M,P[2]
Variances           R     <R>              DM                N,M
Appeals of
Administrative      -     <DM>[3]          -                 N,M
Decisions
R = Review body (review and recommendation)
DM = Decision-making body (final decision to approve or deny)
< > = Public hearing required
Hearing Notice: N = Newspaper; M = Mail; P = Posting (signs)
 
   C.   Applications and Fees:
      1.   Owner-initiated Applications: Whenever the provisions of this zoning
ordinance allow the filing of an application by the owner of the subject
property, that application must be filed by all record title owners of the real
properties that are the subject of the application or the property owners'
authorized agent.
      2.   Pre-application Meetings:
         a.   Purpose: Pre-application meetings provide an early opportunity
for staff and applicants to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations
required for development approval under this zoning ordinance.
         b.   Applicability:   Pre-application meetings are required whenever
the provisions of this zoning ordinance expressly state that they are required.
They are encouraged in all cases.
         c.   Scheduling: Pre-application meetings must be scheduled with the
zoning official.
         d.   Guidelines: The zoning official is authorized to establish
guidelines for pre-application meetings, including information that should be
provided and any available alternatives to face-to-face meetings, such as
telephone conversations and email correspondence.
      3.   Form of Application:
         a.   Applications required under this zoning ordinance must be
submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the official responsible
for accepting the application. Applications must include materials and
information to assist authorized review and decision-making bodies in their
consideration of the application, including at least the following:
         (1)   A list of the names and addresses of all owners of record of the
property that is the subject of the application; and
         (2)   Maps, plats, surveys, dimensioned site plans, engineering
documents, environmental reports, traffic studies, and other materials and
information, as required by this zoning ordinance or application checklists
established by the official responsible for accepting the application.
Application forms and submittal requirements must be made available to the
general public.
      4.   Filing Fees and Deposits:
         a.   General: Petitions for zoning map amendments, planned unit
developments, special use permits, variances, and appeals of administrative
decisions must be accompanied by an application fee and such deposits for
reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses as described in this section. No action may
be taken on such petitions until the fee has been paid and required deposits
made unless the board of trustees waives otherwise applicable requirements. All
petitioners are required to pay any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the
village in the review and consideration of their petition by the village,
including, but not limited to, engineering fees, legal fees, and expenses of
such other consultants as the village deems appropriate and necessary.
         b.   Deposits:
         (1)   Petitions for variances and appeals of administrative decisions
must be accompanied by a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and a deposit
into a non-interest-bearing, nonsegregated account held by the village
treasurer equal to one hundred and twenty-five percent (125%) of estimated
reimbursable expenses, if any, as determined by the zoning official.
         (2)   Petitions for preliminary subdivision plat approval, final
subdivision plat approval annexation, special use permit approval, zoning text
or map amendments, or any combination of such petitions, when filed, must be
accompanied by a cash deposit into a noninterest-bearing, nonsegregated
account. The amount of the minimum initial deposit is based on the following
formula (based on the area of the subject property):
            (a)   Less than five (5) acres: two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
            (b)   More than five (5) acres but less than twenty (20) acres:
seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00).
            (c)   Twenty (20) acres or more: twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00).
         (3)   In lieu of a cash deposit, an applicant or petitioner may elect
to post with the village an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount of at
least two hundred percent (200%) of the otherwise required cash deposit. The
form and provider of any letter of credit is subject to village review and
approval.
         (4)   All applicants and petitioners are required to make additional
deposits with the village as may be necessary to maintain a balance in such
account equal to the required minimum initial deposit until no further
expenditures or charges by the village are reasonably anticipated.
         (5)   The village may, at its sole discretion, retain such
professionals, experts and/or consultants as it deems necessary for a full and
complete review and consideration of any application or petition. Such
professionals, experts and/or consultants may include, but are not limited to,
attorneys, engineers, land planners, environmentalists, conservationists,
arborists, architects, landscape architects, surveyors, soil experts and such
other professionals, experts or consultants as the village deems necessary and
the cost of such services must be borne by the petitioner or applicant.
         (6)   The applicant or petitioner is required to reimburse the village
for all expenses incurred by the village relative to the respective application
or petition, including, but not limited to, fees for the services of any and
all of the foregoing professionals, experts and consultants relative to the
respective petition or application as well as charges for the publication of
legal notices, recording secretaries and/or court reporters.
         (7)   Required deposits and funds must be used by the village for the
payment of such expenses in the event that the applicant or petitioner fails to
make payment to the village for such reimbursement at least seventy-two hours
(72) hours before the commencement of the next scheduled hearing or meeting of
the village on the subject application or petition or sixty (60) days from the
date on which billing is mailed to the applicant or petitioner, whichever is
sooner. The obligation of the applicant or petitioner to reimburse the village
is not limited by the amount on deposit from time to time.
         (8)   Any portion of such deposited funds that are not expended by the
village must be refunded to the applicant or petitioner at such time as no
further expenditures or charges by the village are reasonably anticipated.
         (9)   When it appears to the mayor that the proposed project will
involve additional expenditures by the village, the applicant or petitioner is
required to deposit with the village treasurer such additional amounts
reasonably necessary to pay the estimated amount of such expenses and charges.
Such deposits must be made or increased from time to time as reasonably
required by the village but any such additional deposit must be made at least
seventy-two (72) hours before the commencement of the next hearing or meeting
by the village on the subject application or petition or sixty (60) days from
the date on which any written request by the village for such additional
deposit is mailed to the petitioner or applicant, whichever is sooner. Any
portion of such deposit not expended by the Village must be refunded to the
applicant or petitioner at such time as no further expenditures or charges by
the Village are reasonably anticipated.
         c.   Remedies Upon Noncompliance:
         (1)   If any applicant or petitioner fails to comply with any of the
foregoing fee and deposit provisions, the village, in addition to such other
penalties and remedies provided by law or the provisions of this zoning
ordinance and the other applicable ordinances of the village and any officer,
employee, board, committee or commission of the village may refuse to:
            (a)   Process applications for permits;
            (b)   Make inspections as otherwise required;
            (c)   Issue any applicable permits; and
            (d)   Commence or further conduct hearings or meetings on the
subject application or petition matter if the applicant or petitioner has
failed to comply with this title at least seventy-two (72) hours before the
scheduled hearing or meeting.
         (2)   In addition to the foregoing remedies, and not by way of
limitation, the village may bring any action at law to collect any amounts due
under any of the foregoing fee and deposit provisions.
      5.   Application Completeness, Accuracy and Sufficiency:
         a.   An application will be considered complete and ready for
processing only if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes
all required information, and is accompanied by the required fees and deposits.
         b.   The official responsible for accepting the application must make
a determination of application completeness within ten (10) business days of
application filing.
         c.   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the official
responsible for accepting the application must provide notice to the applicant
along with an explanation of the application's deficiencies. Notice of an
incomplete application may be provided by personal service, electronic mail, or
first-class mail.
         d.   No further processing of incomplete applications will occur and
incomplete applications will be pulled from the processing cycle. When the
deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed in the first
available processing cycle. If the deficiencies are not corrected by the
applicant within sixty (60) days, the application will be deemed to have been
withdrawn.
         e.   Applications deemed complete will be considered to be in the
processing cycle and will be reviewed by staff and other review and decision-
making bodies in accordance with applicable review and approval procedures of
this zoning ordinance.
         f.   The official responsible for accepting the application may
require that applications or plans be revised before being placed on an agenda
for possible action if the zoning official determines that:
         (1)   The application or plan contains one or more significant
inaccuracies or omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the
plan's/application's compliance with zoning ordinance requirements or other
regulations;
         (2)   The application contains multiple minor inaccuracies or
omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the plan's/
application's compliance with zoning ordinance requirements or other
regulations; or
         (3)   The decision-making body does not have legal authority to
approve the application.
   D.   Application Processing Cycles: Officials responsible for accepting
applications, after consulting with review and decision-making bodies, are
authorized to promulgate reasonable cycles and timelines for processing
applications, including deadlines for receipt of complete applications.
   E.   Public Hearing Notices:
      1.   Published Notice: When the provisions of this zoning ordinance
require published (newspaper) notice of a public hearing, the required notice
must be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in South
Barrington at least fifteen (15) days before and no more than thirty (30) days
before the public hearing.
      2.   Written (Mailed) Notice:
         a.   When the provisions of this zoning ordinance require mailed
notice to neighboring property owners, applicants must provide written notice
by certified mail, return receipt requested to all owners of property within
two hundred and fifty feet (250') of the subject property, as measured from
property line to property line, but excluding public rights-of-way. (See
Figure 12-1) Property owner information must be taken from the tax records of
Cook County.
Figure 12-1: Measurement of Mailed Notification Radius
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3127.png]
         b.   Mailed notices must be postmarked at least fifteen (15) days
before the public hearing.
         c.   If, after a bona fide effort to provide mailed notice,
neighboring property owners cannot be located or the mailed notice is returned
because the owner cannot be found at the last known address, the mailed notice
requirements of this provision are deemed to be satisfied.
         d.   In addition to providing mailed notice, the applicant must
furnish to the zoning official a complete list containing the names and
addresses of property owners to whom notices were mailed, all returned
certified mail receipts, and a written statement affirming that applicable
mailed notice requirements of this zoning ordinance have been met.
      3.   Posted Notice (Signs): When the provisions of this zoning ordinance
require the posting of notice signs, at least one public hearing notice sign
must be posted per two hundred feet (200') of street frontage, with a least one
sign per street frontage.
      4.   Information in Required Notices: Required notices must include at
least the following information:
         a.   The address or legal description of the property that is the
subject of the hearing;
         b.   A summary of the nature of the application;
         c.   The time and place of the hearing; and
         d.   A contact for further information on the matter.
      5.   Additional Courtesy Notice:
         a.   In addition to required public hearing notices, the village is
authorized to provide or require that the applicant provide one or more of the
following forms of additional notice of public hearings required under this
zoning ordinance:
         (1)   Mailing notices to village-registered property owners'
associations or neighborhood organizations whose boundaries include the subject
property;
         (2)   Posting notices in village hall or in other government
buildings; and
         (3)   Publishing notice on the village website.
         b.   Failure to provide any form of courtesy notice that is not
required by state law or any defect in such courtesy notice does not
invalidate, impair, or otherwise affect any application, public hearing or
decision rendered in respect to the matter under consideration.
   F.   Hearing Procedures:
      1.   At required public hearings, interested parties must be permitted to
submit information and comments, verbally or in writing. The hearing body is
authorized to establish reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct
of hearings and the presentation of information and comments.
      2.   Once commenced, a public hearing may be continued by the hearing
body. No re-notification is required if the continuance is set for a specified
date and time and that date and time is announced at the time of the
continuance.
      3.   If a public hearing is continued or postponed for an indefinite
period from the date of the originally scheduled public hearing, new public
hearing notice must be given before the rescheduled public hearing.
      4.   If the applicant requests and is granted a continuance or
postponement requiring renotification, the applicant must pay any costs of
renotification.
   G.   Action by Review Bodies and Decision-Making Bodies:
      1.   In taking action under the procedures of this chapter, review and
decision-making bodies must act by simple majority vote of a quorum, unless
otherwise expressly stated in this title or required by law.
      2.   Review and decision-making bodies may take any action that is
consistent with:
         a.   The regulations of this zoning ordinance;
         b.   Any rules or by-laws that apply to the review or decision-making
body; and
         c.   The notice that was given.
      3.   In acting on zoning map amendments, review and decision-making
bodies are expressly authorized to recommend and approve a less intensive
zoning district classification than the zoning district that was described in
required public notices.
      4.   Review and decision-making bodies are authorized to continue a
public hearing or defer action in order to receive additional information or
further deliberate.
   H.   Conditions of Approval: When decision-making bodies approve
applications with conditions, the conditions must relate to a situation created
or aggravated by the proposed use or development and must be roughly
proportional to the impacts of the use or development.
   I.   Decision-Making Criteria; Burden of Proof or Persuasion: Applications
must address relevant review and decision-making criteria. In all cases, the
burden is on the applicant to show that an application or proposal complies
with all applicable review or approval criteria.
   J.   Required Time-frames for Action: Any time limit specified in this
zoning ordinance for any decision or action on behalf of a review or decision-
making body may be extended if the applicant agrees to an extension. Unless
otherwise expressly stated, if a review or decision-making body does not render
a decision or take action within any time period required under this zoning
ordinance and the applicant has not agreed to an extension of that time limit,
the application is deemed denied. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-12-2: ZONING TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority to File:
      1.   Amendments to the text of this zoning ordinance may be initiated
only by the board of trustees.
      2.   Amendments to the zoning map may be initiated by the board of
trustees, the owner of the property that is the subject of the proposed zoning
map amendment, or by the subject property owner's authorized agent.
Figure 12-2: Zoning Text and Map Amendment Process (Generally)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3129.png]
   B.   Application Filing: Property owner-initiated applications for zoning
map amendments must be filed with the zoning official.
   C.   Review and Recommendation-Zoning Official: Upon initiation of a zoning
text amendment or receipt of a complete application for a zoning map amendment,
the zoning official must prepare a report and recommendation on the proposal.
The report must be transmitted to the plan commission/zoning board of appeals
before their public hearing on the proposed amendment.
   D.   Notice of Hearing:
      1.   In all cases, notice of the required public hearing on zoning
ordinance text and map amendments must be published in the newspaper in
accordance with Section
10-12-1E.1.
      2.   The zoning official is also authorized to require that the applicant
provide written (mailed) notice and posted (sign) notice in accordance with
Sections
10-12-1E.2 and
10-12-1E.3, and
10-12-1E.3 respectively.
   E.   Hearing and Recommendation-Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals: The
plan commission/zoning board of appeals must hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment. Following the public hearing, the plan commission/zoning
board of appeals must act to recommend that the proposed amendment be approved,
approved with modifications, or denied and transmit its recommendation to the
board of trustees. If the plan commission/zoning board of appeals arrives at a
tie vote, the application may be forwarded to the board of trustees with the
notation of the tie vote.
   F.   Final Action - Board of Trustees: Following receipt of the plan
commission/zoning board of appeals' report and recommendation, the board of
trustees must act to approve the proposed amendment, approve the proposed
amendment with modifications or deny the proposed amendment. The board of
trustees is also authorized to remand the proposed amendment back to the plan
commission/zoning board of appeals for further consideration.
   G.   Review and Approval Criteria:
      1.   Zoning Ordinance Text Amendments: The decision to amend the zoning
ordinance text is a matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by
any one standard. In making recommendations and decisions about zoning
ordinance text amendments, review and decision-making bodies must consider all
relevant factors, including the comprehensive plan and changed or changing
conditions necessitating the amendment.
      2.   Zoning Map Amendments: The decision to amend the zoning map is a
matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by any single standard.
In making recommendations and decisions about zoning map amendments, review and
decision-making bodies must consider at least the following factors:
         a.   The existing use and zoning of nearby property;
         b.   The extent to which the particular zoning restrictions affect
property values;
         c.   The extent to which any diminution in property value is offset by
an increase in the public health, safety and welfare;
         d.   The suitability of the subject property for the uses and purposes
or which it is zoned;
         e.   The length of time that the subject property has been vacant as
zoned, considering the context of land development in the vicinity;
         f.   The value to the village of the proposed use; and
         g.   The comprehensive plan. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-12-3: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
The procedures of this section apply to the approval of all proposed planned
unit development districts.
   A.   Preapplication: Prior to the filing of a property owner-initiated
application for approval of a PUD preliminary plan, the applicant must provide
the village administrator with an informal presentation of the proposed planned
unit development. At such presentation the applicant must provide information
as to the location of the proposed planned unit development, the uses, and
approximate area of use categories, a list of any known exceptions to the
subdivision, zoning and/or other ordinances of the village, and any other
information the applicant deems necessary to clearly explain the proposed
planned unit development. The village administrator may request additional
information or documentation. The purpose of such preapplication presentation
is not intended to provide binding opinions or advice on behalf of the village
to the applicant but to make advice and assistance available to the applicant
before preparation of the preliminary plan, so that the applicant may
determine:
      1.   Whether the proposed planned unit development appears in general to
be in compliance with the provisions of this title and other applicable
ordinances;
      2.   Whether any zoning amendment, special use or other relief is
required in connection with the proposed planned unit development;
      3.   Whether the proposed planned unit development is consistent with the
goals and policies of the village for development.
      4.   The preapplication presentation does not require formal application,
fee, or filing of a planned unit development plat.
   B.   PUD Preliminary Plan:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of the PUD preliminary plan submission is to
obtain tentative approval and/or commitments from the village that the plans,
design, and program that the applicant intends to build and follow are
acceptable, and that the applicant can reasonably proceed into final detailed
architecture, engineering, surveying, and landscape architecture in
anticipation of PUD final plan approval and subsequent construction. Approval
of the PUD preliminary plan does not constitute authority to proceed with
construction of any improvements, but rather constitutes an approval of the
general features of the plan as a basis for preparing the PUD final plans. The
PUD preliminary plan must describe all uses and must document all
infrastructure, buildings, landscaping, open space, and other improvements for
the property. The board of trustees may only approve PUD final plans which
substantially conform to the approved PUD preliminary plan and the ordinances
rezoning the property and authorizing the special uses within the Planned Unit
Development District.
      2.   Submittal Requirements: See Section
10-17-1 for minimum PUD Preliminary Plan submittal requirements.
      3.   Procedures:
         a.   Application: All owner-initiated petitions for approval of a PUD
must include a petition to rezone the subject property and an application for
approval of a PUD preliminary plan verified by the owner(s) of record or
authorized agent of said owner(s) of the property involved must be filed
simultaneously with the village administrator in a form and in such numbers as
prescribed by the village, which must contain or be accompanied by all required
information. The application and petition must be in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and ordinance. Upon receipt of such application and
petition, the village administrator must forward same to the board of trustees
with the request that the board of trustees refer the matter to the plan
commission/zoning board of appeals and request the plan commission/zoning board
of appeals make recommendations as to whether or not the board of trustees
should approve the PUD preliminary plan and grant the zoning requested. The
board of trustees must refer the application and petition to the plan
commission/zoning board of appeals at a regular or special meeting of the board
of trustees within thirty (30) days of receiving a complete application from
the village administrator.
         b.   Fees: All owner-initiated applications must be accompanied by a
fee which is established by the board of trustees from time to time and a
signed agreement that the applicant will pay all reasonable fees incurred by
the village for consulting planners, engineers, or legal review of the proposed
development.
         c.   Public Hearing: Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the petition
and complete application, and after a determination that they comply with the
requirements of this chapter, the plan commission/zoning board of appeals must
schedule and hold a public hearing in the manner provided in this title for
hearings on the rezoning of property and the granting of special uses. A record
of the testimony presented at the public hearing must be made by a court
reporter at the applicant's expense, and maintained by the village as part of
its permanent record concerning the petition and application.
         d.   Findings of Fact: Following the close of the public hearing on
the PUD preliminary plan and supporting data, the plan commission/zoning board
of appeals must, within sixty (60) days, submit findings of fact and a written
recommendation for approval, modification, or disapproval, and the reasons
therefor, or indicate why a report cannot be rendered to the board of trustees
at that time. The report must set forth in what respects the proposed plan
would or would not be in the public interest and may include findings of fact
on the following:
         (1)   In what respects the proposed plan is or is not consistent with
the stated purpose of these planned unit development regulations;
         (2)   The extent to which the proposed plan meets or fails to meet the
requirements and standards of the planned unit development district (see
Section
10-4-3);
         (3)   The extent to which the physical design of the proposed plan
does or does not make adequate provision for public services, provide adequate
control over vehicular traffic, provide for and protect designated and common
open space, and further the amenities of light, air, recreation, and visual
enjoyment;
         (4)   The relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to the
adjacent properties and neighborhood;
         (5)   The desirability of the proposed plan with regard to the
physical development, tax base, and economic well-being of the village;
         (6)   The extent to which the proposed plan will affect property
values in the vicinity.
         e.   Conditions And Guarantees: In connection with the filed petition
and application, the plan commission/zoning board of appeals may recommend, and
the board of trustees may stipulate, such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, design, layout, height, density, construction,
maintenance, aesthetics, operation, and other elements of the planned unit
development as they deem necessary for the protection of the public interest,
improvement of the development, protection of adjacent areas, and compliance
with this title, the village code, and all existing federal, state, and local
legislation and regulation. In all cases in which the approval of a petition to
rezone and application for approval of a PUD preliminary plan are subject to
such conditions, the corporate board of trustees may require such evidence and
guarantees as they may deem necessary that the conditions stipulated in
connection with the approval of the petition to rezone and application for
approval of a PUD preliminary plan will be met.
         f.   Determination: After receipt of the findings and recommendations
from the plan commission/zoning board of appeals, the board of trustees, must,
within sixty (60) days, unless the applicant consents in writing to an
extension of time, either approve the petition for rezoning and application for
approval of a PUD preliminary plan with such modifications, requirements, or
conditions as it may deem necessary, or deny the petition and application.
Failure of the board of trustees to act within sixty (60) days without an
approved extension of time will be deemed a denial of the petition and
application. The board of trustees may approve or deny a petition and
application notwithstanding any contrary recommendations or findings of fact of
the plan commission/zoning board of appeals. A PUD preliminary plan which fails
to receive approval of the plan commission/zoning board of appeals may not be
approved by the board of trustees except by a majority of the trustees then
holding office. In the case of approval, or approval with modifications, the
board of trustees must pass an ordinance indicating approval of the PUD
preliminary plan, rezoning the property, waiving any requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance or the South Barrington Village Code that are deemed overly
burdensome by the Board of trustees and granting the necessary special uses, if
any, contingent upon approval of the PUD final plan.
   C.   PUD Final Plan:
      1.   Purpose: The PUD final plan must designate with particularity the
land to be developed and the uses to be allowed=. The PUD final plan is
intended as a document to be recorded. The PUD final plan shows the exact
location of facilities, while the PUD preliminary plan shows the general
location of these same facilities.
      2.   Submittal Requirements: See Section
10-17-3 for minimum PUD Final Plan submittal requirements.
      3.   Procedures:
         a.   Application: The PUD final plan, or if the planned unit
development is to be phased, the PUD final plan for the first phase must be
filed with the village administrator, together with all supporting data
required, within twenty-four (24) months of the date of approval of the PUD
preliminary plan or within the time frame(s) set forth in the approved phasing
schedule, if greater.
   Prior to the end of the twenty-four (24)-month period or the time frame(s)
set forth in the approved phasing schedule, if greater, the board of trustees,
at their discretion and for good cause, may extend for up to twelve (12) months
the period for filing of the PUD final plan(s) in whole or for any phase. If
the applicant fails to file a PUD final plan within the aforementioned time
period, or any extension thereof, the board of trustees, on their motion, may
initiate revocation of the approval of the PUD preliminary plan and/or rezoning
of the subject property. Prior to such revocation and/or rezoning, the village
must provide written notice to the applicant and the board of trustees must
conduct a public hearing at which the applicant must be afforded an opportunity
to be heard. After such public hearing, the board of trustees may adopt an
ordinance revoking approval of the PUD preliminary plan and/or rezoning the
property. The PUD final plan and, if the planned unit development is to be
phased, all phased PUD final plans must substantially conform to the PUD
preliminary plan as approved. The PUD final plan and all phased PUD final plans
and supporting data must fully comply with the provisions in this title and
code, as those provisions may be modified by ordinance.
         b.   Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals Review: All documents of
the PUD final plan must be transmitted by the village to the plan commission/
zoning board of appeals for review within sixty (60) days of receipt of the
application and supporting materials. The plan commission/zoning board of
appeals must review the PUD final plan for its conformance with the approved
PUD preliminary plan and other requirements of this chapter. The plan
commission/zoning board of appeals must recommend approval or disapproval, and
provide the reasons therefor, to the board of trustees. The plan commission/
zoning board of appeals may not make a recommendation on the PUD final plan
until it has received written notice of approval of the final engineering plans
by the village engineer. The plan commission/zoning board of appeals is
expressly authorized to recommend approval of a PUD final plan that includes
minor changes from the approved preliminary plan.
         c.   Final Engineering Plans: The final engineering plans and
accompanying documents must be submitted to the village administrator with the
application for approval of PUD final plan. The village administrator must
forward the final engineering plans to the village engineer for review and
approval or revision based on all applicable ordinances. The village engineer
must send written notice to the plan commission/zoning board of appeals, board
of trustees and village administrator within forty-five (45) days of receipt of
the final engineering plans that they have been approved, approved with
modifications, or disapproved. See Section
10-17-2 for minimum PUD Engineering Plan submittal requirements.
         d.   Final Action: If the PUD final plan substantially complies with
the PUD preliminary plan and satisfies all other requirements of this title,
the board of trustees, within sixty (60) days of receipt of the aforesaid
findings and recommendations from the plan commission/zoning board of appeals,
must approve the PUD final plan. If approved, the board of trustees must pass
an ordinance approving the PUD final plan or phase thereof.
         e.   Recording: The approved PUD final plan must be filed with the
appropriate recorder of deeds and all recording costs must be paid by the
applicant. No permit allowing construction of a building or any other
improvement may be issued until the PUD final plan is recorded. No PUD final
plan may be recorded until the final engineering plans have been approved by
the village engineer and the required security for the improvements has been
posted by the developer as set forth in this zoning ordinance.
         f.   Effect of Approval: Once a PUD final plan is approved, the PUD is
governed by the PUD plans and agreements approved by the village.
      4.   Submission Timing and Reversion Clause: The PUD final plans must be
submitted for approval in accordance with agreed scheduling. The first phase
PUD final plan must be submitted not later than twenty-four (24) months from
the date of approval of the PUD preliminary plan or within the time frame(s)
set forth in the approved phasing schedule, if greater. Construction, as
authorized by the issuance of a building permit, must begin within twenty-four
(24) months of the date of the approval of the PUD final plan dealing with such
construction, or within the time frame(s) set forth in the approved phasing
schedule, if greater. If the developer fails to comply with these requirements,
the board of trustees may initiate a revocation of the PUD preliminary plan as
hereinabove provided.
   D.   Changes: The planned unit development must be constructed only
according to the PUD final plan, approved engineering plans and specifications,
and all supporting data. The PUD final plan and supporting data, together with
all amendments, is binding on the applicants, their administrators, executors,
successors, grantees and assigns and shall limit and control the use of the
property (including the internal use of buildings and structures) and the
location of all structures, other improvements, and open space in the planned
unit development as set forth therein. All proposed changes to the planned unit
development after approval of the PUD final plan must be approved by the board
of trustees and may be handled as follows:
      1.   Major Changes: Major changes to an approved PUD may be approved only
by submission and reconsideration of a new PUD preliminary plan and/or PUD
final plan and by following the PUD preliminary plan and/or PUD final plan
procedures. If the major change is inconsistent with data or evidence submitted
during the PUD preliminary plan stage, then the resubmission must begin at the
PUD preliminary plan stage unless the change is requested by the plan
commission/zoning board of appeals, village staff, or board of trustees or the
board of trustees waive this requirement. If the major change is consistent
with the data and evidence submitted during the PUD preliminary plan stage,
then the resubmission must begin at the PUD final plan stage. Major changes
include the following:
         a.   A change in the uses and/or character of the development.
         b.   A change of five percent (5%) or more in the maximum floor area
ratio for a phase of the development.
         c.   Any increase in the units per acre, total number of units, or
total number of any type of units in the residential areas of a development.
         d.   An increase of five percent (5%) or more in the units per acre,
total units or total number of any type of units of a phase of the development.
         e.   A reduction in the minimum approved distance between structures
or in periphery setbacks.
         f.   Any increase in the percent of land covered in an entire
development.
         g.   An increase of five percent (5%) or more in the maximum percent
of land covered in a phase of a development.
         h.   Any change in the height of buildings, street location, open
space plan, subdivision structure, or changes in landscaping that alter the
overall character of the landscaping for the development, or any change in
structures and/or structure locations that increases the total square footage
of all structures approved in the PUD final plan for the development.
         i.   Any material change in the construction phasing schedule or
association agreements, declarations, and other documents.
         j.   Other changes determined to be a major change by the board of
trustees.
      2.   Minor Changes: The board of trustees may, without public hearing,
approve minor changes in the planned unit development. Further, a minor change
is any change not defined as a major change. A minor change may include the
change of location of any structure in a nonresidential portion of the
development so long as such change of location does not affect any of the other
criteria which would be deemed a major change set forth herein. Such change
must be reviewed by the village's architectural control commission prior to its
approval by the corporate authority.
      3.   Application: An application for a major change or a minor change may
be submitted by the owner(s) or duly authorized agent(s) of the owner(s) of the
property described in such application. In the event an application for a major
change or minor change is submitted to the board of trustees for only a portion
of the property within the planned unit development, any notice which is to be
published or other procedure to be followed must be based solely upon the legal
description of the property which is the subject of the application. (Ord.
2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-12-4: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   Intent: The special use permit approval procedures of this section are
intended to provide a transparent, public review process for land uses that,
because of their widely varying design and operational characteristics, require
case-by-case review in order to determine whether they will be compatible with
surrounding uses and development patterns.
   B.   Authorized Special Uses: Special use permits may be approved only for
those uses and activities expressly authorized by special use permit in this
zoning ordinance.
   C.   Authority to File: Applications for special use permit approval may be
filed only by the owner of the subject property or by the property owner's
authorized agent.
Figure 12-3: Special Use Permit Process (Generally)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3131.png]
   D.   Application Filing: Complete applications for special use permit
approval must be filed with the zoning official.
   E.   Review and Report-Zoning official: Following receipt of a complete
application, the zoning official must prepare a report on the proposed special
use permit. The report must be transmitted to the plan commission/zoning board
of appeals before the required public hearing.
   F.   Notice of Hearing:
      1.   In all cases, notice of the required public hearing on special use
permit applications must be published in the newspaper in accordance with
Section
10-12-1E.1.
      2.   The zoning official is also authorized to require that the applicant
provide written (mailed) notice and posted (sign) notice in accordance with
Sections
10-12-1E.2 and E.3, respectively.
   G.   Hearing and Recommendation-Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals: The
plan commission/zoning board of appeals must hold a public hearing on the
proposed special use permit. Following the close of the public hearing, the
plan commission/zoning board of appeals must act to recommend that the proposed
special use permit be approved, approved with modifications, or denied and
transmit its recommendation to the board of trustees. If the plan commission/
zoning board of appeals arrives at a tie vote, the application may be forwarded
to the board of trustees with the notation of the tie vote.
   H.   Final Action-Board of Trustees: Following receipt of the plan
commission/zoning board of appeals' report and recommendation, the board of
trustees must act to approve the proposed special use permit, approve the
proposed special use permit with modifications or deny the proposed special use
permit. The board of trustees is also authorized to remand the proposed special
use permit application back to the plan commission/zoning board of appeals for
further consideration.
   I.   Review and Approval Criteria: No special use permit may be recommended
for approval or approved unless the respective review or decision-making body
determines that the proposed special use permit is consistent with and in
substantial compliance with all village policies and plans and that the
applicant has presented evidence to support each of the following conclusions:
      1.   That the proposed use or activity is expressly authorized in this
title as a special use;
      2.   That the proposed use at the proposed location is necessary or
desirable to provide a service or a facility that is in the interest of public
convenience and will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood or
community;
      3.   That the proposed use will not, in the particular case, be
detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the vicinity or be injurious to property values or improvements in
the vicinity;
      4.   That approval of the special use permit will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district;
      5.   That the proposed special use will be served by adequate utilities,
access roads, parking, drainage and other important and necessary facilities,
infrastructure and community services; and
      6.   That the proposed special use complies with all applicable
regulations of this zoning ordinance except as expressly approved in accordance
with the procedures of this zoning ordinance.
   J.   Lapse of Approval:
      1.   An approved special use permit allowing the erection or alteration
of a building lapses and becomes void six (6) months after it is granted by the
board of trustees unless such building or building alteration is established
within such period.
      2.   An approved special use permit allowing the use of a building or
premises lapses and becomes void 6 months after it is granted by the board of
trustees, unless such use is established within such period; provided, however,
that where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a
building, such order continues in force and effect if a building permit for
said erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or
alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms
of such permit.
      3.   An approved special use permit also lapses upon revocation of a
building permit or a certificate of occupancy for violations of conditions of
approval or upon expiration of a building permit to carry out the work
authorized by the special use permit.
      4.   The board of trustees may extend the expiration period by up to six
(6) additional months at the time of approval of the special use permit or any
time before expiration of the approval. Requests for extensions after the
special use permit is approved must be processed in accordance with the special
use permit procedures, including applicable fees, notices, and public hearings.
   K.   Transferability: Approved special use permits run with the land and are
not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management.
   L.   Amendments: Amendments to approved special use permits must be
processed as new special use permit applications, including all requirements
for fees, notices and public hearings, provided that the zoning official is
authorized to approve the following:
      1.   Any amendments expressly authorized as minor amendments at the time
of special use permit approval;
      2.   The addition of customary accessory uses and structures; and
      3.   Changes to the development site or to structures necessitated by
engineering, architectural or physical limitations of the site that could not
have been foreseen at the time the special use permit was approved and that are
not major changes.
   M.   Successive Applications: If a special use permit application is denied,
no substantially similar application may be accepted for the same property for
twelve (12) months from the date of denial by the board of trustees. (Ord.
2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-12-5: VARIANCES:
   A.   Intent: A variance is a grant of relief to a property owner from strict
compliance with the regulations of this zoning ordinance. The intent of a
variance is not to simply remove an inconvenience or general financial burden
that may result from compliance with applicable zoning requirements. Variances
are intended to help alleviate an undue hardship that would be caused by strict
enforcement of the subject zoning ordinance requirements. They are intended to
provide relief when the requirements of this zoning ordinance render property
very difficult or impossible to put to reasonable use because of unique or
special characteristics of the subject property.
Figure 12-4: Variance Process
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3133.png]
   B.   Authorized Variances: The board of trustees is authorized to grant a
variance to any regulation in this zoning ordinance in accordance with the
variance procedures of this section, except that the variance procedures of
this section may not be used to do any of the following:
      1.   Waive, modify, or amend the home occupation regulations of Section
10-6-7;
      2.   Allow a principal or an accessory use in a zoning district that is
not otherwise allowed in that zoning district (i.e., "use variances" are
prohibited);
      3.   Waive, modify, or vary any use classification; or
      4.   Waive, modify, or otherwise vary any of the review and approval
procedures of this chapter.
   C.   Authority to File: Variance applications, including a written statement
describing the undue hardship that would result from denial of the variance
request must be by the owner of the subject property or by the property owner's
authorized agent.
   D.   Application Filing: Complete applications for variances must be filed
with the zoning official.
   E.   Review and Report-Zoning Official: Following receipt of a complete
application, the zoning official must prepare a report on the requested
variance. The report must be transmitted to the plan commission/zoning board of
appeals before the required public hearing.
   F.   Notice of Hearing: Notice of the plan commission/zoning board of
appeals' required public hearing on a variance application must be published in
the newspaper in accordance with Section
10-12-1E.1 and mailed to all owners of property within two hundred and fifty
feet (250') of the lot lines of the subject property in accordance with Section
10-12-1E.2. The zoning official is also authorized to require that the
applicant post notice signs in accordance with Section
10-12-1E.3.
   G.   Review and Recommendation-Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals:
      1.   Following receipt of a complete variance application, the plan
commission/zoning board of appeals must hold a public hearing to consider the
requested variance. Following the close of the public hearing, the plan
commission/zoning board of appeals must act to recommend that the requested
variance be approved, be approved with modifications and/or conditions, or
denied based on the standards and review criteria of Section
10-12-5I. The plan commission/zoning board of appeals must make its report
promptly, together with its findings of fact, to the board of trustees.
      2.   In recommending approval of a variance, the plan commission/zoning
board of appeals is authorized to recommend such conditions and restrictions as
the commission/board determines to be necessary to ensure compliance with the
standards of Section
10-12-5I, to reduce or minimize the effect of the variance upon other
properties in the area, and to better carry out the general purpose and intent
of this zoning ordinance.
      3.   Each variance request must be considered by the plan commission/
zoning board of appeals on a case-by-case basis solely on the evidence
presented by the applicant in the particular case.
   H.   Review and Final Decision-Board of Trustees: Following the public
hearing before the plan commission/zoning board of appeals, the variance
request must be considered by board of trustees. The grant of approval of any
variance must incorporate findings by the board of trustees that justify the
approval.
   I.   Standards and Review Criteria: No variance may be approved or
recommended for approval unless authorized review and decision-making bodies
determine that the following facts, favorable to the property owner, have been
established:
      1.   That the physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions
of the subject property would result in an undue hardship for the subject
property owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict
letter of the regulations were carried out;
      2.   That literal enforcement of the subject zoning ordinance provision
is not necessary to achieve the provision's intended purpose;
      3.   That the conditions leading to the need for the requested variance
are unique to the subject property and not applicable, generally, to other
property within the same zoning classification;
      4.   That the alleged undue hardship was not created or self-imposed by
the current property owner;
      5.   That the variance to be granted is the minimum variance that will
afford relief;
      6.   That the variance to be granted will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood in which the subject property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair use or development of adjacent property;
and
      7.   That the variance to be granted will not cause substantial detriment
to the public good or impair the purposes, spirit, and intent of this zoning
ordinance or the comprehensive plan.
   J.   Lapse of Approval:
      1.   An approved variance permitting the erection or alteration of a
building lapses and becomes void six (6) months after it is granted by the
board of trustees unless such building or building alteration is established
within such period.
      2.   An approved variance permitting the use of a building or premises
lapses and becomes void six (6) months after it is granted by the board of
trustees, unless such use is established within such period; provided, however,
that where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a
building, such order continues in force and effect if a building permit for
said erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or
alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms
of such permit.
      3.   An approved variance also lapses upon revocation of a building
permit or a certificate of occupancy for violations of conditions of approval
or upon expiration of a building permit to carry out the work authorized by the
variance.
      4.   The board of trustees may extend the expiration period by up to six
(6) additional months at the time of approval of the variance or any time
before expiration of the approval. Requests for extensions after the variance
is approved must be processed in accordance with the variance procedures,
including applicable fees, notices, and public hearings.
   K.   Transferability: Approved variances run with the land and are not
affected by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management.
   L.   Amendments: A request for changes in the specific nature of the
approved variance or changes to any conditions attached to an approved variance
must be processed as a new variance application, including all requirements for
fees, notices, and public hearings. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-12-6: APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
   A.   Authority: The plan commission/zoning board of appeals is authorized to
hear and decide all appeals where it is alleged there has been an error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning official in
the administration, interpretation, or enforcement of this zoning ordinance.
Figure 12-5: Appeals of Administrative Decisions (Generally)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3135.png]
   B.   Right to Appeal: Appeals of administrative decisions may be filed by
any person aggrieved by the administrative official's decision or action. The
plan commission/zoning board of appeals is authorized to make determinations
about whether individuals filing appeals are "aggrieved" by the decision or
action.
   C.   Application Filing:
      1.   Complete applications for appeals of administrative decisions must
be filed with the zoning official.
      2.   Appeals of administrative decisions must be filed within thirty (30)
days of the date of the decision being appealed.
   D.   Effect of Filing: The filing of a complete notice of appeal stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the zoning official
certifies to the plan commission/zoning board of appeals, after the appeal is
filed, that, because of facts stated in the certification, a stay would cause
immediate peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings will not be
stayed unless by a restraining order, which may be granted by the plan
commission/zoning board of appeals or by a court of record based on due cause
shown.
   E.   Record of Decision: Upon receipt of a complete application of appeal,
the zoning official or other administrative official whose decision is being
appealed must transmit to the plan commission/zoning board of appeals all
papers constituting the record related to decision being appealed.
   F.   Notice of Hearing: Notice of the required public hearing must be
published in the newspaper in accordance with Section
10-12-1E.1.
   G.   Hearing and Final Decision:
      1.   The plan commission/zoning board of appeals must hold a public
hearing on the appeal.
      2.   Following the close of the public hearing, the plan commission/
zoning board of appeals must make its findings and take action on the appeal.
      3.   In exercising the appeal power, the plan commission/zoning board of
appeals has all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal
is taken. The plan commission/zoning board of appeals may affirm or may, upon
the concurring vote of at least four (4) members, reverse, wholly or in part,
or modify the decision being appealed.
      4.   In acting on the appeal, the plan commission/zoning board of appeals
must grant to the official's decision a presumption of correctness, placing the
burden of persuasion of error on the appellant.
   H.   Review Criteria: The decision being appealed may be reversed or wholly
or partly modified only if the plan commission/zoning board of appeals finds
that the zoning official or other administrative official erred. (Ord. 2025-
1446, 10-9-2025)
CHAPTER 13
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
10-13-1: General
10-13-2: Nonconforming Lots
10-13-3: Nonconforming Uses
10-13-4: Nonconforming Structures
10-13-5: Nonconforming Signs
10-13-6: Nonconforming Development Features
10-13-1: GENERAL:
   A.   Intent: The adoption and amendment of the zoning ordinance text and
map, beginning with the adoption of the village's first zoning ordinance has
resulted in some lots, uses and structures becoming nonconforming (i.e.,
established in compliance with regulations in effect at the time of their
establishment, but prohibited under subsequently adopted regulations). The
nonconformity regulations of this chapter are intended to explain the effect of
this nonconforming status and help differentiate nonconformities, which have
legal status under this zoning ordinance, from zoning violations, which are
illegal and subject to penalties and enforcement action. The regulations of
this chapter are also intended to:
      1.   Recognize the interests of landowners in continuing to use their
property for uses that were lawfully established;
      2.   Promote maintenance, reuse, and rehabilitation of existing
buildings; and
      3.   Place reasonable limits on nonconformities that have the potential
to adversely affect surrounding properties.
   B.   Authority to Continue: Any nonconformity that existed on the effective
date specified in Section
10-1-3 or any lot, structure use or situation that becomes nonconforming upon
adoption of any amendment to this zoning ordinance or any amendment of the
zoning map beginning on the effective date specified in Section
10-1-3 may be continued, subject to the regulations of this chapter.
   C.   Determination of Nonconforming Status:
      1.   The burden of proving that a nonconformity exists (as opposed to a
zoning ordinance violation) rests entirely with the subject owner.
      2.   The zoning official is authorized to determine whether reliable
evidence of nonconforming status has been provided by the subject owner.
      3.   Building permits, zoning clearance reports, lawfully recorded plats,
lawfully recorded instruments of conveyance, aerial photography owned by a
governmental agency and other official government records that indicate lawful
establishment of the use, lot or structure constitute conclusive evidence of
nonconforming status. If such forms of conclusive evidence are not available,
the zoning official is authorized to consider whether other forms of evidence
provided by the owner are reliable and adequate to document nonconforming
status. Common examples of evidence that may be determined to be reliable and
adequate include:
         a.   Professional registrations or business licenses;
         b.   Utility billing records;
         c.   Rent records;
         d.   Advertisements in dated publications;
         e.   Listings in telephone or business directories; and
         f.   Notarized affidavits affirming the date of lawful establishment
of the use or structure.
      4.   The zoning official's determination of nonconforming status may be
appealed in accordance with Section
10-12-5J.
   D.   Repairs and Maintenance:
      1.   Repairs and normal maintenance necessary to keep a nonconformity in
sound condition are permitted unless the work increases the extent of the
nonconformity or is otherwise expressly prohibited by this zoning ordinance or
other provisions of the village code.
      2.   Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent nonconformities from
being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe condition in accordance
with an order from a duly authorized public official.
   E.   Change of Tenancy or Ownership: Nonconforming status runs with the land
and is not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management. (Ord.
2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-13-2: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
   A.   Description: A nonconforming lot is a lot that was lawfully created in
accordance with lot area and lot width regulations in effect at the time of the
lot's establishment but that does not comply with currently applicable lot area
or lot width regulations.
   B.   Use of Nonconforming Lots:
      1.   A nonconforming lot in an A district may be used as a building site
for a detached house and allowed accessory uses and structures, subject to
compliance with applicable lot and building regulations other than those
pertaining to lot area and lot width.
      2.   Nonconforming lots in office, business, or industrial districts may
be used as a building site for any use allowed in the subject zoning district
(as well as allowed accessory uses and structures), subject to compliance with
applicable lot and building regulations other than those pertaining to lot area
and lot width. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-13-3: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Description: A nonconforming use is a use of a building or of land that
was lawfully established in accordance with all zoning regulations in effect at
the time of its establishment but that is no longer allowed by the use
regulations of the zoning district in which the use is located.
   B.   Change of Use:
      1.   A nonconforming use located may be changed to a use that is allowed
in the subject zoning district, in which case the nonconforming use may not be
re-established.
      2.   A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use only
if approved in accordance with the special use permit procedures of Section
10-12-4. The change of a use to another use included within the same use
category does not constitute a "change of use" within the meaning of this
section. In order to approve a special use permit for a nonconforming use
substitution, the board of trustees must determine that the proposed use
substitution will not result in any increase in adverse impacts on the
surrounding area when compared to the previous nonconforming use of the
property. In making such a determination, review and decision-making bodies
must consider all the following factors, as applicable:
         a.   Traffic to and from the site;
         b.   Hours of operation,
         c.   Outdoor display, storage, and work activities; and
         d.   Other factors likely to effect the surrounding area.
   C.   Expansion of Use: Nonconforming uses of buildings or land may not be
expanded or extended in any way.
   D.   Movement: A nonconforming use may not be moved in whole or in part to
another location on the same lot. A nonconforming use may be moved to another
lot only if the use is allowed on the relocation lot and would comply with the
zoning regulations that apply to that (relocation) lot.
   E.   Loss of Nonconforming Status:
      1.   Abandonment:
         a.   Unless otherwise expressly authorized in this chapter, once a
nonconforming use is abandoned, its nonconforming status is lost and any new,
replacement use must comply with the regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located.
         b.   A nonconforming use of a building is presumed abandoned when the
use is discontinued or ceases for a continuous period of eighteen (18) months
or more or when there is clear evidence of the property owner's intent to
abandon the nonconforming use.
         c.   A nonconforming use of land is presumed abandoned when the use is
discontinued or ceases for a continuous period of six (6) months or more or
when there is clear evidence of the property owner's intent to abandon the
nonconforming use.
         d.   If a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, no matter
how short the period of time, all nonconforming use rights are lost and re-
establishment of the nonconforming use is prohibited.
         e.   Any period of discontinuance caused by acts of God or accidental
fire are not counted in calculating the length of discontinuance.
         f.   Re-establishment of an abandoned nonconforming use may be
approved in accordance with the special use permit procedures if the decision-
making body finds that all the following criteria have been met:
         (1)   The subject property cannot reasonably or economically be used
for a conforming use;
         (2)   The proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate in
the proposed location than the existing nonconforming use;
         (3)   The traffic, hours of operation, noise and other operating
characteristics of the proposed use will result in no greater adverse impact on
the neighborhood than the previous nonconforming use;
         (4)   The proposed use will not be detrimental to the existing
character of development in the immediate neighborhood or endanger the public
health, safety, or general welfare; and
         (5)   The use is consistent with the comprehensive plan.
         g.   Damage or Destruction:
         (1)   When a building containing a nonconforming use is destroyed or
damaged by acts of God or accidental fire, the building may be restored or
repaired, provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the
existing extent of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit to
reconstruct a destroyed or damaged structure must be obtained within twelve
(12) months of the date of occurrence of such damage.
         (2)   When a building containing a nonconforming use is demolished,
damaged or destroyed by causes within the control of the owner and the extent
of demolition, damage or destruction is more than fifty percent (50%) of the
replacement value of the structure, as determined by the property owner's
certified appraiser, the use may not be reestablished except in compliance with
all regulations applicable to the zoning district in which it is located. (Ord.
2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-13-4: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
   A.   Description: A nonconforming structure is a structure, other than a
sign, that was lawfully established but that no longer complies with applicable
setback, coverage or height regulations because of the adoption or amendment of
zoning ordinance after the structure was established.
   B.   Use: A nonconforming structure may be used for any use allowed in the
zoning district in which the structure is located, including a lawfully
established nonconforming use.
   C.   Movement: A nonconforming structure may not be moved in whole or in
part to another location on the same lot. A nonconforming structure may be
moved to another lot only if the use and structure is allowed on such lot and
would comply with the zoning regulations that apply to that (relocation) lot.
   D.   Alterations, Enlargements and Expansions: Nonconforming structures may
be altered or expanded if the proposed alteration or expansion complies with
all applicable use, lot, building, dimensional and locational requirements and
does not increase the extent of the structure's nonconformity. A building with
a nonconforming street setback, for example, may be expanded to the rear as
long as the rear expansion complies with applicable rear setback standards.
   E.   Loss of Nonconforming Status:
      1.   Damage or Destruction
         a.   When a nonconforming structure is destroyed or damaged by acts of
God or accidental fire, the structure may be restored or repaired, provided
that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing extent of
nonconformity is not increased. A building permit to reconstruct a destroyed or
damaged structure must be obtained within twelve (12) months of the date of
occurrence of such damage.
         b.   When a nonconforming structure is demolished, damaged or
destroyed by causes within the control of the owner and the extent of
demolition, damage or destruction is more than fifty percent (50%) of the
replacement value of the structure, as determined by the property owner's
certified appraiser, the structure may not be reestablished except in
compliance with all regulations applicable to the zoning district in which it
is located. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-13-5: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
See Section
10-10-9. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-13-6: NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT FEATURES:
   A.   Description: A nonconforming development feature is any aspect of a
development-other than a nonconforming lot, nonconforming structure,
nonconforming use, or nonconforming sign-that was lawfully established in
accordance with zoning regulations in effect at the time of its establishment
but that no longer complies with one or more applicable zoning regulations.
Common examples are off-street parking areas that contain fewer spaces than
required by current regulations and sites that do not comply with current
landscape, screening, or lighting regulations.
   B.   General: Nonconforming development features may remain except as
otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance, but the nature and extent
of nonconforming development features may not be increased. (Ord. 2025-1446,
10-9-2025)
CHAPTER 14
VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-14-1: Responsibility for Enforcement
10-14-2: Violations
10-14-3: Continuing Violations
10-14-4: Remedies and Enforcement Powers
10-14-5: Remedies Cumulative
10-14-6: Persons Subject to Penalties
10-14-7: Enforcement Procedures
10-14-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT:
The zoning official has primary responsibility for enforcing this zoning
ordinance. All departments, officials, agencies, and employees vested with the
authority to review, recommend or issue zoning and other development approvals,
permits or licenses must act in accordance with the provisions of this zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-14-2: VIOLATIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this zoning ordinance or state law, any
violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance-including any of the
following-are subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this zoning
ordinance.
   A.   To use land, buildings, or other structures in any way that is not
consistent with the requirements of this zoning ordinance;
   B.   To erect a building, sign, or other structure in any way not consistent
with the requirements of this zoning ordinance;
   C.   To install or use a sign in any way not consistent with the
requirements of this zoning ordinance;
   D.   To engage in the use of a building, structure or land, the use or
installation of a sign, or any other activity requiring one or more permits or
approvals under this zoning ordinance without obtaining such required permits
or approvals;
   E.   To engage in the use of a building, structure or land, the use or
installation of a sign, or any other activity for which a permit or approval
has been granted under this zoning ordinance or under previous zoning
regulations of the village in any way inconsistent with such permit or approval
or any conditions imposed on the permit or approval;
   F.   To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this
zoning ordinance or under previous zoning regulations of the village or any
condition imposed on the permit or approval;
   G.   To obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted under
this zoning ordinance;
   H.   To violate any lawful order issued by any authorized public official;
   I.   To establish, maintain or conduct in any business, establishment or
activity that causes or results in a nuisance by reason of dust, smoke,
vibrations, fumes, noise or any other factor harmful to the general health and
welfare;
   J.   To continue any violation after receipt of notice of a violation. (Ord.
2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-14-3: CONTINUING VIOLATIONS:
Each day that a violation continues constitutes a separate violation of this
zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-14-4: REMEDIES AND ENFORCEMENT POWERS:
In enforcing the provisions of this zoning ordinance, the village has all
remedies and enforcement powers allowed by law, including all the following:
   A.   Fines:
      1.   Any person or entity who violates the terms of this zoning ordinance
is subject to a fine in accordance with the village code and any schedule of
fines established by the village.
      2.   If a person or entity to whom a fine is imposed fails to settle or
pay the fine within the prescribed time, or within a period of time specified
in a final notice, then the police officer or the designated village employee
is authorized to cause a notice to appear to be served upon the alleged
violator by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, and
is authorized to file a complaint and to prosecute the same pursuant to the
administrative adjudication process in section 1-6-7 of the village code or in
the Circuit Court of Cook County.
   B.   Liens: The village may file liens against a property for failure to pay
levied fines or fees and to cover any expenses incurred by the village for
remedying violations of this ordinance.
   C.   Withhold Permit:
      1.   The zoning official may deny or withhold all permits, certificates,
or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or improvements upon
which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance
or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval, or other
authorization previously granted by the village. This enforcement provision may
be used regardless of whether the current owner or applicant is responsible for
the violation in question. The zoning official may deny or withhold all
permits, certificates, or other forms of authorization for failure to pay an
assessed fine for a zoning ordinance violation.
      2.   Instead of withholding or denying a permit or other authorization,
the zoning official may grant such authorization subject to the condition that
the violation be corrected.
   D.   Revoke Permits:
      1.   A permit, certificate or other form of authorization required under
this zoning ordinance may be revoked by the zoning official when the zoning
official determines:
         a.   That there are unapproved significant, material departures from
approved plans or permits;
         b.   That the development permit was procured by false representation
or was issued by mistake; or
         c.   That any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance or approval
previously granted by the village are being violated.
      2.   Written notice of revocation must be served upon the owner, the
owner's agent, or contractor, or upon any person employed in the construction
of the building or structure for which such permit was issued. If no such
individuals can reasonably be served with notice, the notice must be posted in
a prominent location.
   E.   Revoke Plan or Other Approval: Where a violation of this zoning
ordinance involves a failure to comply with approved plans or conditions to
which the approval of such plans was made subject, the zoning official may,
upon notice to the applicant and other known parties in interest (including any
holders of building permits affected):
      1.   Revoke the plan or other approval; or
      2.   Condition its continuance on strict compliance with this zoning
ordinance or the provision of security to ensure that construction is completed
in compliance with approved plans, or such other conditions as the zoning
official may reasonably impose.
   F.   Stop Work: With or without revoking permits, the zoning official may
stop work on any building or structure on any land on which there is an
uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance or of a permit or
other form of authorization issued under this zoning ordinance or previous
zoning regulations.
   G.   Injunctive Relief: The village may seek an injunction or other
equitable relief in court to stop any violation of this zoning ordinance or of
a permit, certificate or other form of authorization granted under this zoning
ordinances or previous zoning regulations.
   H.   Forfeiture and Confiscation of Signs on Public Property: Any sign
installed or placed in the public right-of-way or on other public property,
except in compliance with the regulations of this zoning ordinance will be
considered forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation by the village.
In addition to other remedies and penalties of this chapter, the village has
the right to recover from the sign owner or person who placed the sign, the
full costs of sign removal and disposal.
   I.   Abatement: The village may seek a court order in the nature of
mandamus, abatement, injunction or other action or proceeding to abate or
remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the
condition in which they existed before the violation.
   J.   Denial of Utility Service: No permit for connection with or service
from any village-operated water distribution system or other utility may be
issued for connection with or service to any building or premises used or
maintained in violation of this zoning ordinance.
   K.   Other Penalties, Remedies and Powers: The village may seek such other
penalties and remedies as are provided by law.
   L.   Continuation of Previous Enforcement Actions: Nothing in this zoning
ordinance prohibits the continuation of previous enforcement actions,
undertaken by the village pursuant to previous valid ordinances and laws. (Ord.
2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-14-5: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
The remedies and enforcement powers established in this zoning ordinance are
cumulative, and the village may exercise them in any combination or order.
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-14-6: PERSONS SUBJECT TO PENALTIES:
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and
any architect, builder, contractor, or agent, or other person who commits,
participates in, assists in, or maintains such violations may each be found
guilty of a separate offense and be subject to penalties, remedies, and
enforcement actions. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-14-7: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Non-Emergency Matters: In the case of violations of this zoning
ordinance that do not constitute an emergency or require immediate attention,
the zoning official must give notice of the nature of the violation to the
property owner by personal service, certified mail (return receipt requested0
or by posting notice on the premises. Notices of violation must state the
nature of the violation and the time period for compliance and may state the
corrective steps necessary and the nature of subsequent penalties and
enforcement actions should the situation not be corrected.
   B.   Emergency Matters: In the case of violations of this zoning ordinance
that constitute an emergency situation as a result of public health or safety
concerns if not remedied immediately, the village may use the enforcement
powers available under this zoning ordinance without prior notice, but the
zoning official must attempt to give notice to the property owner
simultaneously with beginning enforcement action.
   C.   Appeals: A determination made by the zoning official or other
administrative officials that a zoning ordinance violation has occurred may be
appealed by the affected party in accordance with Section
10-12-5J. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
CHAPTER 15
MEASUREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS
SECTION:
10-15-1: Lot Area
10-15-2: Floor Area
10-15-3: Frontage Or Street Frontage
10-15-4: Lot Width
10-15-5: Street Frontage (Or Frontage)
10-15-6: Setbacks
10-15-7: Building Coverage
10-15-8: Building Height
10-15-9: Other Height Measurements
10-15-10: Occupancy
10-15-1: LOT AREA:
Lot area is measured as the total ground-level surface area contained within
the property lines of a lot. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-15-2: FLOOR AREA:
The floor area of a building is measured as the sum of the gross horizontal
areas of all floors of the subject building, measured from the outside of the
exterior walls, excluding basements, cellars, open porches, breezeways, and
garages. Space devoted to off-street parking or loading is not included in
floor area calculations. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-15-3: FRONTAGE OR STREET FRONTAGE:
Street frontage is measured between side property lines of a lot along the
property line that abuts the street. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-15-4: LOT WIDTH
Lot width is measured as the horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at right angles to the lot depth at the established front building
line. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-15-5: STREET FRONTAGE (OR FRONTAGE):
Street frontage is measured between side property lines of a lot along the
property line that abuts a public street or permanent easement of access to a
public street. For purposes of determining compliance with lot and building
regulations, the street frontage of a lot that abuts a cul-de-sac or similarly
curved non-arterial street may be measured along the required setback line.
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-15-6: SETBACKS:
   A.   Measurement: Required setbacks are measured from the applicable lot
line or right-of-way line. Building setbacks are measured to the nearest
exterior building wall. Minimum setbacks that apply to other features (e.g.,
parking areas) are measured from the nearest point of the area or feature for
which a setback is required.
      1.   Street setbacks are measured from the actual right-of-way line of
the street (other than an alley).
      2.   Interior side setbacks are measured from a side lot line that does
not abut a street.
Figure 15-1: Side (Interior) Setback Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3137.png]
      3.   Rear setbacks are measured from the rear lot line, except on double-
frontage lots. On double-frontage lots, street setbacks apply from all property
lines that abut streets.
Figure 15-2: Rear Setback Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3139.png]
   B.   Setbacks on Irregular Lots: Setbacks are measured from lot lines
towards the center of the lot, as follows:
      1.   Generally, setbacks are measured as set out in Section
10-15-6A.
      2.   When lot lines are curvilinear, setbacks must be measured parallel
to the curvilinear lot line.
Figure 15-3: Setbacks from Curvilinear Lot Lines
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3141.png]
      3.   When there are multiple rear lot lines, the rear setback must be
measured from each of rear lot lines.
Figure 15 4: Setbacks from Multiple Rear Lot Lines
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3143.png]
      4.   When there is no rear lot line, the rear setback must be measured as
a radial distance from the intersection of side lot lines at the rear of the
lot.
Figure 15-5: Rear Setback Measurement When There is No Rear Lot Line
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3145.png]
   C.   Permitted Setback and Yard Obstructions in A Zoning Districts: Setbacks
and yards in A zoning districts must be unobstructed and unoccupied from the
ground to the sky except as indicated in Table 15-1 or as expressly stated in
other provisions of this zoning ordinance.
Table 15-1: Permitted Setback Obstructions in A Zoning Districts
Table 15-1: Permitted Setback Obstructions in A Zoning Districts
Obstruction                                       Allowed Within Setback/Yard?
                                                  Street Side Rear
A/C condensers, standby power generators,
rainwater collection/harvesting and geothermal
equipment when located within 5 feet of the       No     No   Yes
exterior wall of the principal building (see also
Section
10-6-3)
Decks, patios less than 30 inches in height above No     No   Yes
grade
Eaves and gutters projecting no more than 18      Yes    Yes  Yes
inches into required setback
Flagpoles (see also Section                       Yes    No   Yes
10-6-5A)
Recreational Structures, Private Residential (see
also Section                                      No     No   Yes
10-6-8)
Signs (see also Chapter 10)                       Yes    No   Yes
Swimming pools and spas                           See Section
                                                  10-6-8A
Wheelchair lifts and ramps necessary to comply
with federal, state, and local accessibility      Yes    Yes  Yes
standards
Window wells (meeting minimum building code       Yes    Yes  Yes
requirements for emergency egress)
 
   D.   Minor Discrepancies: After submission of plans and specifications
reflecting compliance with setback requirements, encroachments of residential
buildings or structures that do not exceed one inch are not to be considered a
violation of applicable setback requirements. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-15-7: BUILDING COVERAGE:
Building coverage is the total area of a lot covered by principal and accessory
buildings. Only building areas beneath a roof are counted for purposes of
measuring building coverage. A porch with a roof, for example, is counted, but
an uncovered deck structure is not considered building coverage. (Ord. 2025-
1446, 10-9-2025)
10-15-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
   A.   Measurement: Building height is measured as the vertical distance from
grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of
a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable,
hip or gambrel roofs. For the purpose of measuring height, grade is the
existing or established grade at the building setback line midway between side
lot lines.
   B.   Exceptions: Chimneys, parapet walls, elevator bulkheads, mechanical
equipment penthouses, belfries, clock towers, cupolas, domes, spires, and
similar non-habitable essential building features may exceed maximum building
height limits, provided they are not used or intended for human occupancy.
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-15-9: OTHER HEIGHT MEASUREMENTS:
The height of structures other than buildings is measured as vertical distance
from the average finished grade at the base of the structure to the highest
point of the structure. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the height of a
structure may not exceed the maximum building height allowed in the subject
zoning district. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-15-10: OCCUPANCY:
For the purpose of determining compliance with standards or requirements based
on building occupancy or capacity, calculations must be based on the building
code. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
CHAPTER 16
TERMINOLOGY
SECTION:
10-16-1: General
10-16-2: Abbreviations
10-16-3: Use Definitions
10-16-4: Measurement-Related Terms
10-16-5: Definition Of Words And Terms
10-16-1: GENERAL:
Words and terms expressly defined in this zoning ordinance have the specific
meanings assigned unless the context clearly indicates another meaning. Words
and terms that are not expressly defined in this zoning ordinance have their
ordinary dictionary meaning. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-16-2: ABBREVIATIONS:
Abbreviations used in this zoning ordinance have the following meanings:
Table 16-1: Abbreviations
Abbreviation Meaning
Table 16-1: Abbreviations
Abbreviation Meaning
%            Percent
ft.          Feet (or foot)
max.         Maximum
min.         Minimum
no.          Number
NA           Not applicable (no requirement)
sq. ft.      Square feet
 
(Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-16-3: USE DEFINITIONS:
See Chapter 5 for an explanation of the use categorization system used in this
zoning ordinance and for use type definitions. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-16-4: MEASUREMENT-RELATED TERMS:
See Chapter 15 for an explanation of various lot and building regulation terms,
such as "lot area," "building height," "setbacks" and "build-to-zone." (Ord.
2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-16-5: DEFINITION OF WORDS AND TERMS:
ABUT OR ABUTTING: To touch or share a common boundary.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: As defined in Section
10-6-1B. Examples of accessory buildings and accessory structures include
swimming pools, spas, pergolas, gazebos, cabanas, decks, hardscape, fountains,
sport courts and tennis courts. Private detached garages and sheds are
expressly excluded from this definition of "accessory building or accessory
structure." Private detached garages and sheds are expressly prohibited as
accessory buildings and structures.
ACCESSORY USE: A use that:
   A.   Is incidental to the principal use of the subject property;
   B.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of the occupants
of subject property;
   C.   Is customarily found in association with the subject principal use.
ACT OF GOD: An event that directly and exclusively results from the occurrence
of natural causes that could not have been prevented by the exercise of
foresight or caution.
ADJACENT: Near or in the immediate vicinity.
AGENT: A person duly authorized to act on behalf of the subject property owner.
AISLE (PARKING OR CIRCULATION): That portion of a parking area that provides
direct access to parking stalls.
ALLEY: A public or private thoroughfare that affords only a secondary means of
access to abutting property.
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA: Any tower or antenna used for non-commercial radio
communications (transmission and reception) maintained by an FCC-licensed
amateur radio operator.
ANIMAL SERVICE: See Section
10-5-5A.
APPLICANT: Any authorized person, firm, corporation, or agency who submits an
application for approval under this zoning ordinance.
ARTERIAL STREET (MAJOR THOROUGHFARE): Any U.S. or state-numbered route,
controlled access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by resolution of the village as being an arterial street or
highway.
AWNING: An overhang made of cloth or similar materials attached to a structure
for decoration or protection from sunlight and precipitation. See
Figure 16-1.
Figure 16-1: Awning
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3147.png]
BANNER: A temporary sign composed of lightweight material enclosed or not
enclosed in a rigid frame, secured, or mounted to a permanent structure.
BASE (ZONING) DISTRICT: Any zoning district that is not an "overlay" zoning
district.
BATTERY CHARGING STATION : An electrical component assembly or cluster of
component assemblies designed specifically to charge batteries within electric
vehicles.
BLOCKFACE: Property abutting on one side of a street between the two nearest
intersecting streets, railroad rights of way, or other natural or human-made
barriers. See
Figure 16-2.
Figure 16-2: Blockface
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3149.png]
BOAT: Any device, including jet skis and personal watercraft devices, used or
capable of being used for navigation on water.
BUILDING: A structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls, for the
shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. When separated
by division walls from the ground up and without openings, each portion of such
building is deemed as a separate building.
BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a lot after all applicable requirements
(e.g., minimum setbacks) of this zoning ordinance have been met. See
Figure 16-3.
Figure 16-3: Buildable Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3151.png]
BUILDING COVERAGE: See Section
10-15-6D.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A non-accessory building in which the principal use of the
subject property is conducted.
BUILDING LINE: The imaginary lines bounding a building, as measured at ground
level.
CALIPER: A measurement of the size of a young tree, measured as the diameter of
its trunk twelve inches (12") above the root ball. See
Figure 16-4.
Figure 16-4: Caliper (tree size measurement)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3153.png]
CAMPER TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis or metal
welded unit body with the superstructure made in part or in whole of canvas and
metal frame.
CANNABIS: As defined in Section 1-10 of the (State of Illinois) Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act.
CANOPY: A permanent structure that consists of an overhanging shelter connected
to a building and constructed of materials such as wood or steel studs covered
with wood or other material and that may or may not be supported by vertical
columns. See
Figure 16-5.
Figure 16-5: Canopy
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3155.png]
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Any sign, wording, logo, or other representation that
directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business,
product, service, or other commercial activity.
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORY: See Section
10-5-5.
COMMERCIAL SERVICE: See Section
10-5-5B.
COPY (SIGN): Written material, printed text, numbers, logos, symbols, or
pictures located on the copy surface for the purpose of delivering a message.
DAY CARE: See Section
10-5-5C.
DECK: A roofless outdoor space built as an aboveground platform projecting from
the wall of a building and connected by structural supports at grade or by the
building to which it is attached.
DIAMETER-AT-BREAST HEIGHT (DBH): The diameter of a mature tree's trunk,
measured at a height of 4.5 feet above grade level at the base of the tree. See
Figure 16-6.
Figure 16-6: Diameter at Breast Height (DBH)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3157.png]
DISTRICT: Zoning district.
DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: See Section
10-5-8B.
DRIVEWAY: An accessway for motor vehicles from a street to a lot.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, designed and used exclusively for
residential occupancy. Mobile homes, hotels, motels, and lodging houses are not
included in the definition of "dwelling."
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS: See Section
10-5-5D.
EAVE:    The lower edge of a sloping roof surface or the top edge of a parapet
or flat roof. See
Figure 16-7.
Figure 16-7: Eave
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3159.png]
ELECTRIC VEHICLE: Any vehicle that is licensed and registered for operation on
public and private highways, roads, and streets; either partially or
exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid or an off-board source, that is
stored on-board via a battery. "Electric vehicle" includes:
   A.   Battery electric vehicles; and
   B.   Plug-in hybrid electric vehicles.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) CHARGING STATION: A public or private parking space that
is served by battery charging station equipment.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION, PRIVATE (RESTRICTED-ACCESS) : An EV charging
station that is not available for use by the general public. Examples include
electric vehicle charging stations that serve residential homeowners or
renters, executive parking areas, designated employee parking areas and fleet
parking areas.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION, PUBLIC: An EV charging station that is
accessible to and available for use by the general public.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE PARKING SPACE: Any parking space that is clearly identified to
be used exclusively for the parking of an electric vehicle.
EXERCISE OF RELIGION: Exercise of religion means an act or refusal to act that
is substantially motivated by religious belief, whether or not the religious
exercise is compulsory or central to a larger system of religious belief.
FAMILY: See "Household."
FINANCIAL SERVICE: See Section
10-5-5F.
FENCE OR WALL: A structure that functions as a horizontal boundary or barrier
consisting of a structural frame with a fabric of wood, metal, or masonry.
FLOOR AREA: See Section
10-15-2.
FOOTCANDLE: A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which
are one foot from a uniform point source of one standard candle.
FRONTAGE, STREET: See Section
10-15-3.
FUELING STATION: See Section
10-5-5M.1.
FUNERAL AND MORTUARY SERVICE: See Section
10-5-5H.
GARAGE, DETACHED: A detached building designed, arranged, used or intended to
be used for the storage of automobiles and/or possessions of the owner and/or
occupants of the premises. Note: Detached garages are expressly prohibited in
the village unless attached to the principal building by a roofed structure.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM (GEOTHERMAL HEAT EXCHANGE): Equipment that transfers
thermal energy to and/or from the ground for the purposes of heating and/or
cooling a building. Geothermal energy systems consist of a loop system of pipes
filled with liquid, a heat exchanger and heat pump. This includes vertical
closed loop, horizontal closed loop, and open loop systems.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM, HORIZONTAL CLOSED LOOP: A geothermal energy system
that consists of the following basic elements: underground loops of piping;
heat transfer fluid; a heat pump, and an air distribution system. An opening is
made in the earth. A series of pipes are installed into the opening and
connected to a heat exchange system in the building. The pipes form a "closed
loop" and are filled with a heat transfer fluid. The fluid is circulated
through the piping from the opening into the heat exchanger and back. The
system functions in the same manner as the open loop system except there is no
pumping of groundwater.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM, VERTICAL CLOSED LOOP: A geothermal energy system in
which a borehole extends beneath the surface. Pipes are installed with U-bends
at the bottom of the borehole. The pipes are connected to the heat exchanger
and heat transfer fluid is circulated through the pipes.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM, OPEN LOOP: A geothermal energy system in which
groundwater is pumped from a well into a heat exchanger located in a surface
building. The water drawn from the earth is then pumped back into the aquifer
through a different well or in some cases the same well (commonly referred to
as "reinjection"). Alternatively, the groundwater could be discharged to a
surface water body (also known as "pump and dump"). In the heating mode, cooler
water is returned to the earth, while in the cooling mode, warmer water is
returned to the surface water body. Note: Open loop systems are prohibited in
the village.
GROUP LIVING: See Section
10-5-3B.
HEIGHT, BUILDING: See Section
10-15-8.
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use of a dwelling for limited commercial
purposes. Home occupations are subject to the regulations of Section
10-6-7.
HOSPITAL: See Section
10-5-4B.
HOUSE, DETACHED: A principal building that contains only one principal dwelling
unit and that is located on a single lot with private yards on all sides of the
building. Mobile homes and manufactured housing units are not included in the
definition of "detached house."
HOUSEHOLD: Either an individual or, two or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than 8 persons, not related by
blood, marriage or adoption, plus their domestic employees or resident staff,
living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. An unrelated
household does not include persons living together in a large residential-care
home or sorority, fraternity or other similar group living use. See also the
"household living" and "group living" use categories of Sections
10-5-3A and
10-5-3B.
HOUSEHOLD LIVING: See Section
10-5-3A.
INDUSTRY, ARTISAN: See Section
10-5-7A.
INDUSTRY, LOW-IMPACT: See Section
10-5-7B.
MANUFACTURING USE CATEGORY: See Section
10-5-6A.
LANDSCAPING: Any combination of living plants (such as grass, ground cover,
shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees) and nonliving landscape material (such as
rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, or decorative paving materials).
LAWFULLY ESTABLISHED: A use, structure, lot, or sign (as the context indicates)
that was established in conformance with all applicable zoning regulations in
effect at the time of its establishment.
LIBRARY: See Section
10-5-4C.
LODGING: See Section
10-5-5I.
LOGO: A design used by an organization on its letterhead, advertising material
and signs as an emblem by which the organization can be easily recognized.
LOT AND BUILDING REGULATIONS: Zoning district provisions governing such matters
as required minimum lot area, minimum lot width, setbacks, maximum lot coverage
and maximum building height.
LOT: A single lot of record or a combination of multiple contiguous lots of
record.
LOT AREA: See Section
10-15-1.
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) streets or a lot
bounded on two (2) sides by a curving street two (2) chords of which form an
angle of one hundred and twenty degrees (120°) or less measured on the lot
side. See
Figure 16-8.
Figure 16-8: Corner Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3161.png]
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or
nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. See
Figure 16-9.
Figure 16-9: Double-frontage Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3163.png]
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: A lot line abutting a street. On a corner lot, the shortest
street lot line is the front lot line, except that if the length of the longer
street lot line is not more than ten percent (10%) greater than the length of
the shorter street lot line the community zoning official, is authorized to
designate the longer of street lot lines as the front lot line. See
Figure 16-10.
Figure 16-10: Front Lot Line
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3165.png]
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A side lot line in common with another lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line most nearly parallel to and located the furthest
distance from the front lot line. See
Figure 16-11.
Figure 16-11: Rear Lot Line
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3167.png]
LOT LINE, SIDE: Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines. See
Figure 16-12.
Figure 16-12: Side Lot Line
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3169.png]
LOT OF RECORD: A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been
recorded in the office of the Cook County Recorder of Deeds.
LOT WIDTH: See Section
10-15-4.
MEDICAL, DENTAL AND HEALTH PRACTITIONER: See Section
10-5-5J.2.
MIXED-USE BUILDING: A building occupied by residential uses in combination with
nonresidential uses.
MOBILE HOME: A structure designed for permanent habitation, and so constructed
as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently attached to
its frame, from the place of its construction to the location, or subsequent
location, at which it is intended to be a permanent home and designed to permit
the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more persons. Even if such
structure rests on a permanent foundation with wheels, tongue, hitch and axle
or lug both permanently removed, it is still construed to be a mobile home. A
mobile home may be with or without mechanical power. Note: Mobile homes are
expressly prohibited in the village.
NATURAL RESOURCES PROTECTION: See Section
10-5-4D.
NONCONFORMING LOT: See Section
10-13-2.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: See Section
10-10-9.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: See Section
10-13-4.
NONCONFORMING USE: See Section
10-13-3.
NONCONFORMITY: Any nonconforming lot, nonconforming use, nonconforming
structure, or nonconforming sign.
NONRESIDENTIAL (ZONING) DISTRICT: Any base zoning district other than an A
(Residential) district.
OFFICE: See Section
10-5-5J.
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Ordinance to a
Village officer or employee by title only, this reference will be construed as
though followed by the words "of the Village of South Barrington" and will be
taken to mean the officer or employee having the title mentioned or performing
the duties indicated. No provision of this Ordinance designating the duties of
any officer or employee is to be construed to make such officer or employee
liable for any fine or penalty provided in this Ordinance for a failure to
perform such duty.
OTHER USE CATEGORY: See Section
10-5-8.
OVERLAY (ZONING) DISTRICT: A zoning district that over-lays a base zoning
district and imposes supplemental regulations and standards on lands within the
overlay boundaries.
OWNER: The fee title holders of property.
PARAPET OR PARAPET WALL: A wall-like barrier at the edge of a roof that acts as
a vertical extension of an exterior building wall extending above the roof
height of the building. See
Figure 16-13.
Figure 16-13: Parapet
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3171.png]
PARKS AND RECREATION: See Section
10-5-4E.
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY: Any individual whose disability:
   A.   Is attributable to mental, intellectual or physical impairments or a
combination of mental, intellectual or physical impairments;
   B.   Is likely to continue for a significant amount of time or indefinitely;
   C.   Reflects the person's need for a combination and sequence of special
interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or other services which are of a
life-long or extended duration; and
   D.   Results in functional limitations in three or more of the following
areas of major life activities:
      1.   Self-care;
      2.   Receptive or expressive language;
      3.   Learning;
      4.   Mobility;
      5.   Self-direction;
      6.   Capacity for independent living; or
      7.   Economic self-sufficiency.
PERSONAL VEHICLE REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE: See Section
10-5-5M.2.
PERSONAL VEHICLE SALES AND RENTALS: See Section
10-5-5M.3.
PICKUP COACH: A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or truck
chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation uses.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A development project approved in accordance with the
planned unit development procedures in effect at the time the development was
approved.
PORCH: A roofed-over structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a
principal building and commonly open to the weather at least in part.
PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORY: See Section
10-5-4.
RAINWATER COLLECTION EQUIPMENT: A rain barrel or similar container that
collects and stores rainwater or other water that would otherwise be lost as
runoff or diverted into a storm drain.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT: Any snowmobile or all terrain vehicle (as that term is
defined in the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code), and any watercraft including
personal watercraft and specialty prop craft (as those terms are defined in the
Illinois Boat Registration and Safety Act), and the trailers used to transport
or store such equipment.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: See section 6-4-3 of the village code.
RENTAL PREMISES: All or part of a principal structure or accessory structure
being rented or otherwise let to one or more persons other than the owner of
the subject property.
RESIDENTIAL RECREATIONAL STRUCTURE, PRIVATE: A structure erected outdoors for
children to play in, on and around including, but not limited to, swing sets,
jungle gyms, playhouses, and treehouses.
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORY: See Section
10-5-3.
RESIDENTIAL (ZONING) DISTRICT: Any of the A districts established in Section
10-2-1.
RESTAURANT: See Section
10-5-5D.2.
RETAIL SALES: See Section
10-5-5K.
SAFETY SERVICE: See Section
10-5-4F.
SCHOOL: See Section
10-5-4G.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY: See Section
10-5-5L.
SETBACK: Open space areas required between buildings and lot lines. See also
Section
10-15-6.
SHED: An accessory storage building designed, arranged, used or intended to be
used for the storage of possessions of the owner and/or occupants of the
premises. Note: Sheds are expressly prohibited in the village unless attached
to the principal building by a roofed structure.
SHOPPING CENTER: A series of three (3) or more commercial establishments or
professional offices with individual entrances, sharing a common wall and
common off-street parking.
SIGN: Any object, device, structure, or part thereof used to advertise,
identify, display or attract attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means,
including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination or projected images. Signs as defined herein do not include
temporary holiday decorations; or landscape features that display no words or
symbols.
SIGN, ANIMATION: The presentation of pictorials and graphics on signs displayed
in a progression of frames that give the illusion of motion, including but not
limited to the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light,
or expanding or contracting shapes.
SIGN AREA: See Section
10-10-10A.
(SIGN) BANNER: Any sign printed or painted on cloth, plastic or canvas or flags
or pennants and used for attracting the attention of the public.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: See "off-premises outdoor advertising sign"
(SIGN) COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: See "Commercial Message."
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION: A temporary sign located on a lot upon which building or
construction is actively occurring.
SIGN, DRIVE-THROUGH: A sign associated with an allowed drive-through use.
SIGN, DRIVEWAY: A sign located near a driveway entrance from a street or near
an internal site driveway or drive aisle (See also Section
10-10-3A).
SIGN, ELECTRONIC: Any sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures,
images, or messages that can be electronically or mechanically changed by
remote or automatic means. This also includes any display that incorporates
rotating panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input or any other
method or technology that allows a sign to present a series of images, messages
or displays.
SIGN, FEATHER: A lightweight, portable sign mounted on vertical, flexible pole
the appearance of which resembles a sail, bow, or feather.
Figure 16-14: Feather Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3173.png]
(SIGN) FLAG: A generally rectangular or triangular sign or part of a sign made
of fabric or other pliant material attached to a flagpole only along one side
and which predominately displays distinctive colors, images, shapes or designs
rather than legible words, letters, numbers or other linguistic characters.
SIGN, FLASHING (ILLUMINATION): A light source or other image that in whole or
in part physically changes in light intensity or gives the appearance of such
change.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign that is part of a self-supporting structure, other
than a building or portion of a building. Sometimes referred to as a "ground
sign."
Figure 16-15: Freestanding Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3175.png]
SIGN, HEIGHT OF: See Section
10-10-10B.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: Any sign that is directly lighted by any constant light
source, internal or external, except light sources specifically and clearly
operated for the purpose of lighting the general area in which the sign is
located rather than the sign itself.
SIGN, MONUMENT: A freestanding sign where the base of the sign structure is on
the ground or no more than twelve inches (12") above the ground adjacent to the
sign. Typically constructed of brick, wood, stone, or metal, monument signs
have a base that is at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the width of the
sign face.
(SIGN) NAMEPLATE: A sign attached flush against a building.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES OUTDOOR ADVERTISING: Any sign that directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or activity not conducted, sold or offered upon
the premises where such sign is located.
SIGN, POLITICAL: A temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates
or issues in connection with any national, state, or local election. Political
signs are permitted in all districts.
SIGN, PROMOTIONAL: A temporary sign that is located on a lot on which a
business promotion is actively occurring and that consists of tinsel, flags,
balloons, banners, wind devices, or similar attention-getting devices, whether
or not the same contain any words, numbers or characters.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A temporary sign located on a lot or portion of a lot that
is actively being marketed for sale, rental, or lease.
SIGN, ROOF: A sign that is affixed to a roof, extended roof, pitched roof, or
canopy, and that extends above the building wall or parapet wall.
(SIGN) RULES OF MEASUREMENT: See Section
10-10-10.
SIGN, SPECIAL EVENT: A sign approved in connection with a special event permit
approved by the board of trustees (see also Section
10-10-3D.7)
(SIGN) STATIC MESSAGE: An advertisement or message that, when displayed,
contains no motion, flashing, changeable copy, running lights, variances in
brightness, or animation.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign with or without structural frame, intended to be
displayed for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
SIGN, WALL: A sign affixed to a building wall, canopy, awning, marquee or
parapet wall, or a sign displayed in or on a door that does not project more
than fifteen inches (15") from the wall, canopy, awning, marquee, parapet wall,
or door, nor extend above the parapet wall.
Figure 16-16: Wall Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3007c1ad50120ed03460d7cbf92217c79952dccd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3177.png]
(SIGN) WIND DEVICE: Any flag, banner, pennant, streamer, or similar device that
moves freely in the wind.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign attached to a window.
(SIGN) WORD: Any and all the following (otherwise, each separate character is
considered to be a word):
   A.   A word in any language found in any standard unabridged dictionary or
dictionary of slang.
   B.   A proper noun or any initial.
   C.   A separate symbol or abbreviation, such as "&", "S", "%" and "INC".
   D.   A telephone number, street number or commonly used combination of
numerals and/or symbols such as "$5.00" or "50%".
   E.   A symbol or logo that is a registered trademark, but that itself
contains no word or character.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A system intended to convert solar energy into thermal,
mechanical, or electrical energy.
SOLAR PANEL: A group of photovoltaic cells assembled on a panel. Panels are
assembled on-site into solar arrays.
SPA, AT-GRADE: A spa or hot tub unit, manufactured off site and delivered to
the site as a completed assembly; designed to sit on the ground, a concrete
slab or patio, and the spa not larger than eight feet wide by eight feet long
by thirty-nine inches (8' x 8' x 39") in height.
STORAGE AND DISTRIBUTION USE CATEGORY: See Section
10-5-6.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building such
as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, excepting such
alterations as may be required for the safety of the building.
STRUCTURE: An assembly of materials forming a construction for occupancy or
use, including but not limited to buildings, swimming pools, spas, tennis
courts, sports courts, stadia, reviewing stands, platforms, antenna towers,
observation towers, radio towers and other communication towers, windmills,
open sheds, shelters, pergolas, gazebos, cabanas, patios, fountains, display
signs, piers and fences.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL: A structure, other than an accessory structure, in which
the principal use of the lot is conducted.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL: A receptacle for water, or an artificial
pool of water having a depth at any point of two feet (2') or more, intended
for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and
including all appurtenant equipment, constructed, installed, and maintained in
or above the ground outside of a building used as a dwelling unit, provided,
that such swimming pool is maintained by an individual primarily for the sole
use of the household and guests, and not for the purpose of profit or in
connection with any business operated for profit.
TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure designed or used for the storage or
transporting of materials.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis designed to
be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation use.
TRUCK: Any vehicle requiring a commercial Illinois State license.
USE, PERMITTED: A use that is expressly allowed (as of right) in the subject
zoning district subject to compliance with all other applicable regulations of
this zoning ordinance.
USE, SPECIAL: A use that may be allowed in the subject zoning district if
approved in accordance with the special use permit procedures of Section
10-12-4, subject to compliance with all other applicable regulations of this
zoning ordinance.
UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITIES: See Sections
10-5-4H and
10-5-4H.2.
UTILITY-SCALE ENERGY PRODUCTION: An energy production facility that produces
electric energy for widespread distribution through the electric power grid.
VACANT: Land on which there are no structures or only structures that are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
VEHICULAR USE AREA: An area that is devoted to use by or for motor vehicles,
including off-street parking areas (accessory or non-accessory); off-street
loading areas; vehicle storage areas; fuel stations; car washes; drive-through
service areas and auto sales lots. Enclosed areas and access drives used solely
for access between the street and the vehicular use area are not considered
part of a vehicular use area.
WALKWAYS, AT OR ABOVE GRADE, COVERED: Covered structures for pedestrian access,
connecting structures on two (2) adjacent lots.
YARD: The actual (as opposed to "required") horizontal distance that exists
between a principal building and a property line. See also "setback."
YARD, REAR: The yard that exists between a principal building and the rear
property line of the lot on which the building is located, extending along the
full length of the rear property line.
YARD, SIDE: The yard that exists between a building and the interior side
property line of the lot on which the building is located.
YARD, STREET: The yard that exists between a principal building and the street
property line of the lot on which the building is located, extending along the
full length of the street property line.
ZONING LOT: A parcel of land, made up of one or more parcels, which is or may
be occupied by a use, building or buildings including any open spaces required
by this ordinance.
ZONING MAP: The map displaying the location and boundaries of the zoning
districts described in this zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
CHAPTER 17
PUD PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
10-17-1: General
10-17-2: PUD Preliminary Plans
10-17-3: PUD Final Engineering Plans
10-17-4: PUD Final Plans
10-17-1: GENERAL:
Planned unit development plans and supporting data submitted by the applicant
shall become part of the records of the village and remain with the village and
must include at least the following information unless waived by the board of
trustees. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-17-2: PUD PRELIMINARY PLANS:
The application for approval of a preliminary plan shall be accompanied by
preliminary architectural drawings and a preliminary development plan which
must contain the following:
   A.   Statement Of Objectives: Each property owner-initiated PUD application
must include a written explanation from the applicant describing how the
proposed development provides greater benefits to the village than would a
development carried out in accordance with otherwise applicable zoning
ordinance standards. The statement must also include a comparison of the
proposed development with the standards of the base zoning district and the
comprehensive plan.
   B.   Statement Of Ownership and Proposed Use: A statement of the applicant's
intentions with regard to the future selling or leasing of all or portions of
the land areas or structures and the proposed use thereof. A statement and
documentation verifying that the applicant has, or will have, ownership and
control over all land included in the proposed planned unit development is also
required. A certificate must be furnished that there are no delinquent taxes
constituting a lien on the whole or part of the property.
   C.   Quantitative Summary: A projected quantitative summary including, but
not limited to, the following. If the development is to be phased, the
projected quantitative summary must also be broken down into corresponding
phase components.
      1.   Description of the proposed development, including:
         a.   Total square footage of each subarea;
         b.   Estimated square footage of building coverage by subarea;
      2.   Description of residential units by type;
      3.   Number of residential units with projected bedroom mix and projected
population;
      4.   Description and quantity of nonresidential units by type;
      5.   Projected total square footage of all commercial buildings;
      6.   Linear footage of road rights of way;
      7.   Minimum parking ratio for each contemplated use;
      8.   Maximum proposed percentage of impervious coverage for
nonresidential uses;
      9.   Square footage of uncovered ground on-site;
      10.   Square footage of commonly owned and maintained open space;
      11.   Description of development standards and design criteria;
      12.   Lot coverage ratio by building type and total development; and
      13.   A description of the existing vegetation on the site and the
methodology which will be employed to minimize the impact of the development on
the existing vegetation accompanied by a recent aerial photograph depicting the
location of the vegetation.
   D.   Adjacent Property Owners: Certified list of property owners and their
mailing addresses, as appears from the most current available tax records of
such county, of all property within two hundred and fifty (250) in each
direction of the development, excluding the number of feet occupied by all
public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways in computing the two
hundred and fifty (250) requirement, as certified by an Illinois registered
title company.
   E.   Utilities: A preliminary engineering study providing information on
existing and proposed sanitary sewer, storm water, and other utilities
necessary to service the development.
   F.   Aerial Photo: An aerial photograph of the site and surrounding property
at a scale not less than one inch equals four hundred feet (400').
   G.   Open Space Statement: A statement describing why the area for usable
common open space was chosen, the unique advantages it offers, how it differs
or is consistent with the village's open space plan, and how it is envisioned
that residents will utilize the space, either actively or passively.
   H.   Traffic Study: A traffic study prepared by a qualified expert setting
forth and analyzing the effect upon traffic both within and without the village
in the vicinity of the planned unit development. Such study is not to be
limited to the effect on adjacent streets, but must extend to all of the
surrounding areas affected and must indicate the anticipated points of origin
and the direction, amount, and density of traffic flow to and from the proposed
planned unit development. Such study must include the anticipated future
development of adjacent undeveloped land. Such study may not be more than six
(6) months old.
   I.   Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions: A statement describing the
creation of one or more owners' associations to be established through a
declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, together with an
executive summary of such declarations. Such declarations must be recorded and
must run with the land and be binding upon any purchasers of lots or dwelling
units in the planned unit development. Final forms of such declarations must be
submitted at the time of final plan submittal.
   J.   Fiscal Impact Study: A fiscal impact study projecting taxes, costs, and
revenues to the village and the park district(s), school district(s), library
district(s), and fire protection district(s), if any, having jurisdiction over
the proposed development, and population projections establishing anticipated
student yield. The tax impact study should be prepared so as to coincide with
the proposed phasing schedule of the planned unit development.
   K.   Maps And Graphics: A detailed drawing(s) of the planned unit
development showing all preliminary information required, including, but not
limited to, the following:
      1.   Boundary survey of the subject property prepared by a registered
land surveyor;
      2.   All existing or proposed public and private roads, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, biking and walking paths, widths of rights of way, widths of paved
surfaces, and the names of existing streets;
      3.   Existing easements, including location, width, and purpose;
      4.   Lot sizes and building lines;
      5.   Surface drainage system and retention and detention areas;
      6.   Public area lighting systems;
      7.   Off-street parking and service areas, including typical dimensions
and number of spaces or minimum parking ratios to be achieved;
      8.   Utilities on and adjacent to the subject property including the
location and (where relevant) size of septic systems, water wells, sanitary and
storm sewers, water mains, gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone
lines, and the direction and distance to the nearest usable potable water
mains;
      9.   Significant conditions on the tract, including significant
watercourses, wetlands, flood plains, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas,
isolated preservable trees twelve inches (12") or more in diameter, soils and
subsurface conditions, scenic views and vistas, houses, barns, accessory
buildings, and other significant features;
      10.   Conditions on adjacent land within five hundred feet (500'),
indicating land use, adjacent lots showing lot lines, structures, streets,
approximate direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments
or retaining walls; character and location of major buildings, railroads, power
lines, towers, and other nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners
of unplatted land; subdivision plat by name of adjacent platted land showing
approximate percent build up, typical lot size, and dwelling type;
      11.   Existing zoning districts on and adjacent to the subject property;
      12.   Open spaces, including all parcels of land intended to be dedicated
for public use or reserved for the use of all property owners, showing the
purpose, any proposed public or private recreational facilities, or other
amenities, acreage, and percentage of total area;
      13.   General location, purpose, and height, in feet or stories, of each
building (other than single-family residences on individually platted lots);
      14.   Cover sheet showing name of development, name(s) of owner(s),
developer and site planner, north point, scale, date of preparation, acreage of
site, with location map showing relation of site to existing streets and use
districts in surrounding area;
      15.   Topographic map at one foot (1') contour intervals;
      16.   Conceptual cross sections illustrating the bulk and height of
proposed structures in relation to the topography, vegetation, and surrounding
structures;
      17.   A drainage plan illustrating existing and proposed drainage
facilities, storm water detention, and flood plain compensatory storage
facilities;
      18.   A circulation plan illustrating the proposed circulation of all
vehicles, including emergency vehicles, within the planned unit development,
consistent with approved engineering and design standards, and illustrating the
relationship of the internal streets and rights of way of the planned unit
development to existing streets and rights of way immediately surrounding the
planned unit development;
      19.   Landscape and vegetation inventory and preservation plan
illustrating the preliminary earthmoving, if any, to be done within the planned
unit development, and providing a preliminary plan for the preservation and/or
enhancement of the vegetation within the planned unit development, which should
include a vegetation inventory documenting all existing trees with a trunk
diameter equal to or greater than four inches (4") measured twelve inches (12")
above the natural grade within 00 feet of areas of disturbance or construction;
and
      20.   A preliminary signage plan for each phase of the planned unit
development, which must include ground and wall signs for all nonresidential
areas.
      21.   Proposed construction schedule indicating:
         a.   Preliminary determination of the phases in which the project will
be built with emphasis on area, density, use, and public facilities, including
open space, to be developed with each phase. Overall design of each phase must
be shown on the preliminary plan and through supporting graphic material;
         b.   Approximate dates for beginning and completion of each phase; and
         c.   The mix of uses to be built in each phase, if different land uses
are included within the planned unit development.
   L.   Landscaping Plan: A preliminary landscape plan prepared by a registered
Illinois landscape architect. The landscape plan may be submitted on a separate
sheet or may be superimposed on a single sheet with the site plan and must
include or be accompanied by planting and site information. The plan must
include the following information:
      1.   Title block including the name of the project, the landscape
architect's name, scale of the plan, north arrow, and date.
      2.   Property lines.
      3.   Name, location, right-of-way and paving widths of all abutting
streets.
      4.   Note indicating zoning classification and use of abutting
properties.
      5.   Existing natural features, such as wetlands, ponds, and flood
plains.
      6.   Existing and proposed storm water management areas.
      7.   Typical location, height and slope of berms.
      8.   A generalized landscape plan indicating proposed trees, shrubs and
ground cover for both public and private areas. Said generalized plan must
provide sufficient detail by way of typical planting plans to facilitate an
understanding of the overall planting scheme.
      9.   Location, general type and quantity of existing trees over four
inches (4") in diameter measured twelve inches (12") above existing grade.
      10.   Indication of existing vegetation to be preserved in the proposed
methodology for protecting the trees during construction.
      11.   Location of all areas to be seeded or sodded.
      12.   Plant list or schedule showing typical species, range of sizes, and
minimum quantities, key symbols, correct botanical names, and common name, size
and root treatment (e.g., balled and burlapped).
      13.   Location and description of other landscape improvements, such as
fountains, benches, and/or lighting.
      14.   Planting installation detail must be provided in a manner
consistent with the latest edition of the American Association of Nurserymen's
Standards.
   M.   Architectural Plans: Preliminary building standards and materials,
examples of architectural plans, and standards for all buildings in sufficient
detail to permit an understanding of the style of the planned unit development,
and the design of the buildings. This should include anti-monotony provisions
and plans for screening service units such as refuse areas and rooftop
equipment.
   N.   Density: Information on the density of residential uses, including the
number of dwelling units per acre, the number of dwelling units by type, the
number and size of buildings by type, the projected number of bedrooms in each
dwelling unit type, floor area of building types, and total ground coverage of
buildings.
   O.   Market: Market study detailing the existing conditions and impact of
the proposed planned unit development, including consideration of the proposed
phasing schedule of the development and estimated sales prices.
   P.   Other Information: Depending on the scale and unique characteristics of
a particular planned unit development, the board of trustees may waive or
modify any of the above requirements, and the plan commission/zoning board of
appeals or board of trustees may require other materials to be submitted and/or
included in a preliminary planned unit development plan. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-
2025)
10-17-3: PUD FINAL ENGINEERING PLANS:
After approval of the preliminary plan, and concurrently with the submission
for approval of the final plan, the applicant must submit final engineering
plans. Final engineering plans may be phased in accordance with the phasing of
the final plans. However, each phase for which final plan approval is sought
must include all infrastructure improvements necessary for that phase to comply
with all federal, state and local regulations. Final engineering submissions
must include the following:
   A.   Engineering Plans: Engineering plans drawn to a scale not greater than
one inch equals one hundred feet (100'), including complete plans and
specifications for building and operating on-site and off-site water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, street improvements, and drainage detention/
retention facilities prepared, signed, and sealed by a professional engineer
licensed to practice in Illinois.
   B.   Utilities Plan: Plan showing recommended locations and easements for
water, sanitary sewer, storm water, electric, gas, and telephone facilities.
   C.   Grading and Drainage Plan: A reproducible mylar drawing with original
signatures, prepared at the same scale as the final plat and satisfying the
requirements for topographic and profile studies of the Illinois Plat Act, 765
Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/0.01 et seq. (1998), as amended from time to
time, and village ordinances, and containing the following specific
information:
      1.   Topographic information prepared from aerial photographs or surveys
made by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer, showing one foot
contour lines (unless the relief makes this impractical) referenced to bench
marks and United States Geological Survey data;
      2.   Preliminary finished grades or contours, showing the proposed
changes to the land form and the top of minimum allowable foundation elevations
for proposed and existing buildings;
      3.   The extent and area of each watershed tributary to the drainage
channels in the planned unit development;
      4.   The street storm sewers and other storm drains to be built, the
basis of their design, the outfall and the outlet locations and elevations, the
receiving stream or channel and its high-water elevations, and the functioning
of the drains during high-water conditions;
      5.   Existing streams and flood plains to be maintained, enlarged,
altered, or eliminated, and new channels to be constructed with their
locations, cross sections, and profiles;
      6.   Existing culverts and bridges with drainage areas, elevation, and
adequacy of waterway openings, and new culverts and bridges to be built with
their materials, elevations, waterway openings, and the basis of their design;
      7.   Existing detention ponds and basins to be maintained, enlarged, and
altered and new ponds or basins to be built with dams, if any;
      8.   The estimated location and/or extent of impervious surfaces both
existing and expected to be constructed when the planned unit development is
completely developed;
      9.   The slope, type, and size of all sewers and other waterways;
      10.   For all detention basins, a plot or tabulation of storage volumes
with corresponding water surface elevations of the basins and outflow rates for
those water surface elevations;
      11.   For all detention basins serving a tributary drainage area greater
than twenty (20) acres in area, design hydrographs of inflow and outflow for
one hundred (100)-year design runoff events for the site and the calculated one
hundred (100)-year peak flows from the site under undeveloped conditions;
      12.   Certificate in the following form:
      STATE OF ILLINOIS )
       )
      COUNTY OF COOK )
      ENGINEER AND OWNER(S) CERTIFICATE
      We hereby state that to the best of our knowledge and belief, the
drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of such
subdivision or any part thereof, or, if such surface water drainage will be
changed, reasonable provision has been made for collection and diversion of
surface waters into public areas, or drains, which the subdivider has a right
to use, and that plans have been made for such surface water in accordance with
generally accepted engineering practices to reduce the likelihood of damage to
the adjoining property because of the construction of the subdivision.
      Registered Professional Engineer
      Date:
      By: Owner(s)
      Date:
      (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
10-17-4: PUD FINAL PLANS:
The final plan must conform substantially to the preliminary plan as approved.
If desired by the applicant, it may be submitted for only that portion of the
approved preliminary plan which the applicant proposes to develop at that time.
The applications for approval of a final plan must be accompanied by copies of
a final development plan, which must contain the following:
   A.   Final Document: Final versions of all documents required to be
submitted for preliminary plan approval.
   B.   Final Plat: Final plats with original signatures of a final planned
unit development plat, suitable for recording with the County Recorder of
Deeds, which must include, but not be limited to:
      1.   An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate
development within the planned unit development;
      2.   The location and dimensions of the building lots, common permanent
open space, existing permanent buildings, easements, and rights of way;
      3.   An open space easement on the common area assuring that the open
space will remain open in perpetuity;
      4.   Data on each separate unsubdivided use area, including land area,
number of buildings, and number of dwelling units per acre; and
      5.   Certificates, seals, and signatures required for the dedication of
land and for recording the document, in the forms provided for such
certificates in this zoning ordinance.
   C.   Declarations And Covenants: Final agreements, declarations, covenants,
bylaws, and/or provisions which will govern the use, maintenance and continued
protection of the planned unit development. Such declaration(s) must be
recorded after review by the board of trustees and final approval by the
village attorney and must include, without limitation, the following
provisions:
      1.    A requirement that the developer convey any private streets or
roads, detention or retention facilities, and common areas to the association;
      2.   A requirement that the association maintain and repair any and all
private streets or roads, detention or retention ponds, and common areas, and
any and all appurtenances thereto; and
      3.   A provision that if the association fails to maintain and repair any
private streets or roads, detention or retention ponds, or common areas, or
violates or fails to enforce any covenant, the village may, but is not required
to, enter upon the property to maintain and repair such items and take all
necessary steps to enforce such covenant, and be reimbursed for all such costs
by the homeowners' association.
   D.   Dedications: An agreement by the applicant stating that prior to the
recording of the final plat he will fully comply with the provisions of this
zoning ordinance for "Dedications".
   E.   Security For Public and Quasi-Public Facilities: A bond or letter of
credit in a form approved by the village attorney posted to guarantee
construction of all public and quasi- public facilities and improvements made
necessary as a result of the planned unit development. The bond or letter of
credit, payable to the village, must be sufficient to cover the full cost of
the improvements as estimated by the village, plus twenty percent (20%).
Detailed construction plans must be submitted for all public and quasi-public
facilities to be built. Public and quasi-public facilities must include, but
not be limited to, roads, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, street
signs, water, sewer improvements or open spaces, recreational facilities,
landscaping and public parking facilities.
   F.   Construction Schedule: A final construction schedule for that portion
of the planned unit development for which final plan approval is being
requested.
   G.   Landscape Plan: Final landscape plans complying with the provisions of
this zoning ordinance.
   H.   Maintenance Bond/Deposit: A deposit made to the village in cash, letter
of credit or maintenance bond in a form approved by the village attorney, equal
to twenty percent (20%) of the estimated cost of public facilities. This
deposit must represent a guarantee of satisfactory performance of the
facilities constructed within the planned unit development and must be held by
the village for a period of two (2) years from the date of acceptance of the
facilities by the village. After such two (2) years, the deposit must be
refunded if no defects have developed, or if any defects have developed, then
the balance of such deposit, if any, must be refunded after reimbursement for
amounts expended in correcting defective facilities.
   I.   Storm Water Facility Bond: If the owner builds and/or uses storm water
facilities in otherwise yet undeveloped areas of the district to service areas
that are or have been developed, the owner must provide the village with a
bond, in a form approved by the village attorney, equal to thirty percent (30%)
of the cost of such facilities, to secure adequate maintenance of such
facilities.
   J.   Other Information: Such other information as may be requested by the
board of trustees. (Ord. 2025-1446, 10-9-2025)
TITLE 11
LAND SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose
11-1-2: Jurisdiction
11-1-3: Definitions
11-1-4: Approvals, Interpretations and Exceptions
11-1-5: Vacations
11-1-6: Snow Removal from Streets in Subdivisions
11-1-7: Penalties
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
This Title, regulating the subdivision of land, is hereby made a part of the
Official Plan of South Barrington and contiguous areas. 1  It is to provide
for:
   A.   The harmonious development of the Village and its environs.
   B.   The coordination of streets within new subdivisions with other existing
or planned streets.
   C.   The dedication and acceptance of land required for schools, parks,
playgrounds and other public uses.
   D.   The preparation of subdivision plans and the procedure for the
submittal, approval and recording of subdivision plats in and about the
Village, in accordance with the authority vested in the Municipality under the
provisions of the "Revised Cities and Villages Act" of the State of Illinois. 2
(Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-77)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 9 of this Code.
2 2. S.H.A. ch. 24.
11-1-2: JURISDICTION:
Wherever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be laid out within the
incorporated limits of the Village, or one and one- half (11/2) miles beyond
the incorporated boundary of the Village, the subdivider thereof, or his agent,
shall submit both a preliminary plan and final subdivision plat to the Village.
Said plans and plats, proposed improvements and all procedure relating thereto
shall in all respects be in full compliance with the regulations hereafter
contained in this Title. All lands offered to the Village for use as streets,
highways, alleys, parks and other public use shall be referred to the South
Barrington Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, as created and regulated in
Title 2, Chapter 1 of this Code, for review and recommendation before being
accepted by the Village Board or by any other governing authority. (Ord. 0-77-
57A, 2-9-77)
11-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
ACCEPTED PUBLIC STREET: Any street duly accepted by the Village Board of
Trustees for maintenance by said Village.
ALLEY: A public right of way, not less than twenty feet (20') nor more than
forty feet (40') wide, designed to provide access to the rear or side of
properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.
APPROVED STREET: Any street, whether public or private, meeting standards and
specifications of the Village.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The duly elected Trustees and President of the Village of
South Barrington who, together, constitute the official governing body of the
Village.
BUILDING LINE: A line within a lot or other parcel of land, so designated on
the plat of the proposed subdivision.
BUILDING LINE SETBACK: The distance between the building line and the street
line in a district, lot, tract or parcel of land.
COLLECTOR or SECONDARY STREETS: Those existing streets designated as such on
the Official Plan of the Village, and those streets proposed as collector
streets in new subdivisions, as shown on the Official Plan, for the purpose of
providing arteries for the access of traffic from several minor streets to a
major street. Right of way for such streets shall be not less than sixty six
feet (66') nor more than eighty feet (80').
COMMISSION: Refers to the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals of the
Village. 1
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN The Official Plan of the Village, prepared by the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals and adopted by the Board of Trustees. 2
CROSSWALKWAYS: A strip of land dedicated to public use and located across a
block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent areas.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street accessible from only one direction whose terminal end is
broadened into a circular vehicle turn-around.
DEDICATED STREET: A public right of way owned by the Village and created by
designation on a recorded plat of subdivision or in a recorded instrument
accepted by the corporate authorities of the Village.
DEVELOPER: Any person, group of persons, organizations, etc., whose primary
concern and desire is to subdivide and improve land according to this Title.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the
general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons for a specific
purpose or purposes.
FINAL PLAT: The drawings and documents described in Chapter 2 of this Title.
FLOOD PLAIN: The contiguous area adjacent to a lake, stream, stream bed, ditch,
swale or any watercourse, the elevation of which is greater than the normal
water level or pool elevation but equal to or lower than the flood crest
elevation.
FRONTAGE: The length of the front property line of the lot, lots, or tract of
land abutting a street, road or highway.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN: That part of the Official Comprehensive Plan of the
Village which defines the various zoning areas and the existing or proposed
primary and secondary streets and roads in and around the Village.
GRADE: The slope of a road, street or other public way, given as a percent and
shown on street profile plans as required herein.
GRADE LANDING: The grade required on streets entering major thoroughfares, at
the point of intersection, as required herein.
IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC: Any sanitary or storm sewer, drainage ditch, water main,
roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, planting strip, off-street parking
area or other facility for which the Village or some other public body will
assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer
of ownership or for building development.
MAJOR STREET: See "Primary Street".
MINOR STREET: A street intended primarily as access to abutting properties.
OWNER: Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to the land sought
to be subdivided under this Title.
PARKWAY: That part of the street right of way not occupied by the street
pavement.
PEDESTRIAN WAY: A right of way across or within a block for use by pedestrian
traffic, whether designated as a pedestrian way, crosswalk or however otherwise
designated.
PLAN COMMISSION/ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS: See "Commission".
PLAT: A map, drawing or chart on which the subdividers plan of the subdivision
presented and which he submits for approval and intends to record in final
form.
PRELIMINARY PLAN: The drawings and documents described in subsection 11-2-1B,
first submitted, of the proposed subdivision and subject to change and
corrections.
PRIMARY STREET: Primary or major street means a street of considerable
continuity which serves or is intended to serve as a major traffic artery
between the various sections of the Barrington area, as shown on the
Comprehensive Plan Map, or the Village Street Map.
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT: Any installed or constructed facility for which the
responsibility of maintenance and ownership will be retained by the owner or a
homeowners' association.
PRIVATE STREET: Any road generally within a development that is used for access
and circulation and the ownership and maintenance responsibility is borne by
the owner, developer or homeowners' association.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any facility for which the Village or other governmental
body may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation or
which is constructed for general public use and benefit.
PUBLIC STREET: All primary, secondary and minor streets which are shown on the
subdivision plat and are to be dedicated for public use, whereas the ownership
and maintenance responsibility is generally borne by the Village.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a road,
crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for other special use. Right of way
shall be exclusive of the lots; adjoining lots or parcels and the dimensions of
the right of way shall not be included in the adjoining lots or parcels. Right
of way intended for roads or any other public use which will ultimately require
maintenance by the Village or some other public body shall be dedicated to
public use by the maker of the plat which establishes the right of way.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street which is paved or prepared for vehicular
traffic.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM - CENTRAL: A system of sanitary sewers that discharges
into an interceptor sewer or an approved sewage treatment plant.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM - INDIVIDUAL: A septic tank - seepage field sewage
disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device approved by the Village
serving only one lot or building site.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: Refers to the "Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction, State of Illinois, Department of Transportation", current
edition, as well as 'Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois", current
edition.
STREET: Refers to the entire width of the street right of way or easement and
shall not be considered as the width of the pavement only.
SUBDIVIDER: Any persons, firms or corporations, partnerships, trusts or other
legal entities who undertake the subdivision of land as defined herein.
SUBDIVISION: A described tract of land which is to be, or has been, divided
into two (2) or more lots or parcels. The term "subdivision" includes
resubdivisions and where it is appropriate to the context, relates to the
process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
   A.   For the purpose of these regulations, a single-family residential
subdivision of land is, or includes:
      1.   The division of land for single-family residential purposes into one
or more additional tracts, sites, or parcels of five (5) acres or less in area.
      2.   The division of land for single-family residential purposes into
tracts of more than five (5) acres where the proposed lot frontage is less than
five hundred feet (500').
      3.   The dedication or establishment of a public or private road, highway
or street through a tract of land regardless of area.
      4.   Any sale or division of land for which a plat is required by
statute; any resubdivision of land heretofore divided or platted.
   B.   Any multiple-family, commercial or industrial district included in a
zoning district of the Zoning Title of this Code 3  after the effective date
hereof, shall be considered as a planned development and shall be deemed a
subdivision for the purpose of these regulations regardless of whether the land
is divided into parcels for separate sale or is developed on a lease basis, and
said subdivision shall be subject to the improvement and design requirements of
this Title.
THROUGH LOT: Any lot having frontage on two (2) approximately parallel streets.
Such lots are not permitted. 4
VILLAGE: The Village of South Barrington.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: An administrative officer appointed by the Village Board to
perform such functions as outlined in this Title as well as the various
ordinances of the Village as may be appropriate. The Board of Trustees may
appoint a Superintendent of Public Works who shall be superior in authority to
the Village Engineer and an Assistant Superintendent of Public Works who shall
be authorized to perform certain or all functions assigned to the
Superintendent of Public Works. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-77)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 2, Chapter 1 of this Code.
2 2. See Title 9 of this Code.
3 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
4 1. See also the provisions of Section 11-3-1B9 of this Title.
11-1-4: APPROVALS, INTERPRETATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   No land shall, after the adoption of these regulations, be subdivided
or filed for record, nor any street laid out, nor any public improvements made
to the land, until the plat or plans of the subdivision or street improvements
shall have been certified to and approved by action of the Village Board of
Trustees. This approval must be in writing and placed on the original tracing
of the final plats according to the procedures outlined in Chapter 2 of this
Title.
   B.   No lot, tract or parcel of land within any such subdivision shall be
offered for sale nor shall any sale, contract for sale or option be made or
given until such subdivision plans have been properly reviewed by the South
Barrington Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals and officially approved by
the Village Board of Trustees.
   C.   No public improvements such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water
drainage, sewerage facilities, lighting, grading, paving or surfacing of
streets shall hereafter be made within any such subdivision by any owner or
owners or his or their agent until the plats for the subdivision and also the
plans for improvements thereto have been formally recommended by the Village
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals and approved by the Village Engineer
and the Village Board of Trustees.
   D.   Subdivisions of land lying outside of the Village and within one and
one-half (11/2) miles of the Village limits shall also be required to conform
with the requirements of this Title or the regulations of the county in which
the property is located wherever said county requirements are more stringent
than the provisions of this Title.
   E.   Where a tract of land is proposed for subdivision that is part of a
larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the Village as a whole, the
Village President, the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals or the Board of
Trustees may cause to be prepared a recommended plan of the entire area, such
plan to be used by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals and the Village
Board as an aid in judging the proposed plat.
   F.   No occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official for the
use of any structure within any subdivision approved for platting or re-
platting until required utility facilities have been installed and made ready
to service the property, and until roadways providing access to the subdivision
have been constructed or are in the course of construction.
   G.   The current map entitled "Village of South Barrington Zoning Map",
presently in effect or as hereafter revised, 1  is hereby adopted as the
Official Map of the Village. No plat or subdivision within the Village or
within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the boundaries of the Village and not
in any other municipality shall be filed for record or have any validity unless
said plat or subdivision complies with said map.
   H.   All interpretations of these rules and regulations are reserved to the
administrative bodies referred to herein.
   I.   The Village Board, in accordance with this Title, may vary and make
exceptions as set forth herein in instances where there is sufficient evidence,
in its opinion, or hardship caused by topographic conditions, or where any
other reasonable deterrents prevail, provided the variations or exceptions are
in substantial conformance with the standards of design of this Title. (Ord. 0-
77-57A, 2-9-77)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 10-3-2 of this Code.
11-1-5: VACATIONS:
   A.   Vacation of Plats of Subdivisions: In cases where an application is
made to the Village Board of Trustees to vacate any subdivision or part thereof
prior to the sale of any lot in the subdivision, the Board may, by resolution,
order the vacation of all or part of the said subdivision. When lots have been
sold, the plat may be vacated; provided, that all the owners of lots in said
plat join in the execution of said application.
   B.   Vacation of Streets, Alleys or Public Places:
      1.   In all cases where application for any subdivision street, alley or
part thereof is made to the Board of Trustees, such application shall be
referred to the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals for investigation. The
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized and directed to make the
following determinations concerning the requested vacation:
         a.   That the title to the property is in the applicants' name as set
forth in the application.
         b.   That the vacation conforms to the General Development Plan
approved by the Board.
         c.   The amount of benefit which shall accrue to the applicant as a
result of the proposed vacation.
         d.   That the vacation is in the public interest.
After the foregoing determinations are made by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board
of Appeals, said Commission shall make its recommendation to the Board of
Trustees.
      2.   If the vacation is recommended by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board
of Appeals, the applicant shall provide a plat of the area to be vacated as
prepared by a registered land surveyor. The applicant shall also pay to the
Village, by certified check, an amount equal to the amount of benefit accruing
to the applicant as a result of the vacation as determined by the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals under paragraph 1c above. The Board of
Trustees may then approve the vacation by resolution, passage requiring a two-
thirds (2/3) vote of the Board of Trustees. The resolution shall recite the
following:
         a.   A specific description of the street, alley or public place, or
part thereof vacated.
         b.   Passage is subject to the payment of the compensation fixed
therein.
         c.   Passage is subject to the filing of a certified copy of the
resolution, along with a plat thereof, in which the vacated portion is clearly
shown and marked "hereby vacated" with the County Recorder of Deeds within
sixty (60) days of the date thereof.
         d.   That the Board of Trustees has determined that the public
interest will be served by the vacation.
When the resolution and plat are presented to the Recorder of Deeds, it shall
have, in addition, the receipt of the Village Clerk showing payment of the
compensation fixed therein. Receipt shall likewise be filed for record. (Ord.
0-77-57A, 2-9-77)
11-1-6: SNOW REMOVAL FROM STREETS IN SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Responsibility of Subdivider to Remove Snow:
      1.   This Section is to insure that the residents of completed units in a
subdivision will be provided with adequate snow removal service by the
subdivider to assure the resident of access to his unit prior to acceptance of
the street by the Village.
      2.   Snow Removal Required: Prior to acceptance of a street within a
subdivision by the Village, it shall be the responsibility of a subdivider to
conduct snow removal operations on such street so as to provide access to the
residents of all units at such times and in such manner so as to maintain
access at all times to all completed units.
      3.   Penalties: Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall
be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day the offense continues to occur. (Ord. 0-78-91, 4-13-78)
   B.   Snow Removal by Village: If any street, prior to approval and
acceptance thereof, becomes a necessary access route to reach lawfully occupied
residences, the Village may enter upon such street to perform snow plowing and
removal subject to the following conditions:
      1.   If the subdivider has not provided snow plowing and removal service
necessary to provide a reasonable access route to lawfully occupied residences
within twelve (12) hours after an accumulation of two inches (2") of snow or
more, the Village may enter upon such street and perform snow plowing and
removal service, and shall be entitled to reimbursement for the costs thereof.
Such performance of snow plowing and removal shall not constitute an acceptance
and/or approval of a street by the Village.
      2.   The Village will bill the subdivider for the actual cost incurred
for the snow plowing or removal and an additional ten percent (10%) charge for
administrative costs. If payment in full is not made by the subdivider within
thirty (30) days after receipt of such billing, the Village may take the
necessary action to obtain payment from the completion bond that the subdivider
is required to post under the provisions of subsection 11-2-2B9a of this Title.
      3.   The subdivider shall execute a document in a form supplied by the
Village authorizing snow plowing and removal service by the Village pursuant to
the terms of this subsection, and further stating that snow plowing and removal
service performed hereunder will not constitute approval and/or acceptance of
any street by the Village.
      4.   Nothing in this subsection shall limit any other lawful cause of
action available to the Village. (Ord. 0-79-135, 8-9-75)
11-1-7: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provisions of this title shall be, upon conviction,
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
CHAPTER 2
SUBDIVISION PLANS, PLATS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-2-1: Preliminary Plan
11-2-2: Final Plat
11-2-3: Fees
11-2-1: PRELIMINARY PLAN:
   A.   Procedure For Filing Preliminary Plan:
      1.   Any owner of land which is within the corporate limits of the
village, or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of such corporate limits on
unincorporated land, wishing to divide the same into building lots for the
purposes of sale or assessment or both, or wishing to dedicate streets, alleys
or other lands for public use or redivide land previously subdivided, or change
the boundaries of any lot or parcel thereof, shall first submit to the village
one Mylar copy, seven (7) photocopies, and one electronic version (in a format
acceptable by the village engineer) of the preliminary plan and all other
information as required. The preliminary plan shall be submitted for the entire
tract or parcel sought to be developed and for which approval is requested.
(Ord. 2007-831, 9-13-2007)
      2.   The application shall specify the intent of the subdivider with
respect to land use, drainage, sewage disposal, water supply and street
improvement proposed by the developer, those deed restrictions which exist or
are to be placed on the property subdivision and the expected date of
development.
      3.   The village board shall, by motion, refer the preliminary plan to
the plan commission/zoning board of appeals and shall at the same time instruct
the village engineer to collaborate with the developer and the plan commission/
zoning board of appeals in assembling plans for the design and construction of
streets and other public improvements as are required by ordinance. The plan
commission/zoning board of appeals shall, within thirty (30) days from the
conclusion of all hearings, submit its written recommendations for approval or
disapproval to the village board.
      4.   The preliminary plan shall be presented to the plan commission/
zoning board of appeals at least ten (10) business days prior to the regular
meeting of the commission to receive action thereon at that meeting.
   B.   Contents Of Preliminary Plan: The preliminary plan shall contain the
following:
      1.   Proposed name of the subdivision.
      2.   Location and legal description.
      3.   Names and addresses of the developer and designer who made the plan.
      4.   Scale of plan, one inch (1") to one hundred feet (100') or larger.
      5.   Date.
      6.   North point.
      7.   Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by solid heavy line
and the total acreage encompassed thereby.
      8.   Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted
streets or of the public ways, railroad and utility rights of way, parks and
other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements and
section and village corporate lines within or adjacent to the tract.
      9.   Existing sewers, water mains, wells, culverts or other underground
facilities within the tract or adjacent to the tract, indicating pipe sizes,
grades, manholes and exact locations.
      10.   Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of unsubdivided or subdivided
land, showing ownership where possible.
      11.   Existing zoning of proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts in
zoned areas.
      12.   Contours at one foot (1') intervals corresponding to USGS datum and
to include any areas designated as floodplain or flood hazard as defined by the
floodplain ordinance of the village 1  or as designated on the flood hazard
maps published by the department of housing and urban development, U.S.
government.
      13.   Layout of streets, widths of rights of way and also the widths of
crosswalks and easements.
      14.   Layout, numbers, square footage area and dimension of lots. All
lots in the preliminary and final plans shall be numbered consecutively
regardless of the phases or units by which said parcel is intended to be
subdivided.
      15.   Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved
for public use or set aside for use of property owners in the subdivisions.
      16.   Building setback lines, showing dimensions.
      17.   Easements shall be provided for all public utilities where alleys
are not provided. Proper continuity for the utilities from block to block shall
be maintained.
      18.   Location, size and grades of proposed sewers.
      19.   Proposed street grades.
      20.   Proposed location of water, gas, electric and telephone
installations.
      21.   A certificate showing ownership of the property described in the
preliminary plat and if the owner is a land trust, the beneficial owners
thereof. In the event that a foreclosure or bankruptcy proceeding is then
pending with respect to said property, the same shall be so identified in the
certification. The applicant shall be under a continuing duty to notify the
chairman of the plan commission/zoning board of appeals of any such change
during the pendency of the application. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
   C.   Conditions Of Plan Approval: The following qualifications shall govern
approval of the preliminary plan:
      1.   The approval of the preliminary plan by the plan commission/zoning
board of appeals and the village board is tentative only, involving merely the
general acceptability of the layout submitted.
      2.   The plan commission/zoning board of appeals may recommend or the
village board may require such changes or revisions as are necessary in the
interest and needs of the community.
      3.   Subsequent approval of the engineering will be required with
reference to water supply, storm drainage, sewage, gas and electric service,
street lighting, fire hydrants, grading, gradients, roadway widths and the
surfacing of the streets by the village engineer and county officials, where
concerned, prior to the approval of the plat by the village.
      4.   Preliminary plan approval shall be effective for a maximum period of
twelve (12) months unless, upon application by the developer to the village
board prior to the time of expiration, the village board grants an extension.
If the final plat has not been recorded within this time, the preliminary plan
must again be submitted. However, if the final plat is recorded for a portion
of the tract or parcel, then the preliminary plan shall remain effective for an
additional twelve (12) months after the date of recording of the last final
plat.
      5.   One print of the approved preliminary plan signed by the president
and clerk shall be retained by each of the following:
         Village clerk's office
         Village engineer's office
         Plan commission/zoning board of appeals
         Developer
One copy is authorization for the developer to proceed with the preparation of
plans and specifications for the improvements required in this title and with
the preparation of the final plat. (Ord. 2007-835, 10-24-2007)
   D.   Submittal of a copy of the Natural Resource Inventory Report prepared
by the North Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District as required by
State statute. (Ord. 2007-835, 10-24-2007; amd. Ord. 2019-1199, 4-11-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 12 of this code.
11-2-2: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Procedure For Approval Of Final Plat:
      1.   One Mylar copy, seven (7) photocopies, and one electronic version
(in a format acceptable by the village engineer) of the final plat and
accompanying engineering and other documents shall be submitted to the village
engineer. The village engineer shall review the final plat, engineering and
other documents for conformance with the preliminary plat, as approved by the
plan commission/zoning board of appeals and the village board, and the
requirements of this title and such other ordinances of the village as may be
applicable. (Ord. 2007-831, 9-13-2007)
      2.   If the final plat and accompanying documents are in conformance with
these requirements, then the village engineer shall approve the final plat and
accompanying documents by affixing his signature to a certificate of approval
which may include certain recommendations and forward these documents to the
plan commission/zoning board of appeals.
      3.   Action must be taken by the village board within thirty (30) days
after the final plat has been forwarded by the plan commission/zoning board of
appeals for approval.
   B.   Accompanying Documents: Accompanying documents shall consist of:
      1.   Approval by village engineer of subdivider's plans for engineering
and improvements required by this title.
      2.   Approval by the plan commission/zoning board of appeals of names of
the proposed streets and of the proposed system of addresses along such
streets.
      3.   Before the final plat of any subdivision shall be approved and
recorded, the subdivider shall furnish profiles of all streets and alleys in
the proposed subdivision drawn to a horizontal scale of fifty feet to the inch
(50' = 1") and a vertical scale of five feet to the inch (5' = 1").
      4.   Certification by a registered land surveyor to the effect that the
plat represents a survey made by him and that monuments and markers shown
thereon exist as located and that all dimensions and geodetic details are
correct.
      5.   Notarized certification by owner or owners and by mortgage holder,
if any, of the adoption of the plat and dedication of streets and other public
areas.
      6.   Approval by signature of county, state or village officials
concerned with the specifications of the utility installations.
      7.   Final plans and specifications for the improvements required in this
title. There shall be strict conformity with subdividers, preparations for such
improvements previously approved by the president and board of trustees or
other appropriate authority and signed by the subdivider and owner.
      8.   An agreement executed by the owner and subdivider to make and
install the improvements provided for in this title in accordance with the
plans and specifications accompanying the final plat. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
      9.   Cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit, for the purpose of
guaranteeing the completion of all required improvements, by one or both of the
following methods:
         a.   A cash bond may be deposited with the village in accordance with
a specific escrow agreement approved by the village attorney and village
engineer in an amount equal to one hundred thirty percent (130%) of the cost of
the improvements required by the provisions of this title and all other
improvements required by the village board pursuant to the ordinances of the
village. The deposit shall be held in a special account by the village, and the
agreement may provide for partial payouts as work progresses in amounts
approved by the village engineer as corresponding to the original estimate of
costs. Provisions shall be made in the escrow agreement that funds therein may
be used to pay the fees provided in this title (including those enumerated in
subsection B9e of this section), if such fees have not previously been paid in
accordance with the provisions of this title. The use of said funds shall also
be conditioned upon the faithful performance of all provisions of this title
and the agreements executed pursuant hereto.
         b.   An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or institution in a
form and manner acceptable to the village attorney may be deposited with the
village clerk. Such irrevocable letter of credit shall be in an amount
sufficient to cover one hundred thirty percent (130%) of the cost of the
improvements required by the provisions of this title and all improvements
required by the village board pursuant to the ordinances of the village. In no
event shall a letter of credit be renewed for a period of less than twelve (12)
months.
         c.   The public works committee shall review the letter of credit six
(6) months after the project commences to verify that all necessary
governmental permits have been issued for such public improvements and that the
letter of credit is in an amount sufficient for such public improvements. The
public works committee shall review and adjust, as necessary, project cost
increases, if any, annually from the date of issuance of the letter of credit.
The letter of credit may also be reviewed at the discretion of the public works
committee and adjusted as cost increases, if any, are determined.
         d.   There shall be no reduction of that portion of the escrow deposit
or irrevocable letter of credit applying to a particular improvement, unless
and until that improvement is completed, accepted, and approved by the village
board. In no event shall any reduction in any letter of credit be granted
unless and until the costs of all public improvements required as a result of
governmental permitting have been established, and further the village shall
receive confirmation that all such permits have been issued. In no event, after
a reduction, shall the remaining portion of the cash escrow deposit or
irrevocable letter of credit be less than an amount which is equal to the total
of: 1) one hundred percent (100%) of an updated estimate of cost of completion
of the remaining required improvements, and 2) thirty percent (30%) of the
updated estimate of the cost of completion of all of the required improvements.
In no event shall any person be entitled to the release of an escrow deposit or
letter of credit until and unless a guarantee bond in a form satisfactory to
the attorney for the village is deposited with the village clerk in accordance
with the provisions of subsection 11-3-16C of this title.
         e.   In the event a letter of credit is due to expire, and the village
has not received a replacement letter of credit fourteen (14) days prior to the
expiration date thereof, the village clerk or village president is authorized
to draw on the letter of credit in accordance with the terms of the letter of
credit. Draws may be made on the letter of credit or cash escrow for any of the
following purposes:
            (1)   Guaranteeing or securing the completion of all required
improvements and all maintenance obligations set forth in this title, together
with the payment of all fees required by this title;
            (2)   Paying for the completion, repair, replacement and
maintenance (including, but not limited to, snowplowing and street cleaning) of
required improvements;
            (3)   Paying for engineering and attorney fees incurred for
services rendered in conjunction with the subdivision; or
            (4)   Paying for attorney fees arising from any actions taken to
enforce the letter of credit or escrow agreement. (Ord. 2004-726, 9-9-2004)
      10.   A land surveyor's calculation sheet that includes the square
footage of actual land area of each lot.
   C.   Contents Of Final Plat: The final plat shall contain the following:
      1.   Name of subdivision.
      2.   Location by township, section and range, or by other legal
description.
      3.   Scale of one inch (1") to one hundred feet (100') (shown
graphically).
      4.   Date and north point.
      5.   Boundary of plat, based on an accurate traverse, with angles and
linear dimensions and with the total acreage of the parcel and its subdivision.
      6.   Exact location, width and names of all streets within and adjoining
the plat, and the exact locations and widths of all pedestrian ways. Streets
that are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall
bear the names of the existing streets.
      7.   True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or
official monuments (not less than three [3]) which shall be accurately
described in the plat.
      8.   Municipal, township, County or section lines accurately tied to the
lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
      9.   Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and
length of all arcs.
      10.   All easements for right of way provided for public utilities.
Easements shall be approved by applicable utility company.
      11.   All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths. All lots shall be certified by a registered land surveyor as to the
total land surface area of the lot.
      12.   Permanent monuments for bench marks shall be placed at all corners
and points of tangency of curve lines along the boundary of the subdivision.
      13.   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be
dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated or reserved
for public use, indicated thereon, and of any area to be reserved by deed
covenant for common uses of all property owners.
      14.   Building setback lines accurately shown by dimension.
      15.   Protective covenants which meet the approval of the village
President and board of Trustees shall be lettered on the final plat or attached
thereto and incorporated by reference.
      16.   An endorsement on the final plat by the County Clerk that he finds
no delinquent special assessments or unpaid current special assessments or
taxes against the land thereon.
      17.   Notarized certification, by owner or owners and by mortgage holder,
if any, of the adoption of the plat and dedication of streets and other public
areas.
      18.   A blank certificate of approval as set out in subsection A2 of this
Section.
      19.   A certificate in relation to flood hazards.
      20.   Such final plat may be for a unit of a proposed subdivision,
provided that:
         a.   A preliminary plat had previously been approved as to the whole
subdivision.
         b.   Approval by the village engineer as to the feasibility of such
unit construction.
         c.   The plat for each unit shall be submitted to the plan commission/
zoning board of appeals for its approval.
      21.   Final plat shall be certified by a registered land surveyor.
      22.   Form for the approval of the required village officials.
      23.   Approval by signatures of village, County and State officials
concerned with the specification of utility installations.
      24.   Approval by signature of the chairman of the plan commission/zoning
board of appeals. This approval of the final plat shall not be deemed to
constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of any street or other
proposed public way or space shown on the plat.
   D.   Recording of Final Plat:
      1.   Upon approval by the village board, the developer shall record the
plat with the County Recorder within six (6) months. If not recorded within six
(6) months, the approval shall be null and void.
      2.   One print of the final plat, certified as being recorded by the
County Recorder, and one copy of a complete set of plans and specifications
bearing the village engineer's seal of approval shall be retained by each of
the following:
         The village Clerk's office
         The village engineer's office
         The Building Department
         The plan commission/zoning board of appeals
         No building permits will be issued for the subdivision until said
certified copies of the final plat are on file as above.
In addition to the filing of the final plat with the County Recorder, approved
covenants, if any, or reference thereto shall also be recorded and
certification of the recorded covenants shall also be deposited with the
village offices as required in subsection D2 of this Section.
   E.   Copy To Building Department: After recording the final plat, the
developer shall furnish the Building Department with one copy of a Mylar
reproducible drawing of the final approved plat, added to any other previously
approved plat, drawn to a scale of one inch (1") to two hundred feet (200') on
an eighteen inch by eighteen inch (18" x 18") sheet with a northpoint at the
top of the page and with each page constituting a quarter section. Said drawing
shall have match lines where subdivisions overlap into more than one quarter
section. Drawing shall also include the name of the subdivision, section and
quarter section designations. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
11-2-3: FEES:
   A.   Deposit: Prior to engaging in any discussions or negotiations with the
village, any party desiring to annex, subdivide, rezone or otherwise develop a
parcel of property shall submit a cash deposit to the village which shall be
held by the village in a noninterest-bearing, nonsegregated account. The amount
of such deposit shall be determined by the village. Any cost and expenses,
including, but not limited to, engineering fees, attorney fees and village
staff review fees, incurred by the village shall be invoiced to the party
involved, and such amount shall be paid to the village within sixty (60) days
of the date of the invoice. If such invoice is not paid by the party, the
village may suspend all further discussions and negotiations until such time as
the invoice is paid in full. In the event that an invoice remains unpaid, the
village may elect to draw on the posted deposit for purposes of satisfying the
outstanding invoice. In the event the village draws on the posted deposit, all
discussions and negotiations shall be suspended until the party provides the
village with additional funds in order to increase the posted deposit to its
original amount. If the party elects to terminate discussions and negotiations
with the village, the party shall notify the village in writing. The village
shall return the posted deposit, less any outstanding costs and expenses owed
to the village, to the party.
   B.   Preliminary Plan: At the time of filing an application for approval of
the plan, the application shall be accompanied by a certified check or money
order for twenty five dollars ($25.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) for each lot in
the proposed subdivision, but not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), payable to
the village. In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a certified
check or money order in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) which
amount may be drawn upon from time to time, upon approval of the village board,
to pay engineering fees incurred by the village with respect to the proposed
subdivision. In the event that the engineering fees incurred by the village
with respect to the proposed subdivision do not reach one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), the difference shall be returned to the applicant. Nothing in this
subsection shall relieve an applicant from the obligation to pay the village
for engineering fees incurred by the village in excess of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) with respect to the proposed subdivision. Upon acceptance of the
application by the plan commission/zoning board of appeals, the chairman shall
deliver the checks or money orders to the village Clerk for deposit with the
treasurer.
   C.   Final Plat: At the time of filing the final plat, the owner shall pay a
fee by certified check or money order of twenty five dollars ($25.00) plus one
dollar ($1.00) for each lot in the proposed subdivision, but not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00), payable to the village. Upon acceptance of the fee by
the plan commission/zoning board of appeals, the chairman shall surrender the
check or money order to the village Clerk for deposit with the treasurer. (Ord.
0-99-558, 2-11-1999)
CHAPTER 3
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Block Design
11-3-2: Lot Design And Standards
11-3-3: Floodplain Regulations
11-3-4: Storm Water Retention
11-3-5: Streets
11-3-5-1: Conformance To General Development Plan
11-3-5-2: Minimum Right Of Way Widths And Design Standards
11-3-5-3: Street Standards And Specifications
11-3-6: Sidewalks, Streetlights; Curbs, Gutters; Street Signs
11-3-7: Cut And Fill Requirements
11-3-8: Storm Drainage
11-3-9: Utilities
11-3-10: Water Supply And Sewage Disposal
11-3-11: Street Trees And Landscaping
11-3-12: Parkway Grading And Seeding
11-3-13: Monuments
11-3-14: Public Open Spaces And Sites
11-3-15: Property Owner Disclosure
11-3-16: Inspection Of Improvements; Maintenance Guarantee
11-3-1: BLOCK DESIGN:
   A.   Length Of Block: The lengths of a residential block may vary within
reasonable limitations. The recommended length, where conditions permit, is one
thousand feet (1,000'). Approval of blocks in excess of one thousand six
hundred feet (1,600') will be granted only where it is shown that such plan is
the only feasible way of subdividing the property.
   B.   Width Of Block: A normal block shall be designed with sufficient depth
to provide two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Exceptions to the normal
block shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to heavy traffic ways, railroads or
streams. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
11-3-2: LOT DESIGN AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Zoning Compliance: Lots proposed for residential use shall be designed
and platted in accordance with all requirements of the zoning ordinance of the
village.
   B.   Standards:
      1.   All side lot lines shall be at right angles to the straight street
lines, or radial to curved street lines.
      2.   No tract shall be subdivided into lots having a land area of less
than forty thousand (40,000) square feet or an average width of less than one
hundred forty feet (140') or a minimum width at the right of way line of less
than one hundred twenty five feet (125').
      3.   The average minimum width of residential lots at the building line
shall be as follows, providing the original frontage is one hundred twenty five
feet (125') or more:
         a.   All lots containing an area of one acre or more, but less than
two (2) acres, shall have a minimum frontage of one hundred forty feet (140').
         b.   All lots containing an area of two (2) acres or more, but less
than three (3) acres, shall have a minimum frontage of two hundred fifty feet
(250').
         c.   All lots containing an area of three (3) acres or more, but less
than five (5) acres, shall have a minimum frontage of two hundred fifty feet
(250').
         d.   All lots containing an area of five (5) acres or more shall have
a minimum frontage of three hundred feet (300').
      4.   Where said lots front upon a cul-de-sac or curved road or street
having a radius of two hundred feet (200') or less, the minimum width of the
footage as given in subsection B3 of this section may be measured at the
building line. The width at the street right of way shall not be less than one-
half (1/2) or fifty percent (50%) of the required minimum width as given in
subsection B3 of this section.
      5.   In every case, there shall be a suitable building site on each and
every block.
      6.   In no case will building sites be permitted in a floodplain. All
subdivisions are subject to the floodplain ordinance of the village 1 .
      7.   All lots shall have a width and depth entirely adequate to provide
the necessary yard and setback requirements of the zoning ordinance.
      8.   Every lot shall abut on a street or road which has been dedicated to
public use or which has acquired that status through long usage as a public
thoroughfare.
The plan commission/zoning board of appeals may approve lots on a private right
of way; provided proper showing is made that such access is adequate and not
detrimental to future planning of adjacent land; and further provided, that
such private roads shall comply with the standards, specifications and design
requirements for public roads. This applies only to single-family residential
lots.
      9.   Through lots shall not be permitted. This does not apply in the case
of lots which back to a major thoroughfare.
   C.   Building Lines: Building lines shall be shown on all plats of lots
within the jurisdiction of this title. They shall comply with the zoning
ordinance of the village. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 12 of this code.
11-3-3: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS:
All developments including, but not limited to, buildings, streets, driveways,
septic systems and any other structures or improvements subject to the
floodplain ordinance shall comply with the WMO in title 12, chapter 2 of this
code and any amendments, additions, or revisions made thereto. (Ord. 0-2015-
1059, 3-19-2015)
11-3-4: STORMWATER RETENTION:
All subdivisions shall be subject to the stormwater retention provisions of the
WMO in title 12, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 0-2015-1059, 3-19-2015)
11-3-5: STREETS:
11-3-5-1: CONFORMANCE TO GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
The subdivision of land, including the arrangement, character, extent, width,
grade and location of all streets, alleys or other land to be dedicated for
public use, shall conform to the general development plan of the village as
approved and adopted by the village board. Consideration shall be given to
their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic and soil
conditions, to public safety and convenience and to their appropriate relation
to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. (Ord. 0-77-57A,
2-9-1977)
11-3-5-2: MINIMUM RIGHT OF WAY WIDTHS AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Schedule Of Right Of Way Widths: The minimum widths of rights of way
for streets to be dedicated or established after the effective date hereof
within the village or its environs under the jurisdiction of this title shall
conform to the following schedule:
 
Primary streets, arterial, major   80 feet to 100 feet, located in
streets, parkways                   accordance with general development plan
Secondary, arterial, or collector  66 feet to 80 feet, located in accordance
streets                             with general development plan
Minor streets                      66 feet
Cul-de-sacs                        60 foot radius
Cross walkways                     10 feet
Utility easements                  10 feet
 
   B.   Clear Vision: Clear visibility, measured along the center line of the
street, shall be provided for at least three hundred feet (300') on all primary
streets, two hundred feet (200') on all secondary streets and at least one
hundred feet (100') on all other streets.
   C.   Street Intersections: All street intersections and confluences must
give clear evidence of being conducive to safe traffic flow.
   D.   Minor Streets: Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by
through traffic will be discouraged.
   E.   Alleys:
      1.   Alleys must be provided in commercial and industrial districts
unless provisions are made for service access such as off-street loading and
parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
      2.   Alleys shall be prohibited in residential areas.
      3.   The width of an alley shall not be less than twenty feet (20') nor
more than forty feet (40').
   F.   Cul-de-sacs: Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular
shape with a minimum diameter of one hundred twenty feet (120') of right of
way; the pavement shall have a minimum diameter of eighty feet (80') to the
outside edge.
   G.   Half Streets; Reserve Strips: Half streets shall be prohibited. No
strip or area shall be reserved along any portion of a street, half street or
alley which will prevent adjacent property owners access thereto.
   H.   Entrances to State or County Highways: If the tract of land proposed to
be subdivided or any part thereof lies adjacent to a highway over which the
Division of Highways of the State of Illinois or the County of Cook has
jurisdiction with respect to maintenance and upkeep thereof, and an entrance or
entrances are desired from such highways to lots, streets, roadways or alleys
in such proposed subdivisions, the subdivider or developer shall submit to the
Village Engineer a written permit from the said Division of Highways, granting
him permission to obtain and construct such an entrance or entrances.
   I.   Street Names: No street names may be used which duplicate or may be
confused with the names of existing streets; provided, that existing street
names shall be used on all continuations of existing streets.
   J.   Natural or Man-Made Features: Due consideration shall be given to the
preservation of any landmarks, large trees or natural or man-made structures of
unusual or unique beauty or historical interest.
   K.   Driveways and Private Streets:
      1.   Wherever possible, driveways or private or minor streets shall not
enter directly onto major roads or thoroughfares.
      2.   Private driveways shall have c.m.p. culverts, or equal, of fourteen
(14) gauge minimum thickness and a diameter adequate to insure the continuous
unrestricted flow of water, but in no case less than twelve inches (12") in
diameter. All driveway approaches shall have a minimum radius of five feet (5')
with the toe of the radius not permitted to extend beyond the property line.
All approaches within the right of way shall have the same base requirements as
the street it adjoins. All culverts shall be installed slightly below the ditch
flow line. All private driveways for multi-family, commercial and industrial
subdivisions shall be subject to the review and recommendation of the Village
Engineer and the approval of the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals. (Ord.
0-77-57A, 2-9-77)
11-3-5-3: STREET STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Generally: Where applicable, the State of Illinois Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Department of Highways,
current edition, shall be considered as a part of the following specifications
in use. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-77)
   B.   Pavement Widths: Street widths shall be in two (2) classifications of
varying width and shall follow the following descriptions:
      1.   Thoroughfares shall be interpreted to mean those streets which are
major connecting streets within the Village or its jurisdictional limits and
shall consist of a minimum pavement width of twenty four feet (24') and a
minimum base course width of twenty four feet (24').
      2.   All other streets shall be twenty two feet (22') in width and a
minimum base course width of twenty two feet (22').
   C.   Standard Street Cross-Section:
      1.   A standard street cross-section shall consist of the pavement width
herein specified with a minimum six foot (6') shoulder on each side which shall
consist of four inches (4") of black soil and a permanent seeding of approved
grasses with a planting of not less than one hundred twenty five (125) pounds
per acre for the remainder of the shoulder width. All seed shall be properly
fertilized and maintained until accepted by the Village Board upon
recommendation by the Village Engineer, but in no case less than eighteen (18)
months.
      2.   Ditches shall normally have a three foot (3') horizontal to a one
foot (1') vertical slope, and shall have a minimum width of two feet (2').
Minimum depth of ditches below the center line of road grade shall be eighteen
inches (18") with a minimum grade of seventy five hundredths percent (0.75%)
unless otherwise specified by the Village Engineer. Any ditches having depths
greater than five feet (5') shall have adequate storm sewers of design and
specifications as approved by the Village Engineer. Whenever drainage ditches
are of such capacity that, in the Village Engineer's opinion, the ditch bottoms
shall be subject to erosion, then the Village Engineer may require the
installation of a stone bed of such design to prevent said erosion.
      3.   To the extent that the minimum width of any right of way required to
be dedicated pursuant to the applicable provisions of this Title is not
sufficient to locate ditches in compliance with the specifications herein
required, easements shall be granted to the Village in form and substance as
will be reasonably acceptable to the Village in order to provide sufficient
area for the location of such ditches.
      4.   The pavement crown at the center line of the pavement shall be three
inches (3") above the edge of the pavement.
      5.   Backslopes, where necessary to meet existing grades, shall have a
three foot (3') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical slope and shall be
extended to meet existing ground lines.
      6.   Street cross-sections shall be standard in all locations with the
exceptions of the actual pavement width, as hereinabove specified. (Ord. 84-
212, 11-8-84)
   D.   Excavations: Excavated materials shall be placed in locations not
offensive to the subdivision and shall not be placed in the vicinity of a
proposed building site. All subgrade material shall be of stable clay material
and excavation shall continue until all material has been removed which is not
stable clay material. All cutting and filling shall be subject to cut and fill
requirements and restrictions as required in Section
11-3-6 of this Chapter.
No base course work shall be constructed until after the sub-base has been
inspected and approved by the Village Engineer. No surface course work shall be
started until the base course work has been inspected and approved by the
Village Engineer. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-77)
   E.   Base and Surface Courses:
      1.   Alternate Methods:
         a.   Residential Streets: All streets in residential subdivisions
shall follow the base and surface requirements of one of the following three
(3) alternates; all as per State of Illinois requirements:
            (1)   Alternate A: Ten inches (10") of grade nine (9) crushed
gravel or grade eight (8) limestone, done in two (2) lifts of five inches (5")
each and compacted to a density of not less than ninety five percent (95%).
Surface courses shall consist of one and one-half inches (11/2") of bituminous
binder course Cl.1 and one and one-half inches (11/2") of bituminous concrete
surface course Cl.1. Surface courses shall be laid in two (2) lifts. All stone
or gravel base course shall be primed with MC-O liquid asphalt at a rate of
one-third (1/3) gallon per square yard.
            (2)   Alternate B: Six inches (6") of pozzolonic base course T-A.
Surface courses are to consist of one and one-half inches (11/2") of bituminous
concrete binder course Cl.1 and one inch (1") of bituminous concrete surface
course Cl.1. Surface courses shall be laid in two (2) lifts. Bituminous curing
cover shall be applied at the time and rate specified in the "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", state of Illinois, current
edition.
            (3)   Alternate C: Six inches (6") bituminous aggregate mixture
(BAM). Surface courses are to consist of one and one-half inches (11/2") of
bituminous concrete binder course Cl.1 and one inch (1") of bituminous concrete
surface course Cl-1. Surface courses shall be laid in two (2) lifts.
         b.   Commercial Streets: All streets in commercial subdivisions shall
follow the base and surface requirements of one of the three (3) alternates;
all as per state of Illinois requirements:
            (1)   Alternate A: Ten inches (10") of grade nine (9) crushed
gravel or grade eight (8) limestone, done in two (2) lifts of five inches (5")
each and compacted to a density of no less than ninety five percent (95%).
Surface courses are to consist of two inches (2") bituminous concrete binder
course Cl.1 and two inches (2") of bituminous concrete surface course class
Cl.1. Surface courses shall be laid in two (2) lifts. All stone or gravel base
course shall be primed with an MC-O liquid asphalt at a rate of one-third (1/3)
gallon per square yard.
            (2)   Alternate B: Six inches (6") of pozzolonic base course T-A.
Surface courses to consist of one and one-half inches (11/2") of bituminous
concrete binder course and one and one-half inches (11/2") of bituminous
concrete surface course Cl.1. Surface courses shall be laid in two (2) lifts.
Bituminous curing cover shall be applied at the same time and rate specified in
the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", state of
Illinois, current edition.
            (3)   Alternate C: Six inches (6") of bituminous aggregate mixture
(BAM). Surface courses shall be same as alternate B.
         c.   Industrial Streets: All streets in industrial subdivisions shall
follow the base and surface requirements of one of the following three (3)
alternates; all as per state of Illinois requirements:
            (1)   Alternate A: Twelve inches (12") of grade nine (9) crushed
gravel or grade eight (8) limestone, done in two (2) lifts of six inches (6")
each and compacted to a density of no less than ninety five percent (95%). Two
inches (2") of bituminous concrete binder course and two inches (2") of
bituminous concrete surface course Cl.1. Surface course shall be laid in two
(2) lifts.
            (2)   Alternate B: Six inches (6") of pozzolonic base course T-A.
Surface courses are to consist of two inches (2") of bituminous concrete binder
course Cl.1 and one and one-half inches (11/2") of bituminous concrete surface
course Cl.1. Surface courses shall be laid in two (2) lifts.
            (3)   Alternate C: Six inches (6") of bituminous aggregate mixture
(BAM). Surface course requirements shall be the same as alternate B. (Ord. 0-
84-212, 11-8-1984)
         d.   Residential Streets And Commercial Streets For Subdivisions
Approved On Or After November 22, 1987: All streets in residential and
commercial subdivisions having received preliminary plat approval on or after
November 22, 1987, shall follow the base and surface requirements of one of the
following two (2) alternates, all as per state of Illinois requirements, and
the provisions of the following subsections E1d(2) and E1d(4) of this section:
            (1)   Alternates:
               (A)   Alternate A: Twelve inches (12") of grade nine (9) crushed
gravel or grade eight (8) limestone, done in two (2) lifts of six inches (6")
each and compacted to a density of not less than ninety five percent (95%).
Surface courses shall consist of two inches (2") of bituminous binder course
class I and two inches (2") of bituminous concrete surface course class I.
Surface courses shall be laid in two (2) lifts. All stone or gravel base course
shall be primed with MC-O liquid asphalt at a rate of one-third (1/3) gallon
per square yard.
               (B)   Alternate B: Base course to be six inches (6") of
bituminous aggregate mixture (BAM M.S. 1700). Surface courses are to consist of
two inches (2") of bituminous concrete binder course class 1 and one and one-
half inches (11/2") of bituminous concrete surface course class 1. The BAM base
course shall be laid in two (2) lifts.
   All thickness of material above shall mean compacted thickness. Binder
course (class 1) must be installed as soon as the gravel base and subgrade
reaches ninety five percent (95%) compaction as witnessed by the village
engineer and tested by the developer's consultants. The bituminous binder
course for all flexible type pavements must set for a minimum of nine (9)
months during which time the developer shall be responsible for the
maintenance, repair or replacement of same.
            (2)   Additional Requirements:
               (A)   After eighteen (18) months following the installation of
the binder course, the surface course shall be installed pursuant to the
specifications set forth herein.
               (B)   When a minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of all lots
in the subdivision in which said street is located shall have been granted
certificates of occupancy by the village building department the surface shall
be ground and a final surface course shall be installed. This seventy five
percent (75%) occupancy requirement may be determined in a completed phase,
unit or other divisional area basis. If any street in a single phase or unit
within the subdivision has met the seventy five percent (75%) occupancy
requirement, the village engineer may grant in writing approval for the
grinding of the surface and the installation of the final surface course of
asphalt (class 1) within that phase or unit. The president and board of
trustees may grant relief from the seventy five percent (75%) requirement
established herein, provided it has received a written recommendation for such
relief from the village engineer, which recommendation shall set forth any
damage and hardship which may be incurred by strict adherence to the seventy
five percent (75%) requirement.
               (C)   The developer is responsible for the maintenance of all
public improvements covered by the letter of credit until said improvements
have been accepted by the village and the maintenance period has expired in
accordance with subsection 11-3-16C of this chapter.
            (3)   Report: After the above requirements have been met, a report
shall be prepared by a village soil consultant at the developer's/subdivider's
expense listing the existing thicknesses of base and binder courses. Upon
receipt of the reports, the village engineer will review and approve said
report and will perform an inspection of the existing base and binder courses.
Any and all base and binder course failures will then be repaired to the
village engineer's satisfaction.
            (4)   Approval: Approval by the village engineer must be granted in
writing before the surface course can be applied.
            (5)   Corrugated Edging: In instances where preliminary plat
approval has been granted prior to the effective date hereof, provided the
preliminary plat approval has not expired due to the time requirement as set
forth in chapter 2 of this title and curb and gutter is not used, any surface
course hereafter installed shall contain a corrugated edging (rumble strip) two
feet (2') in length and one foot (1') in width installed along the edge of the
road placed at twenty foot (20') increments.
      2.   Standard And Maintenance:
         a.   All thickness of material above, except for subsection E1d of
this section, shall mean compacted thickness. Base stone, gravel and bituminous
binder course for all flexible type pavements must set for a minimum of nine
(9) months during which time the developer shall be responsible for the
maintenance, repair or replacement of same.
         b.   Immediately prior to paving, and prior to placement of fabric and
aggregate stone earthwork, there shall be a proof roll of the entire length of
the street to be paved, along both sides of the street, with truck tires within
one foot (1') of the intended edge of the paving, with a: 1) semitruck loaded
seventy three thousand (73,000) pounds, or 2) a six (6) wheel truck loaded to
sixty eight thousand (68,000) pounds. Prior to proof roll, street clay base
shall be bladed smooth, without holes or indentations in excess of one inch
(1"), and with the form factor of the crown conforming to profile required
herein. Proof roll to be witnessed and approved by two (2) village personnel,
as designated by the chairman of the public works committee. Proof roll to show
no visible deflection.
      3.   Minimum Percentage Fully Improved: A minimum of seventy five percent
(75%) of all lots in the subdivision in which said street is located shall have
been fully improved with buildings which have been granted certificates of
occupancy by the village building department before the final surface course is
installed. If any street in a single phase or unit within the subdivision has
met the seventy five percent (75%) occupancy requirement, the village engineer
shall grant in writing approval for the installation of the final surface
course of asphalt (class 1) within that phase or unit. (Ord. 2004-726, 9-9-
2004)
      4.   Corrugated Edging: The surface course shall contain a corrugated
edging (rumble strip) two feet (2') in length and one foot (1') in width
installed along the edge of the road placed at twenty foot (20') increments.
      5.   Pavement Sample Cores: After the above requirements have been met,
except for subsection E1d of this section, pavement sample cores must be taken
at intervals required by the village engineer listing the existing thicknesses
of base and binder courses and the type and condition of subgrade material as
determined from the cores.
      6.   Report Review And Inspection: Upon receipt of the report, the
village engineer will review said report and will perform an inspection of the
existing base and binder courses. All base and binder course failures will then
be repaired to the village engineer's satisfaction.
      7.   Permission Required: Permission must be granted in writing before
the surface course (class I) can be applied in accordance with the "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", state of Illinois, current
edition.
   F.   Street Plans: Engineering plans and specifications shall be furnished
for all street improvements being proposed within the village and shall contain
the following items and conform to the following regulations:
      1.   No street grade shall be less than four-tenths percent (0.4%), nor
more than ten percent (10%) for pavement widths of twenty feet (20') or more.
      2.   No sharp curves or right angles shall be permitted for the length of
any street.
      3.   All corner radii of pavement shall have a minimum radius of twenty
five feet (25') and will vary in accordance with the aforementioned state of
Illinois specifications, depending upon the angle of street intersections.
      4.   No street intersections shall be made at less than seventy degrees
(70°) and shall be made at ninety degrees (90°) unless existing conditions
warrant a change not in excess of the seventy degrees (70°) aforementioned.
      5.   All plans shall indicate elevations based on United States geodetic
survey sea level datum and with sufficient information on existing improvements
or conditions. All storm sewers shall be designed on a basis of a flood
frequency of a 10-year storm. All roadway culverts and ditches shall be
designed on a flood frequency based on a 25-year storm.
      6.   All engineering plans and specifications shall be submitted to the
village engineer for approval before any construction can be instituted.
      7.   After engineering plans and specifications have been approved by the
village engineer, no revisions shall be allowed without express permission of
the village engineer. Final approved engineering plans shall be submitted in
triplicate. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
   G.   Approval And Acceptance: After approval of the completion of the final
street pavement surface course, all maintenance and repairs shall be the
responsibility of the developer for a period of two (2) years following said
approval. Prior to the remaining requirements of this chapter, all repairs,
replacement and corrections shall be made, where required, by the subdivider at
its cost. Before returning any bonding or contract guarantee with the village,
the subdivider shall obtain a statement from the village engineer stating that
all construction is substantially in accordance with plans and specifications
submitted and have been completed in accordance with the applicable standards
and shall obtain final approval of the board of trustees.
After the two (2) year period following said completion and approval, and as a
requirement to acceptance of all public improvements required by this title, a
detailed inspection of such improvements shall be made by the village engineer,
a village executive officer and a representative of the developer. After
certification by the village engineer and village executive officer that all
construction has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications
previously approved by the village, the village board will formally accept the
required improvements. Prior to such acceptance however, the engineer employed
by the developer shall prepare and submit to the village one complete set of
Mylar reproducible as built drawings of all installed improvements on which
also are shown or indicated any changes in the original construction drawings
that were made during the construction period.
The acceptance of the completed street by the village in no way relieves the
subdivider of responsibility for negligence or careless acts. The acceptance of
the streets, however, does constitute an official recognition by the village of
its responsibility for the maintenance of the streets from the date of
acceptance. All streets shall then become the property of the village and no
further work shall be done by the developer unless specifically authorized by
the proper village authority.
The application and enforcement of ordinances and performance of functions
relating to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of South
Barrington, including, but not limited to, traffic ordinances, street
maintenance and snow plowing and removal shall not constitute acceptance of a
street not previously accepted. (Ord. 0-86-260, 12-11-1986)
   H.   Insurance: During the construction of the improvements and until the
village board has accepted said improvements by ordinance or resolution, the
village shall not be responsible for any liability incurred and the owner and
contractor shall carry sufficient liability insurance to cover any liability
incurred during said period of time. Prior to commencing work, said owner and
contractor shall submit a certificate of insurance subject to the approval of
the board of trustees.
   I.   Inspections: All material used on street projects shall be of the
quality, type and size previously mentioned and the material shall be subject
to inspection by the village and its authorized representatives. The site must
remain open for inspection by any village official or his representative at all
times. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
11-3-6: SIDEWALKS, STREETLIGHTS; CURBS, GUTTERS; STREET SIGNS:
   A.   Sidewalks And Streetlights: Sidewalks and streetlights shall be
installed throughout a subdivision where the lot size is less than forty
thousand (40,000) square feet.
   B.   Curbs And Gutters: Curbs and gutters shall be required throughout all
subdivisions, except as hereinbelow provided. Curbs and gutters shall be of the
type, height, length and width as required by the village. Concrete curb and
gutter shall be reinforced longitudinally as currently required by the village.
Curbs and gutters shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and
specifications set forth in the diagram attached to ordinance 0-88-282 as
exhibit A and incorporated by reference herein, and in accordance with current
"Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", state of Illinois,
division of highways (current edition). The provisions of this subsection shall
not apply to:
      1.   Any subdivision which receives preliminary plat approval as of July
1, 1987, and which approval does not require curbs and gutters; and
      2.   Any subdivision which, because of existing conditions in the terrain
or the configuration of the subdivision, would experience an unreasonable
hardship if required to construct curbs and gutters.
The plan commission/zoning board of appeals shall determine what constitutes an
unreasonable hardship, which determination shall be subject to the approval of
the village board of trustees. (Ord. 0-88-282, 1-14-1988)
   C.   Street Sign Design:
      1.   Uniform street sign design shall be required to be installed at all
intersections in all subdivisions for every subdivision that receives
preliminary plat approval as of July 1, 2004, and thereafter. Street sign
design shall include the type, style, material, color, font, height, and length
of the sign, as well as the type, color, material, height, and diameter of the
pole and supporting bracket, as set forth in the standards as approved by the
village board and on file with the village engineer and in accordance with
current "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", state of
Illinois, division of highways (current edition).
Individuals or entities that currently have street signs and poles located in
existing subdivisions may install, at their own expense, street signs and poles
consistent with the standards provided herein. In such event, the village shall
be responsible for the maintenance of such replaced signs and poles after the
initial installation. (Ord. 2004-715, 5-13-2004)
      2.   The village board does hereby adopt, as the village standard, the
street sign design as set forth herein.
(Ord. 2013-985, 3-14-2013)
11-3-7: CUT AND FILL REQUIREMENTS:
Any cutting and filling required within the development shall be limited to the
area within the public right of way or drainage easements. Under unusual or
exceptional conditions, the village engineer may permit cutting and filling
outside the right of way or drainage easements provided the developer has
submitted detailed drawings indicating the specific areas to be cut and filled.
Village engineer approval of cutting and filling shall be done in cooperation
with the village official who is responsible for the approval of building
foundations and septic system permits. Such approval shall be in writing and
shall bear the signatures of both the village engineer and the village official
in charge of building foundations and septic systems. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
11-3-8: STORM DRAINAGE:
The road construction program in every new subdivision shall include such
drainage structures and storm sewers as required for the removal of surface
water through the subdivision. When open ditches are permitted for surface
water drainage, they shall not be more than four feet (4') below the
established grade.
When lots are less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in area, storm
sewers shall be required which discharge into natural and adequate drainage
channels. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
11-3-9: UTILITIES:
   A.   Underground Utilities: All electric service lines, both primary
(carrying line voltage) and secondary (carrying house voltage) and telephone
lines, shall be placed underground throughout the entire subdivision.
Transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to
the public. All such lines shall be placed in easements or dedicated public
ways in a manner that will not conflict with any other underground services. No
gas facilities shall be placed aboveground.
   B.   Easements: Easements shall be provided for sanitary utilities, electric
and telephone lines and surface drainage including all streams and drainage
courses. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
11-3-10: WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Water Supply:
      1.   A central water supply system shall be required when the lot size is
less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, which system may be dedicated to
the village at the village's option. All details of the system shall be subject
to review by the plan commission/zoning board of appeals and the village
engineer.
      2.   When so designed and planned as to ensure adequate and pure water
supply, the use of a single well to serve from two (2) to nine (9) residences
may be permitted by the plan commission/zoning board of appeals on lots of
forty thousand (40,000) square feet or more in area.
      3.   Water conservancy features shall be considered and provided for in
every subdivision of land. This shall include:
         a.   Lakes, ponds and water impoundments shall be constructed wherever
the topographic and soil conditions make such structures feasible and
reasonable, and such costs are not prohibitive. Such structures shall be
protected from contamination and the surface area of the water shall belong to
the lots adjacent to the water. The same shall be in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the building code as now in effect or hereafter
amended.
         b.   House cisterns may be constructed in conjunction with all new
residential construction. Cisterns shall be subject to the approval and review
of the plan commission/zoning board of appeals and village engineer.
      4.   The requirements of this subsection shall apply to all new
subdivisions and all subdivisions which have not as of October 11, 1990,
received final plat approval from the village. In all of said subdivisions in
which a pond is proposed and which pond will have a depth of four feet (4') or
greater, the developer shall install as a portion of the public improvements a
suction pipe into the pond leading to a manhole structure to be situated on the
right of way of a street proposed to be installed within the subdivision. The
precise location of the manhole and the suction pipe shall be subject to the
approval of the village engineer. The purpose of this structure is to provide a
source of water for firefighting vehicles in the event of a local fire
emergency. This improvement shall be installed prior to the issuance of
building permits for residences.
In addition, there shall be depicted on the face of the final plat of
subdivision the following language:
As a condition to the approval of the final plat of subdivision, the developer
of the subdivision is required to and shall install a suction pipe in the pond
and a manhole structure adjacent to the pond situated within the subdivision.
The Fire Protection District within which the subdivision is located is hereby
granted the right of access to the manhole drainage structure and the suction
drainage pipe and further granted a permanent license to withdraw water from
the pond for firefighting purposes.
   B.   Sewage Disposal:
      1.   In the event that a sanitary sewage disposal plant must be
installed, then the developer shall construct such facilities as may be
required by the village engineer, village president, village board and any
other governmental agency having jurisdiction thereof and in accordance with
all governmental and statutory requirements.
      2.   In the event that soil or topographic conditions on single-family
residential lots of forty thousand (40,000) square feet or more will not permit
the use of individual septic systems, larger lot sizes shall be dedicated.
      3.   On all sites where sanitary sewer mains are not available, septic
systems shall be installed in accordance with all applicable village, state and
county requirements.  1  A soil survey map prepared by a certified soil
scientist which shows soil types, depth to seasonal groundwater and a
delineation of the areas at twelve (12) inches and twenty-four (24) inches to
seasonal ground water. Soil borings shall be done at the intersections on a two
hundred (200) foot grid, with a minimum of at least two (2) borings per acre. A
report shall accompany the map summarizing the data and the areas of
suitability and nonsuitability for on-site waste water treatment systems. An
Alternative to the soils map is to provide the same information and data
derived from four (4) borings in the anticipated on-site waste disposal area
per each proposed lot, if known. (Ord. 0-2000-601, 4-13-2000; amd. Ord. 2019-
1199, 4-11-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 7 of this code.
11-3-11: STREET TREES AND LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Landscape Plan: A landscape plan indicating the placement of all trees,
shrubs and other landscaping features as well as a species list and percentage
or number of each species of plant as may be planned for shall be submitted for
approval by the plan commission/zoning board of appeals. The plan commission/
zoning board of appeals shall have the power to exclude any species of plant
which, in its opinion, shall be unsatisfactory. No planting or seeding or
sodding shall begin without an approved plan. Trees should not be planted in
drainage easements and/or drainage and utility easements.
   B.   General Criteria For Trees: The following are general criteria for
trees to be planted in and upon public rights of way:
      1.   All trees shall be grown in a nursery located in the northern half
of the state of Illinois.
      2.   Deciduous trees selected for planting in the village shall be
healthy, free of insects and diseases, bark bruises and scrapes on the trunk or
limbs before and after planting. Selected trees shall have a straight trunk
with limbs not lower than six feet (6') above the ground.
      3.   Tree holes may be machine dug, but if any existing lawns are
damaged, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to restore these lawns
to their original condition. All trees shall be hand planted and planted
straight.
      4.   The planting season shall be approximately October 15 to December 1,
and March 15 to May 1.
      5.   Trees shall have a trunk diameter, measured twelve inches (12")
above the ball, of not less than one and one-half inches (11/2"). Wherever
possible, trees shall be spaced not more than sixty feet (60') apart on each
side of the right of way.
      6.   Trees shall be planted in the parkway along all streets no closer
than six feet (6') from the driveways and forty feet (40') from intersections,
as measured from the right of way extended. In addition, no trees are to be
planted within six feet (6') on either side of a fire hydrant.
      7.   Prior to planting, the developer shall submit to the plan
commission/zoning board of appeals a list of the number and types of trees that
are to be planted.
         A minimum of two (2) species of trees shall be required on all parcels
under twenty (20) acres. More species may be required by the plan commission/
zoning board of appeals for parcels over twenty (20) acres.
         As directed by the plan commission/zoning board of appeals, the trees
shall be planted by alternating the different species on sixty foot (60')
spacing rotation on each side of the street.
      8.   All trees planted by the developer shall be guaranteed for two (2)
years from the date of planting and shall be replaced by the developer at no
charge to the village, should they die or fail to grow adequately in the
opinion of the plan commission/zoning board of appeals. The replacement tree
shall be of the same size, species and quality, and shall carry the same two
(2) year guarantee.
   C.   Planting Requirements:
      1.   Trees shall be planted on back slope of drainage ditches or at an
elevation above water flow line.
      2.   The planting hole shall be twelve inches (12") larger in diameter
than the diameter of the ball.
      3.   The planting hole shall be no deeper than the height of the ball.
The tree shall be planted no deeper than the depth at which it was growing in
the nursery.
      4.   All burlap, rope and wire must be removed from the top third of the
plant ball before planting.
      5.   In most instances, the backfill around the ball shall be the same
soil as that which was removed from the hole; however, in cases where rocks,
stones, clay, etc., are encountered, topsoil shall be used.
      6.   Any excess soil, debris, or trimmings shall be removed from the
planting site immediately upon completion of planting each individual tree.
      7.   All trees shall be staked to ensure that the trees remain planted in
a straight, neat manner.
      8.   All tags, wires, and plastic ties shall be removed from each tree.
      9.   All trees shall have their trunks protected with wrap paper from the
base of the trunk up to the first branch.
      10.   All wrap paper and guy wires must be removed from the tree one year
after the tree is planted.
   D.    Species Of Trees Allowed:
      1.   As a suggestion, the following species of trees may be planted:
Blackgum
 Nyssa sylvatica                
Elm
 Ulmus x accolade              Accolade elm
 Ulmus x frontier              Frontier elm
 Ulmus x morton varieties      Morton, morton stalwart, triumph
Ginkgo (male, nonfruiting)
 Ginkgo biloba varieties       Magyar, princeton sentry, autumn gold
Hackberry
 Celtis occidentalis           Common hackberry
Honeylocust (thornless)
 Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Shademaster, skyline
  varieties
Japanese Tree Lilac
 Syringa reticulate             
Kentucky coffeetree
 Gymnocladus dioicus
Linden
 Tilia americana varieties     Redmond, wandell
 Tilia cordata varieties       Greenspire, baileyei, glenleven
Maples
 Acer miyabi "Morton"          State Street maple
 Acer platanoides varieties    Deborah, crimson king, emerald lustre,
                                emerald queen, superform
 Acer rubrum varieties         Autumn flame, bowhall, October glory,
                                brandywine, red sunset, northwood
 Acer saccharum varieties      Crescendo, green mountain
 Acer x freeman varieties      Autumn blaze maple, autumn fantasy
                                maple, marmo maple, sienna glen
Oak
 Quercus bicolor               Swamp white oak
 Quercus macrocarpa            Burr oak
 Quercus rubra                 Red oak
 Quercus muehlenbergii         Chinkapin oak
Shagbark Hickory
 Carya ovata                    
 
      2.   Other species of trees will be considered, but must be approved by
the village.
   E.   Safeguarding Trees:
      1.   During any type of construction work, the developer shall place such
guards around all nearby trees to prevent injury to such trees, especially
injury that may occur to oak trees, because of disturbance within the drip
line.
      2.   No subdivision streets shall be accepted by the village without a
letter of compliance by the plan commission/zoning board of appeals stating the
landscaping is in acceptable condition. (Ord. 2011-942, 7-14-2011; amd. Ord.
2019-1210, 6-13-2019)
11-3-12: PARKWAY GRADING AND SEEDING:
Parkways between right of way line and the pavement edge on roadways and
roadway backslopes outside the right of way and drainage easements shall be
graded smooth and topped with at least four inches (4") of black dirt after
compacting and removal of brush or trees that cannot be saved, boulders and
such. Such areas shall be seeded or sodded in accordance with section 642 or
644 of the state standard specifications. If seeded, seeding mixtures shall be
class I or class II. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
11-3-13: MONUMENTS:
   A.   Reference Monuments: Permanent reference monuments shall be placed in
such locations as are designated by the village engineer. Such permanent
reference monuments shall be stone or reinforced concrete at least thirty six
inches (36") in length and six inches (6") square with suitable center point
and shall be set flush with the ground and planted in such a manner that they
will not be moved by frost.
   B.   Metal Monuments: Metal monuments, three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter
and twenty four inches (24") in length of galvanized or wrought iron, shall be
placed in the ground at all lot corners, intersections of streets,
intersections of streets and alleys with plat boundary lines. All monuments
shall be properly set in the ground before the streets and alleys are accepted
for public maintenance.
   C.   Street Name Signs: Street name signs of a type approved by the village
board shall be provided at the developer's cost at all street intersections.
(Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
11-3-14: PUBLIC OPEN SPACES AND SITES:
Whenever a tract to be subdivided includes a proposed site for a park,
playground, school or other public use, such space shall be suitably
incorporated by the developer into his subdivision plan after proper
determination by the plan commission/zoning board of appeals and the
appropriate public agency involved in the acquisition and use of each such as
to its necessity.
   A.   Requirements For Adequate Open Space:
      1.   Construction of any kind within a floodplain shall be subject to the
floodplain ordinance of the village 1 .
      2.   Whenever school sites or parks may be needed, the developer is
required to open negotiations with the public authority involved as to the
possibility of an agreement between the two (2) parties.
   B.   Acquisition Of Land For Public Use: The plan commission/zoning board of
appeals shall consider all tentative subdivision plans and any or all adopted
or proposed studies related thereto to determine the need for acquisition for
public use any of the land included in the said tentative subdivision plan for:
highway or street right of way; public school and public sites; parks,
playgrounds, other recreational areas; or other public purposes as provided by
law.
   C.   Refusal Of Areas Not Suitable For Public Use: Whenever a tentative plan
includes a proposed dedication of land to public use and the plan commission/
zoning board of appeals finds that such land is not required or suitable for
public use, the plan commission/zoning board of appeals may refuse to approve
such proposed dedication, and may require the rearrangement of lots in the
proposed subdivision to include such land. (Ord. 0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 12 of this code.
11-3-15: PROPERTY OWNER DISCLOSURE:
As part of the submittal documents, the owner of the property upon which the
subdivision is located shall furnish in all instances an affidavit of property
owner interest stating the aggregate total area of said property and all other
lands contiguous to said property in which the owner holds an interest. The
applicability of the water detention requirements will be based on the total
contiguous area in which an interest is held by the owner. The affidavit shall
also state whether or not the owner of the subdivision had any interest at any
time during the previous two (2) years. The owner shall also covenant and agree
that if, within five (5) years after the issuance of a development permit, he
acquires any interest in any land contiguous to the subdivision, the owner
shall provide for stormwater detention for the entire aggregate area. All the
above shall apply only to those subdivisions which, because of the size of
their land area, are exempt from the stormwater detention requirements. (Ord.
0-77-57A, 2-9-1977)
11-3-16: INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS; MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE:
   A.   Inspections: All public improvements proposed to be made under the
provisions of this title shall be inspected during the course of construction
by the village engineer or a duly appointed assistant. All fees and costs
connected with the review and approval of plans and specifications, soil tests,
compaction tests, inspections, documents and plats shall be paid for by the
developer.
   B.   As Built Drawings: The developer is also required to furnish as built
drawings, at his expense, as required under subsection 11-3-5-3G of this
chapter.
   C.   Maintenance Guarantee Of Improvements: As a condition of acceptance of
all improvements, the village shall be furnished with a maintenance guarantee
bond in the amount of thirty percent (30%) of the cost of the improvements to
guarantee the continued acceptability of the improvements. The bond shall be in
a form approved by the attorney for the village and shall remain in effect for
a minimum of two (2) years' duration. After the completion of all of the
improvements required by this title and by the ordinances of the village, the
irrevocable letter of credit described in subsection 11-2-2B9 of this title may
be used to satisfy, in whole or in part, the maintenance guarantee bond
obligations set forth in this title, provided that it is an amount not less
than the thirty percent (30%) requirement established herein. (Ord. 2004-726,
9-9-2004)
CHAPTER 4
DEDICATION OF LANDS FOR PUBLIC USE
SECTION:
11-4-1: Park Land Dedications
11-4-1-1: Criteria For Requiring Park And Recreation Land Dedication
11-4-1-2: Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of Park Sites
11-4-1-3: Density Formula
11-4-2: School Site Dedications
11-4-2-1: Criteria For Requiring School Site Dedication
11-4-2-2: Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of School Sites
11-4-2-3: Density Formula
11-4-3: Fire/Rescue Land Dedications
11-4-3-1: Criteria For Requiring Fire/Rescue Land Dedication
11-4-3-2: Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of Fire/Rescue Sites
11-4-3-3: Density Formula
11-4-4: Library Land Dedications
11-4-4-1: Criteria For Requiring Library Land Dedication
11-4-4-2: Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of Library Sites
11-4-4-3: Density Formula
11-4-5: Reserved
11-4-6: Reserved
11-4-7: General Requirements For All Dedications Of Land For Public Use
11-4-7-1: Criteria For Requiring A Cash Contribution In Lieu Of Dedication Of
School, Park, Library And Fire/Rescue Sites
11-4-7-2: Consumer Price Index
11-4-7-3: Density Formula
11-4-7-4: Reservation Of Additional Land
11-4-7-5: Combining With Adjoining Developments
11-4-7-6: Requirements For Dedicated Land
11-4-7-7: Condition To Annexation
11-4-8: Objections
11-4-8-1: Duties Of The Plan Commission
11-4-8-2: Information And Services To Be Used
11-4-8-3: Procedure For Resolving An Objection
11-4-8-4: Costs And Fees
11-4-9: Requirements And Conditions Of Benefiting Districts
11-4-10: Time Of Payment
11-4-11: Miscellaneous
11-4-12: Agreement Regarding The Receipt Of Developer Subdivision Contributions
And Indemnification Agreement
11-4-13: Agreement Between Owner And Village To Delay Payment Of Cash
Contributions
11-4-14: Table Of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit
11-4-1: PARK LAND DEDICATIONS:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a final plat
of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will be required to
dedicate land for park and recreational purposes, to serve the immediate and
future needs of the residents of the development, or cash contribution in lieu
of actual land dedication, or a combination of both at the option of the
village, in accordance with the following criteria and formula as set forth in
section
11-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-1-1: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING PARK AND RECREATION LAND DEDICATION:
   A.   Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed
development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for
dedication. The total requirement shall be eleven (11.0) acres of land per one
thousand (1,000) of ultimate population in accordance with the following
classifications:
 
Types Of Recreation Area    Minimum Size Range       Acres Per 1,000 People
Neighborhood playground     5.0 acres                2.5
Neighborhood park           3.5 acres                2.0
District wide park or play  4.0 acres                2.5
field
Community wide recreation   12 acres up to 30 acres  4.0
park
                                                                   
                           Total                    11.0
 
This contribution and/or dedication are based upon a review of available data,
studies and literature, including, but not limited to, the requirements of
surrounding communities. They shall be presumed to be correct and accurate and
shall be used in calculating cash contributions herein unless timely objected
to as provided herein. Objections to this section shall be made in accordance
with section
11-4-8 of this chapter. Failure to timely object to these requirements in
strict accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
   B.   Location: The comprehensive park and recreation plan and the "Standards
By Types Of Recreation And Park Areas" as adopted by the South Barrington park
district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A neighborhood park
site of not less than five (5) acres shall be considered a requirement. A
central location which will serve equally the entire development is more
desirable. In large developments, these sites can be located throughout the
development according to established standards for park area distances.
   C.   Credit For Private Open Spaces And Recreation Areas: When subdividers
or developers provide their own open space for recreation areas and facilities,
it has the effect of reducing the demand for local public recreational
services. Depending on the size of the development, a portion of the park and
recreation area in subdivisions or planned unit developments may, at the option
of the board of trustees, be provided in the form of "private" open space in
lieu of dedicated "public" open space. Such private open space may include
water areas or land areas or a combination of both determined to be suitable
for recreation purposes. The extent of such credit shall be determined by the
board of trustees after consultation with the board of park commissioners of
the South Barrington park district, based upon the needs of the projected
residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land for the
general area. The village will notify the park district of a developer's
request for credit for private open spaces and recreation areas at least
fifteen (15) days prior to the plan commission meeting at which said request
will be reviewed.
In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply
a substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of
recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer as part of his
obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including specification of facilities
to be installed, must be approved by the village, and before any credit is
given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or developer must guarantee
that these private recreation areas will be permanently maintained for such use
by the execution of the appropriate legal documents. Private "swimming clubs"
are included in this provision. A copy of "Suggested Criteria For Swimming Pool
Development" as adopted by the South Barrington park district shall be used for
the guidance of the developer. When an adjustment for private recreation areas
is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total park land dedication
that would have been required from the subdivision or planned unit development
and then subtract the credit to be given; however, in no event shall the credit
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total park land dedication that would have
been required. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-1-2: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF PARK SITES:
Where the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be
practical, or when the proposed park site is determined by the village and
South Barrington park district to be inappropriate for park and recreational
purposes, the village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash
contribution in lieu of the land dedication required. Such cash contribution in
lieu of land shall be made in accordance with procedures in section
11-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-1-3: DENSITY FORMULA:
The table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit, prepared by
Illinois School Consulting Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc.,
Naperville, Illinois, and as updated from time to time by the consulting firm
shown in section
11-4-14 of this chapter, constitutes projections of anticipated population
density and is generally indicative of current and short range projected trends
in family size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount
of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu
thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or
developer pursuant to section
11-4-8 of this chapter.
A "bedroom" as used in this section shall include any room which may be used
for bedroom purposes, such as a den, study, loft or extra room located on any
floor in a dwelling unit which may be converted into a sleeping area and is not
clearly identified for some other specific purpose such as a kitchen (1 per
unit), dining room (1 per unit), living room (1 per unit), bathroom(s) and
family room (1 per unit).
The most recent version of the table of estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit shall be used in calculating any cash in lieu of land dedication
herein unless objected to as provided in section
11-4-8 of this chapter. Objections to the table of estimated ultimate
population per dwelling unit shall be made in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter to the plan commission. Failure to object to the table
of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the table
of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit listed herein, he shall
submit his own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to
be generated from the subdivision or planned development, and in that event
final determination of the density formula shall be made in accordance with
section
11-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-2: SCHOOL SITE DEDICATIONS:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or a final plat of
planned unit development, the subdivider or developer will be required to
dedicate land for school sites, to serve the immediate and future needs of the
residents of the development, or cash contribution in lieu of actual
dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the village, in
accordance with the following criteria and formula and as set forth in section
11-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-2-1: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION:
   A.   Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate number of students to be
generated by a subdivision or planned unit development shall bear directly upon
the amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. The land
dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of: 1)
estimated children to be served in each such school classification over the 2)
maximum recommended number of students to be served in each such school
classification as stated herein, and then applying such ratio to the 3) portion
of said minimum recommended number of acres for a school site of each such
school classification as stated herein. The product thereof shall be the acres
of land deemed needed to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the
estimated increased children in each such school classification.
   B.   School Classifications And Size Of School Sites: School classifications
and size of school sites within the village which shall be required to the
subdivider/developer shall be determined in accordance with the following
criteria:
   SCHOOL DISTRICT 220
 
                           Maximum Number Of Students Appropriate Number Of
School Classification By   For Each Such School       Acres Of Land For Each
Grades                     Classification             School Site Of Such
                                                      Classification
Elementary schools, grades
kindergarten through 5th   500 students               15 acres
or 6th
Junior high schools,
grades 6th through 8th or  800 students               25 acres
7th and 8th
                           2,500 students             72 acres
High schools, grades 9th   500 (addition only)        15 acres adjacent to
through 12th               3,000 students             present high school
                                                      87 acres total
 
   SCHOOL DISTRICT 300
 
                           Maximum Number Of Students Appropriate Number Of
School Classification By   For Each Such School       Acres Of Land For Each
Grades                     Classification             School Site Of Such
                                                      Classification
Elementary schools, grades
kindergarten through 5th   600 students               15 acres
or 6th
Junior high schools,
grades 6th through 8th or  900 students               30 acres
7th and 8th
High schools, grades 9th   1,800 students             60 acres
through 12th
 
This contribution and/or dedication are based upon a review of available data,
studies and literature, including, but not limited to, the requirements of
surrounding communities. They shall be presumed to be correct and accurate and
shall be used in calculating cash contributions herein unless timely objected
to as provided herein. Objections to this section shall be made in accordance
with section
11-4-8 of this chapter. Failure to timely object to these requirements in
strict accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
   C.   Location: The comprehensive school plan and/or the standards adopted by
the affected school district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites.
(Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-2-2: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF SCHOOL SITES:
Where the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be
practical or when the available land is inappropriate for a school site, the
village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in
lieu of the land dedication required. Such cash contribution in lieu of land
shall be made in accordance with procedures in section
11-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-2-3: DENSITY FORMULA:
The table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit, prepared by
Illinois School Consulting Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc.,
Naperville, Illinois, and as updated from time to time by the consulting firm
shown in section
11-4-14 of this chapter, constitutes projections of anticipated population
density and is generally indicative of current and short range projected trends
in family size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount
of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu
thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or
developer pursuant to section
11-4-8 of this chapter.
A "bedroom" as used in this section shall include any room which may be used
for bedroom purposes, such as a den, study, loft or extra room located on any
floor in a dwelling unit which may be converted into a sleeping area and is not
clearly identified for some other specific purpose such as a kitchen (1 per
unit), dining room (1 per unit), living room (1 per unit), bathroom(s) and
family room (1 per unit).
The most recent version of the table of estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit shall be used in calculating any cash in lieu of land dedication
herein unless objected to as provided in section
11-4-8 of this chapter. Objections to the table of estimated ultimate
population per dwelling unit shall be made in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter to the plan commission. Failure to object to the table
of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the table
of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit listed herein, he shall
submit his own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to
be generated from the subdivision or planned development, and in that event
final determination of the density formula shall be made in accordance with
section
11-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-3: FIRE/RESCUE LAND DEDICATIONS:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a final plat
of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will be required to
dedicate land for fire/rescue facilities, to serve the immediate and future
needs of the residents of the development, or cash contribution in lieu of
actual land dedication, or a combination of both at the option of the village,
in accordance with the following criteria and formula and as set forth in
section
11-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-3-1: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING FIRE/RESCUE LAND DEDICATION:
   A.   Requirement And Population Ratio: The development of new subdivisions
and planned developments increases the demands upon the existing fire/rescue
protection service provided in a proportionate and ascertainable manner and
create the need for additional fire/rescue, firehouse and training sites.
Studies reveal the need to develop additional fire/rescue protection services.
Therefore, as a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a
final plat of a planned development, each developer or subdivider shall be
required to dedicate land for fire/rescue facilities to serve the immediate and
future needs of the residents of the development or shall be required to make a
cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication.
The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear directly on the
amount of land required for a fire/rescue site dedication. The village hereby
finds that the total requirement shall be three (3) acres of land per ten
thousand (10,000) of ultimate population. This requirement is based upon a
review of available data as well as the fire/rescue district's own internal
examination of fire/rescue utilization and needs.
This contribution and/or dedication are based upon a review of available data,
studies and literature, including, but not limited to, the requirements of
surrounding communities. They shall be presumed to be correct and accurate and
shall be used in calculating cash contributions herein unless timely objected
to as provided herein. Objections to this section shall be made in accordance
with section
11-4-8 of this chapter. Failure to timely object to these requirements in
strict accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
   B.   Location: The appropriate fire district in consultation with the
village shall determine the location of any new fire/rescue facility and/or
training site. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-3-2: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF FIRE/RESCUE SITES:
Where the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be
practical or when the available land is inappropriate for a fire/rescue site,
the village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash
contribution in lieu of the land dedication required. Such cash contribution in
lieu of land shall be made in accordance with procedures in section
11-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-3-3: DENSITY FORMULA:
The table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit, prepared by
Illinois School Consulting Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc.,
Naperville, Illinois, and as updated from time to time by the consulting firm
contained in section
11-4-14 of this chapter, constitutes projections of anticipated population
density and is generally indicative of current and short range projected trends
in family size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount
of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu
thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or
developer pursuant to section
11-4-8 of this chapter.
A "bedroom" as used in this section shall include any room which may be used
for bedroom purposes, such as a den, study, loft or extra room located on any
floor in a dwelling unit which may be converted into a sleeping area and is not
clearly identified for some other specific purpose such as a kitchen (1 per
unit), dining room (1 per unit), living room (1 per unit), bathroom(s) and
family room (1 per unit).
The most recent version of the table of estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit shall be used in calculating any cash in lieu of land dedication
herein unless objected to as provided in section
11-4-8 of this chapter. Objections to the table of estimated ultimate
population per dwelling unit shall be made in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter to the plan commission. Failure to object to the table
of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the table
of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit listed herein, he shall
submit his own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to
be generated from the subdivision or planned development, and in that event
final determination of the density formula shall be made in accordance with
section
11-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-4: LIBRARY LAND DEDICATIONS:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a final plat
of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will be required to
dedicate land for library purposes, to serve the immediate and future needs of
the residents of the development, or cash contribution in lieu of actual land
dedication, or a combination of both at the option of the village, in
accordance with the following criteria and formula and as set forth in section
11-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-4-1: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING LIBRARY LAND DEDICATION:
   A.   Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed
development shall bear directly on the amount of land required for dedication.
New development and increased population create greater demands for adequate
and efficient library services to meet the educational, cultural and
recreational needs of the citizenry. They create the need for additional
library facilities. The village hereby finds that the total requirement shall
be 2.5 acres of land per ten thousand (10,000) of ultimate population.
These requirements are based upon a review of available data, studies and
literature on the subject, as well as the library district's own internal
examination of library utilization and needs. They shall be presumed as the
appropriate acreage requirements and shall be used in calculating any cash in
lieu of land contribution herein unless timely objected to as provided herein.
Objections to these acreage requirements for any particular development shall
be made in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter. Failure to timely object to these acreage requirements
in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
   B.   Location: The location of any new library facility shall be determined
by the library district after consultation with the village. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-
8-2004)
11-4-4-2: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF LIBRARY SITES:
Where the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be
practical or when the available land is inappropriate for a library site, the
village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in
lieu of the land dedication required. Such cash contribution in lieu of land
shall be made in accordance with procedures in section
11-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-4-3: DENSITY FORMULA:
The table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit, prepared by
Illinois School Consulting Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc.,
Naperville, Illinois, and as updated from time to time by the consulting firm
shown in section
11-4-14 of this chapter, constitutes projections of anticipated population
density and is generally indicative of current and short range projected trends
in family size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount
of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu
thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or
developer pursuant to section
11-4-8 of this chapter.
A "bedroom" as used in this section shall include any room which may be used
for bedroom purposes, such as a den, study, loft or extra room located on any
floor in a dwelling unit which may be converted into a sleeping area and is not
clearly identified for some other specific purpose such as a kitchen (1 per
unit), dining room (1 per unit), living room (1 per unit), bathroom(s) and
family room (1 per unit).
The most recent version of the table of estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit shall be used in calculating any cash in lieu of land dedication
herein unless objected to as provided in section
11-4-8 of this chapter. Objections to the table of estimated ultimate
population per dwelling unit shall be made in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter to the plan commission. Failure to object to the table
of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the table
of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit listed herein, he shall
submit his own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to
be generated from the subdivision or planned development, and in that event
final determination of the density formula shall be made in accordance with
section
11-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-5: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-6: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-7: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL DEDICATIONS OF LAND FOR PUBLIC USE:
11-4-7-1: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CASH CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF DEDICATION OF
SCHOOL, PARK, LIBRARY AND FIRE/RESCUE SITES:
   A.   Cash Contribution Required; Held In Trust: When the development is
small and the resulting site is too small to be practical, or when the
available land is inappropriate for park and recreational purposes or school,
fire/rescue or library sites or is in conflict with the approved comprehensive
school plan, the village, with the concurrence of the affected district, shall
require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the
land dedication.
The cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication shall be
held in trust by the village and shall be used solely for the acquisition of
park and recreation land as classified above, which will be available to serve
the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or
development or for the expansion of other existing local park and recreation
lands that already serve such needs or for any other lawful park purpose or for
any park purpose agreed to by the owner, subdivider or developer at the time of
platting.
The cash contribution in lieu of dedication of school sites shall be held in
trust by the village and shall be used solely for the acquisition of land for
school sites to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that
subdivision or development or for the expansion of any existing school site
that already serves such needs or for any other lawful school purpose or for
any school purpose agreed to by the owner, subdivider or developer at the time
of platting.
The cash contribution in lieu of fire/rescue sites shall be held in trust by
the village and shall be used for the acquisition of land for fire/rescue
facilities or training sites to serve the immediate and future needs of the
residents of that subdivision or development or for the expansion of any other
existing fire station or training site that already serves such needs or for
any other lawful fire/rescue purpose agreed to by the subdivider or developer
at the time of platting.
The cash contribution in lieu of a library site dedication shall be held in
trust by the village and shall be used for the acquisition of library land as
required herein, which will be available to serve the immediate or future needs
of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the expansion of
existing or proposed library facilities that already serve or will serve such
needs or for any other lawful purpose agreed to by the owner, subdivider or
developer at the time of platting.
   B.   Refund: If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of dedication of
library and/or school sites or park and recreation or fire/rescue land
dedication is not expended for the purposes set forth herein within thirteen
(13) years from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded by the entity holding
the contribution to the record owner of the subdivided land at the time of the
refund. If there is more than one record owner of the subdivided land or of the
land that comprises the planned development, as applicable, such record owners
shall share in the refund pro rata based on the cash contributions originally
paid by each property.
   C.   Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be
based on the "fair market value" of the acres of land in the area that
otherwise would have been dedicated as park and recreation, school sites, fire/
rescue and library. The fair market value, on a per acre basis, shall assume,
unless determined otherwise pursuant to section
11-4-8 of this chapter, that the land is zoned in a one-family dwelling
residential zoning district subdivided with appropriate frontage on a dedicated
street or road, has all appropriate utilities available, is improved as set
forth in section
11-4-7-6 of this chapter, and is otherwise property capable of being used for
residential development. Based upon a study of comparable real estate
transactions, it has been determined that the present "fair market value" of
such improved land in and surrounding the village is, as of the effective date
hereof, as follows:
      1.   Ninety eight thousand dollars ($98,000.00) per acre for purposes of
locating a park.
      2.   One hundred ninety six thousand dollars ($196,000.00) per acre for
purposes of locating an elementary or junior high school within School
Districts 220 and 300 and locating a high school within School District 300.
      3.   Three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,000.00) per acre for
purposes of adding on to the existing high school in School District 220.
      4.   One hundred ninety six thousand dollars ($196,000.00) per acre for
purposes of locating a fire station.
      5.   Three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,000.00) per acre for
purposes of locating and/or adding on to the existing library.
These figures shall be adjusted by the village board from time to time with
appropriate study and documentation. The "fair market value" as defined above
shall be used in calculating any cash in lieu of land dedication herein unless
timely objected to as provided in section
11-4-8 of this chapter. Objections to the "fair market value" as defined above
shall be made in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter to the plan commission. Failure to timely object to the
"fair market value" as defined above in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
   D.   Criteria For Requiring Dedication And A Contribution: There will be
situations in subdivisions or planned developments when a combination of land
dedication and a cash contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These
occasions will arise when: 1) only a portion of the land to be developed is
proposed as the location for a park, school site, fire/rescue, library (that
portion of the land within the subdivision falling within a park, school site,
fire/rescue, library; location shall be dedicated as a site as stated above,
and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional
land that would have been required to be dedicated); or 2) a major part of the
local park, school site, fire/rescue, library, has already been acquired by the
particular district or village and only a small portion of land is needed from
the development to complete the site (the remaining portion shall be required
by dedication, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof for the rest of the
required land shall be required). (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-7-2: CONSUMER PRICE INDEX:
The fair market value identified in section
11-4-7-1 of this chapter shall be subject to a "CPI adjustment" which shall be
calculated on January 1, 2003, as a base year adjusted on January 1 in each
year thereafter. Annually, the "fair market value" shall be adjusted to an
amount equal to the "fair market value" multiplied by a fraction, the numerator
of which is the "all items" "Consumer Price Index For Urban Consumers (1982-84
= 100)" for Chicago, Illinois, published by the United States department of
labor's bureau of labor statistics ("CPI") for the month of December preceding
the adjustment and the denominator of which is the CPI for the month of
December 2002. If any index is calculated from a base different from the base
period 1982-84 = 100, such index shall be converted to a base period of 1982-84
= 100 by use of a conversion factor supplied by said bureau of labor
statistics. If the CPI is discontinued or replaced, such other governmental
cost of living index or computation which replaces the CPI shall be used in
order to obtain substantially the same result as would be obtained if the CPI
had not been discontinued or replaced. (Ord. 0-2007-839, 12-13-2007)
11-4-7-3: DENSITY FORMULA:
The table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit, prepared by
Illinois School Consulting Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc.,
Naperville, Illinois, and as updated from time to time by the consulting firm
shown in section
11-4-14 of this chapter, constitutes projections of anticipated population
density and is generally indicative of current and short range projected trends
in family size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount
of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu
thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or
developer pursuant to section
11-4-8 of this chapter.
A "bedroom" as used in this section shall include any room which may be used
for bedroom purposes, such as a den, study, loft or extra room located on any
floor in a dwelling unit which may be converted into a sleeping area and is not
clearly identified for some other specific purpose such as a kitchen (1 per
unit), dining room (1 per unit), living room (1 per unit), bathroom(s) and
family room (1 per unit).
The most recent version of the table of estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit shall be used in calculating any cash in lieu of land dedication
herein unless objected to as provided in section
11-4-8 of this chapter. Objections to the table of estimated ultimate
population per dwelling unit shall be made in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter to the plan commission. Failure to object to the table
of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the table
of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit listed herein, he shall
submit his own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to
be generated from the subdivision or planned development, and in that event
final determination of the density formula shall be made in accordance with
section
11-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-7-4: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND:
When the comprehensive plan or the standards of the village call for a larger
amount of park and recreational land, school sites, fire/rescue and library, or
in a particular subdivision or planned development than the developer is
required to dedicate pursuant to this section
11-4-7, the land needed beyond the developer's dedication shall be set aside
and reserved by the developer for subsequent purchase by the village (at a
price determined at the time of reservation) or other public body designated by
the village, provided that such acquisition is made within two (2) years from
the date of approval of the final plat. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-7-5: COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS:
Where appropriate, a public open space or a school site that is to be dedicated
should, if possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments
in order to produce usable recreation areas and/or school sites without undue
hardship on a particular developer. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-7-6: REQUIREMENTS FOR DEDICATED LAND:
   A.   Topography And Grading: The slope, topography and geology of the
dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended
purpose. Wetlands and floodplains may be accepted for village ownership and
maintenance, but shall not serve as a credit toward the required park site
dedication. Stormwater detention areas shall not be accepted for village
ownership and maintenance, and the portion of a detention area designed to
function primarily as a component of the storm water control system shall not
serve as a credit toward the required park site dedication. A park site shall
be not less than one acre in area. The village board reserves the right,
however, in its sole discretion, to accept in whole or in part, certain areas
such as, but not limited to, tree massings, prairie remnants, high quality or
unique wetlands, or other natural features as all or part of the required park
site dedication in furtherance of open space preservation that may be unique to
a given parcel or development. Wetlands, floodplains, detention areas,
retention areas and areas of steep slope shall not be accepted as park, school,
fire/rescue or library sites and shall not serve as a credit toward the
required park, school, fire/rescue or library site cash contribution in lieu of
land dedication.
In addition, the following site conditions and preparation standards shall be
met:
      1.   Slope:
         a.   Should not vary greatly in appearance from existing and adjacent
slopes;
         b.   Optimum slopes range from two percent (2%) minimum to five
percent (5%) maximum. No less than two percent (2%) slope is acceptable under
any circumstances;
         c.   Maximum allowable slope is ten percent (10%), except under
special conditions where greater slopes are desirable to enhance the use of the
site; and
         d.   On site drainage patterns shall be designated and constructed to:
            (1)   Ensure flow toward swales; and
            (2)   Ensure drainage away from active areas.
      2.   Grading:
         a.   Rough grading shall be completed at time of rough grading of
adjacent contiguous area;
         b.   Grading shall comply with village approved plans;
         c.   Subgrade shall be graded and compacted so it will parallel
finished grade;
         d.   Subgrade material shall be loosened and fine graded to a depth of
two (2) to four inches (4"). All stones over four inches (4") in size, sticks,
debris, rubbish and other foreign substances shall be removed; and
         e.   Finished grades shall be uniform in slope between points for
which elevations have been established.
      3.   Soils:
         a.   Soils shall not differ from those naturally occurring;
         b.   Soils shall not offer any restriction to the ultimate use of the
property;
         c.   Topsoil shall be spread evenly and lightly compacted to a minimum
depth of six inches (6") over the entire site;
         d.   Topsoil must be good, friable soils with good tillage and shall
be without any admixture of subsoil, clay, gravel, stones, debris, refuse, sand
or other subsurface elements;
         e.   Topsoil shall not be placed in a muddy or frozen condition;
         f.   Topsoil shall contain no toxic substances which may be harmful to
plant growth; and
         g.   Topsoil shall be spread no later than the placement of topsoil on
the first lot adjacent to the site.
      4.   Seeding:
         a.   All proposed park and recreational, school sites, and library,
shall be seeded and an acceptable stand of grass or vegetation established
prior to dedication of the area to the village;
         b.   Village approved ground covers and grasses shall be used for all
park and recreational areas suitable for the nature of the activity planned to
occur thereon;
         c.   Seeding shall be completed during the fall or spring planting
times, depending upon the recommended seed planting specifications;
         d.   Seeding shall be on moderately dry soil on a seedbed which will
easily accept and nurture germination of seeds;
         e.   Seeding shall be watered sufficiently so that the vegetation
becomes reasonably established; and
         f.   The developer shall be responsible for making necessary
reparations to the site caused by erosion or other damage. Reparations shall be
completed prior to acceptance of the site.
   B.   Improved Sites: All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for
full service of electricity, natural gas, telephone and cable television, and
streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter, where applicable), as
applicable to the location of the site, and shall otherwise comply with the
requirements of the village ordinances and codes. The landscaping normally
included within the definition of "improved" sites under said ordinances and
codes may be deleted due to the delay time between dedication of any such
school site and the construction of school facilities thereon, except for
ground cover as required in this section. The site shall have direct access to
a fully improved street across at least twenty percent (20%) of the distance of
its perimeter. Park, school and library sites should ideally be accessible by a
bicycle/pedestrian trail, and any such access route onto the property shall be
at least twenty five feet (25') wide. Such access routes should normally be
dedications and not easements, depending on which entity of government is to be
responsible for said routes. Any vehicular access route leading to or on the
site shall be of sufficient size and good geometry to properly accommodate
vehicles that will access and traverse the site, including, but not limited to,
good principles of traffic circulation, accommodation of one-way and/or two-way
drives for school buses, separation of bus traffic from passenger automobile
traffic, bus drop off areas separate from publicly dedicated streets, guest and
employee parking areas, and the like. Such off street access routes, drives,
drop offs and parking areas will not be dedicated rights of way and shall be
the responsibility of the owner of the site to maintain.
   C.   Environmental Risk Audit: Prior to the conveyance of any land to the
village, park district, school district, fire protection district or library
district, the intended grantee shall be furnished with an environmental risk
audit prepared by an environmental professional meeting the minimum
requirements of 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii), certified
to and acceptable to the grantee, assuring the grantee that there are no
"hazardous substance(s)" (as defined hereinafter) on, under, to or from the
land. Said environmental audit shall be what is commonly referred to as a phase
I environmental audit, which shall meet the minimum requirements for a
preacquisition audit as set forth in 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.2(j)
(6)(E)(iii)(v).
In the event the phase I environmental audit does not conclude there is no
presence or likely presence of a release of substantial threat of a release of
hazardous substance(s) or pesticide on, under, to or from the land, the grantee
shall furnish a phase II environmental audit as set forth in 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii)(vi), including a soil toxicity analysis
and recommendation from said environmental professional, meeting the minimum
requirements of 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii), which
concludes that there is no presence or likely presence of a release or
substantial threat of a release of hazardous substance(s) on, under, to or from
the land, and certifying that, in the judgment of said environmental
professional, there is no reasonable probability that the land contains any
hazardous substance(s) in violation of any federal or state environmental
standards.
In the event said phase II environmental audit and/or soil toxicity analysis
discloses the presence or likely presence of a release or a substantial threat
of a release of any hazardous substance(s) at, on, under, to or from the land
to the conveyed, the grantor shall first cause all such hazardous substance(s)
to be removed at its sole cost and expense in accordance with all federal,
state and local environmental laws, rules and regulations and furnish the
intended grantee with a "no further remediation letter" from the governmental
agencies having jurisdiction over the cleanup prior to conveyance of any of the
land to the intended grantee.
Prior to the conveyance of the land, the subdivider or developer, as the case
may be, and the owner of the land to be conveyed, shall execute and deliver to
the intended grantee an environmental indemnification agreement, which form has
been approved by the village attorney, agreeing to defend, indemnify and hold
the village, its corporate authorities, officers, officials, employees, agents,
successors and assigns, and the park, fire/rescue, school district, or library
as the case may be, and its respective officers, officials, employees, agents,
successors and assigns, harmless from and against any and all liability,
claims, damages, causes of action and expenses arising out of the presence of
any hazardous substance(s) in, under or upon said land to be conveyed prior to
the date of conveyance.
"Hazardous substance(s)" includes without limitation:
      1.   Those substances included in the definitions of hazardous
substances, extremely hazardous substances, hazardous materials, toxic
substances, toxic chemicals, toxic wastes, hazardous chemicals, hazardous
wastes, solid waste and pesticides in CERLA, SARA, RCRA, HSWA, TSCA, OSHA,
FWPCE, Illinois pesticides act 1 , Illinois responsible property transfer act 2
and the Illinois hazardous materials transportation act 3 , 49 USC section 1801
et seq., as amended, and as they may be amended in the future, and in the
regulations promulgated pursuant to said laws.
      2.   Those substances defined in section 1003 of the Illinois
environmental protection act and in the regulations promulgated pursuant to
said act or other Illinois laws pertaining thereto.
      3.   Those substances listed in the U.S. department of transportation
table (49 CFR 172.101 and amendments thereto) or by the environmental
protection agency (or any successor agency) as hazardous substances (40 CFR
part 302 and amendments thereto).
      4.   Such other substances, materials and wastes which are to become
regulated under applicable local, state or federal law, or which are classified
as hazardous or toxic under federal, state or local laws, ordinances or
regulations.
      5.   Any material waste or substance which is: a) asbestos, b)
polychlorinated biphenyls, c) designated as a hazardous substance pursuant to
section 311 of the clean water act, 33 USC section 1251 et seq., (33 USC
section 1321) or listed pursuant to section 307 of the clean water act (33 USC
section 1317), d) explosives, or e) radioactive materials.
      6.   For purposes of this subsection C, hazardous substances shall
include petroleum or its byproducts as regulated under RCRA and any applicable
state law or regulations.
   D.   Suitability Of Soils At Site: The subdivider or developer, at its own
cost or expense, shall provide to the village, park district, school district,
fire district or library district soil boring data, soil compaction test
results and such other engineering studies, data and information pertaining to
the proposed park and recreational, fire/rescue, school, library or site, which
the village, park district, school district, fire district or library district
may request to enable it to determine the suitability of the proposed land
dedication for park and recreation, school sites, fire/rescue, or library. The
village shall have the right to reject any site which the village, in
accordance with sound engineering practices, is not suitable for site purposes.
   E.   Title Insurance, Survey, Assessment Plats: Each deed or other
instrument conveying land to the village shall be accompanied by:
      1.   A written commitment issued by a title insurer licensed to do
business in the state to insure the grantee's title to such real estate in an
amount equal to the value computed pursuant to section
11-4-7-1 of this chapter, with extended coverage over the general exceptions to
title and subject only to:
         a.   Real estate taxes not yet due and payable,
         b.   Covenants, conditions and restrictions which do not prohibit the
use of the subject property for library, school or park and recreational use,
         c.   Utility easements located within twenty feet (20') of the
boundary lines of the subject real estate (except where approved on the final
engineering plans approved by the village engineer),
         d.   Drainage ditches, feeders and laterals,
         e.   Underground pipe or other conduit, and
         f.   Acts done or suffered by or judgments against the grantees;
      2.   A current ALTA boundary line survey, certified to the grantee by a
licensed Illinois land surveyor to be in compliance with the American land
survey standards, showing no encroachments; and
      3.   Except in instances where the real estate is to be conveyed is a lot
in a recorded subdivision, an assessment plat and tax division petition in a
form acceptable to the appropriate village authorities so the land to be
conveyed can be assigned its own permanent real estate index number (PIN) for
exemption purposes.
In addition, monuments must be established and the land staked immediately
prior to dedication of the property. The subdivider or developer shall pay for
the cost of the owner's title insurance in said amount, the ALTA survey, the
assessment plat and any and all costs in connection with the tax division.
   F.   Real Estate Tax Escrow: The developer shall pay the general real estate
taxes on the land not yet due and payable as of the date of transfer, and shall
deposit a sum of money in escrow with the intended grantee's attorney or a
title company licensed to do business in the state of Illinois, which is
prorated as of the date of transfer on the basis of one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the tax assessor's latest assessed valuation, the latest known
equalization factors and the latest known tax rate on the land. In the event
the previous tax information or the previous tax bill includes other property,
then the amount to be deposited in escrow shall be adjusted ratably based on
the net acreage of the land compared to the net acreage of the other parcels
covered by said tax bills. After the land has been divided for real estate tax
purposes and has been conveyed to the intended grantee, the grantee shall
proceed with due diligence to apply for a real estate tax exemption on the
land. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 60/1 et seq.
2 1. 765 ILCS 90/1 et seq.
3 2. 430 ILCS 30/1 et seq.
11-4-7-7: CONDITION TO ANNEXATION:
The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof required by this
chapter shall also be required as a condition to the annexation of any land to
the village, and provisions therefor shall at a minimum be incorporated in any
annexation or preannexation agreement governing such land. However, the village
reserves the right to negotiate dedications of land or cash contributions in
lieu of land or a combination thereof greater than those set forth herein.
(Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-8: OBJECTIONS:
All objections relating to acreage requirements, presumptions as to fair market
value, the table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit or any
other application of this chapter to a particular subdivision or planned
development, shall first be referred to the plan commission for a hearing. An
objection must be made, if at all, prior to the approval of the final plat of
subdivision by the village. A failure to object by such time shall constitute a
waiver of the right to object to the provisions of section
11-4-7 of this chapter or any other provisions of this chapter. The procedure
for a hearing before the plan commission shall be as follows. (Ord. 2004-708,
4-8-2004)
11-4-8-1: DUTIES OF THE PLAN COMMISSION:
The plan commission shall serve in an advisory capacity and shall have the
following duties:
   A.   Advise and assist the village in resolving objections regarding the
table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit in section
11-4-14 of this chapter, the size of the park, school, fire/rescue, and library
sites in sections
11-4-1-1,
11-4-2-1,
11-4-3-1, and
11-4-4-1 of this chapter respectively, the fair market value of the land used
to calculate the cash contribution in section
11-4-7-1 of this chapter, or any other application of this chapter to a
particular subdivision or planned development.
   B.   The plan commission shall adopt procedural rules to be used by the plan
commission in carrying out the duties imposed by this section. (Ord. 2004-708,
4-8-2004)
11-4-8-2: INFORMATION AND SERVICES TO BE USED:
The village shall make available to the plan commission all professional
reports relating to the table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling
unit, the size of the library, fire/rescue, park and school sites and the fair
market value of land used in calculating these cash contributions. The plan
commission may also request that the village board retain the services of
professionals (attorneys, appraisers, statisticians, etc.) to assist in its
review of issues raised by any objection. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-8-3: PROCEDURE FOR RESOLVING AN OBJECTION:
   A.   Upon receipt of an objection, the village administrator shall place the
same on the next regular meeting agenda of the village board. Thereafter the
village board shall refer the objection to the plan commission and by
resolution to establish a hearing date.
   B.   The plan commission shall provide public notice of the hearing date to
consider the objection and shall notify affected library, fire protection,
school and park districts by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the
filing of the objection and of any hearing regarding same.
   C.   The objector shall publish notice of the hearing date once at least
thirty (30) days before but no more than sixty (60) days before the scheduled
date of the hearing. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the corporate limits of the village. The notice of public
hearing shall not appear in the part of the paper where legal notices or
classified ads appear. The notice shall not be smaller than one-quarter page of
a standard size or tabloid size newspaper. The objector shall send a copy of
said notice to all benefiting districts and to any person who has requested
said notice by certified mail (stamped at a U.S. postal service facility
showing the date of mailing) at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing
date.
   D.   The notice shall contain all of the following information:
      1.   The headline shall read:
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ON OBJECTION TO APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE REQUIRING THE
DEDICATION OF PARK LANDS, FIRE/RESCUE SITES, SCHOOL SITES, LIBRARY SITES, OR
PAYMENT OF THE CASH CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU THEREOF.
      2.   The date, time and location of the public hearing.
      3.   A statement that the purpose of the hearing is to consider the
objection to a component of the application of the ordinance requiring the
dedication of park lands, fire/rescue sites, school sites, library sites or
calculation of cash payments in lieu thereof.
      4.   A general description of the parcel(s), service area or areas within
the village that are the subject of the hearing.
      5.   A statement that the village shall make available to the public,
upon request, an easily understandable and detailed map of the parcel(s),
service area or areas to which the ordinance applies, and any other available
information about the objection.
      6.   A statement that any member of the public affected by the ordinance
or the parcel(s) or service area shall have the right to appear at the public
hearing and present testimony and/or evidence in support of or against the
objection.
   E.   A public hearing shall be held for the consideration of the objection.
In addition to the village, any affected park district, fire/rescue, school
district, library district, and provider shall be allowed to participate in
such hearing as a party thereto to present evidence, cross examine witnesses
and make arguments to the plan commission regarding the issues raised in the
objection. The plan commission shall make a recommendation to adopt, reject in
whole or in part, or modify the objection presented at the hearing, by written
report to the village, within sixty (60) days after the hearing. The village
shall then have at least sixty (60) but not more than one hundred twenty (120)
days to approve, disapprove or modify, by ordinance or resolution, the findings
in this chapter as it pertains to the development in question. (Ord. 2004-708,
4-8-2004)
11-4-8-4: COSTS AND FEES:
The objector shall bear all costs of the hearing before the plan commission,
including, but not limited to, attendance fees paid the plan commission
members, publication costs, professional consultants and any other expenses of
the village. The objector shall not be responsible for the expenses incurred by
any benefiting district with respect to the objection. Failure to promptly pay
expenses incurred by the village shall be cause to stay or defer any hearings,
meetings or actions by the village. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-9: REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS OF BENEFITING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Indemnification: As a condition to the village distributing land
dedications and/or cash contributions in lieu thereof, the appropriate district
shall execute an indemnification agreement in the form set forth in section
11-4-12 of this chapter.
   B.   Distribution: The cash contribution in lieu of land dedication imposed
by this chapter shall be collected and held by the village to be used for the
purposes set forth in this chapter. Such distributions shall be made not later
than April 15, July 15, October 15 and January 15 of all funds received by the
village in the prior quarter and accrued interest on all funds shall be the
property of the village to be utilized for the administration of this chapter.
Such distribution shall be conditioned upon the benefiting district being in
compliance with the conditions set forth in subsections A, C and D of this
section.
As a condition of distribution of these land dedications and/or cash
contributions in lieu of land dedications, the village shall require that the
park district, school district, fire/rescue provider, or library district,
benefiting from such land dedications and/or cash contributions conduct a needs
assessment and adopt a plan for acquisition of land and capital facilities
needed to accommodate growth.
   C.   Annual Report By Benefiting District: Within ninety (90) days of the
end of each fiscal year, every benefiting district that receives payments from
the village under this agreement shall submit a report to the village
describing the manner in which the payments have been used. This report shall
include information requested by the village, including, but not limited to:
The balance of funds held at the close of the prior fiscal year, the amount of
payments received during the fiscal year, the amount expended during the fiscal
year, the purpose of the expenditures and to whom paid, as well as the balance
of funds held by the benefiting district at the end of the fiscal year. When
this agreement provides that money turned over to the benefiting district is to
be used for a specific purpose or within a specific time period, the report
shall address those issues. If the benefiting district should fail to file such
a report with the village, the village may delay the payment of any additional
funds due the benefiting district until such time as a full report containing
adequate information is transmitted to the village.
   D.   Needs Assessment; Land And Capital Facilities Acquisition Plan:
      1.   A needs assessment shall contain the following information for each
district (park, fire/rescue provider, school, library):
         a.   A description of the nature and location of existing park, fire/
rescue, school, or library lands and existing capital facilities within each
district.
         b.   An identification of the capacity of each park, fire/rescue
facility, school building, library facility or site within the particular
district and of the number of students then enrolled in each school building.
         c.   A projection of the character and location of new development
that is expected to occur within each district or village during the succeeding
ten (10) year period. The district or village may obtain the information
necessary to make this projection from sources such as, but not limited to:
municipalities, other units of government, agencies and consultants.
         d.   An identification of the amount of lands that will be necessary
within the district and village in order to accommodate the demands of such
projected new development, and an estimate of the public grounds acquisition
costs that will be incurred or have been incurred by each district in acquiring
such lands.
         e.   A general description of each classification of capital
facilities (including construction, expansion or enhancement of any public
facilities and the land improvement, design, engineering and professional costs
related thereto) that will be necessary within each district in order to
provide adequate capacity for the projected new development, and an estimate of
the capital facilities' costs that will be incurred by each district in
constructing such capital facilities.
      2.   Based upon the needs assessment, the park district, the school
district, fire/rescue district or library district shall provide the village
with an acquisition plan for lands and capital facilities. This acquisition
plan shall:
         a.   Project for a planning period of at least five (5) years, the
need for lands and capital facilities within the district or village;
         b.   Set forth a schedule for the acquisition of such lands and
facilities to meet the projected needs (which schedule may be conditioned upon
the availability of financing);
         c.   Indicate the size and general location of the needed lands and
facilities;
         d.   Identify the estimated or incurred costs of acquiring such needed
lands and facilities;
         e.   Set forth the anticipated funding sources for the acquisition of
such needed lands and facilities;
         f.   Determine the feasibility of acquiring the needed lands and
facilities based upon the district's current financial condition;
         g.   Determine the feasibility of acquiring the needed lands and
facilities based upon the district's or village's estimate of the revenues
(including, without limitation, cash in lieu of land dedication as required by
section
11-4-7 of this chapter) pursuant to the plan.
         h.   The impact on property taxes in the village assuming the plan is
implemented.
      3.   If the village deems it necessary, it may require an updated needs
assessment and plan for acquisition of land and capital facilities from the
district annually. The failure to require said assessment update shall not
invalidate the requirements of this section. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-10: TIME OF PAYMENT:
   A.   All land dedications and cash contributions imposed by this chapter
shall be due and payable upon final plat approval, unless otherwise determined
as provided in subsections B, C and D of this section. In calculating the fee
at the time of platting, the village will assume the maximum density permitted
under the zoning classification approved pursuant to the table in section
11-4-14 of this chapter. For example, if the subdivision in question is zoned
single-family, the village will assume for purposes of calculating fees
payable, pursuant to this chapter, that all houses will have four (4) bedrooms.
The amount determined by such calculation shall be paid prior to the signing of
the final plat of subdivision for the lots contained within said final plat.
Such amount shall satisfy the obligation under this chapter for the lots within
that final plat. Objections to these calculations for any particular final plat
shall be made in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter. Failure to timely object to these acreage requirements
in accordance with section
11-4-8 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
   B.   For any lot in a plat that had final plat approval prior to January 1,
1979, or any lot for which no payments have been made under this chapter, all
fees imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable at the time a building
permit is issued.
   C.   The village may agree that payment of fees be made at the time of
building permit issuance in consideration of which the owner, subdivider or
developer shall execute an agreement, agreeing that the fees payable will be
paid in accordance with the requirements of this section and further agreeing
that the fees may be expended for the purposes described in said section.
Requests for a delayed payment shall be made to the plan commission when
applying for approval of the final plat and must be approved by the village
board as a part of the final plat approval process. Such agreement shall be
recorded with the plat of subdivision.
   D.   In the event the village and owner, subdivider or developer agree to
enter into an agreement substantially in conformity with that shown in section
11-4-13 of this chapter, the cash contributions owed shall be based upon this
chapter, or as provided in such future ordinances amending or replacing this
chapter, which is in effect at the time the building permit is issued. In
calculating any cash contributions in lieu of land dedication payable at time
of issuance of a building permit, the village shall use the fair market value
as set forth in section
11-4-7-1 of this chapter and the table of estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit in section
11-4-14 of this chapter or any amendments thereto and in effect at the time of
the contribution and building permit issuance. (Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-11: MISCELLANEOUS:
The village recognizes the fact that developments may differ in their impact
upon a community. Consequently, the village reserves the right to negotiate
dedications that are different from those contained in this chapter when
annexing property to the village pursuant to an annexation agreement. (Ord.
2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-12: AGREEMENT REGARDING THE RECEIPT OF DEVELOPER SUBDIVISION CONTRIBUTIONS
AND INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT:
   A.   Execution Of Agreement: Prior to the distribution of any cash or land
to a benefiting district, the benefiting government shall enter into an
agreement with the village as set out in subsection B of this section. The
village president and village clerk are authorized to execute said agreement on
behalf of the village without additional authorization of the village board.
Said agreement shall be utilized by the parties unless the village board
authorizes the execution of an agreement in another format.
   B.   Agreement:
   WHEREAS, the Village of South Barrington, Illinois, on behalf of itself, its
officers, employees and independent contractors (the "Village"), through its
ordinances or through the provisions of its annexation agreements has required
that developers make contributions to the Village, that the Village, in turn,
may make available for other government bodies that are affected by the
subdivision improvements; and
   WHEREAS, such contributions may be in land or in money and, when transferred
or paid over to those government bodies, inure in part to the benefit of those
government bodies and not entirely to the direct benefit of the Village; and
   WHEREAS, from time to time within the Village, and within other
municipalities, disputes have arisen regarding the validity and amount of such
contributions; and
   WHEREAS, the Village is willing, at its discretion, to continue seeking the
contribution of land or money but wishes to procure a commitment from other
government bodies benefited by the receipt of such contributions that those
government bodies will (a) acknowledge that the requirement that such
subdivision contributions be made are totally within the discretion of the
Village as to their existence, manner and amount; (b) pay the cost of defending
any lawsuit or other legal action that is filed challenging the appropriate
amount of the contributions, the time at which they are to be made or any other
aspect of the contributions; and (c) comply with the terms of a final and
nonappealable judicial determination by a court of competent jurisdiction
rendered in connection with any lawsuit; and
   WHEREAS, the Village is willing, in its discretion, to pay over or require
contributions only to other government bodies that execute this agreement
annually.
   NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS AGREED in consideration for the payment of money or
the transfer of the land to the Benefiting District, which the Village from
time to time may within its discretion cause to be made by developers that are
subdividing property, it is agreed between the Village, on behalf of itself and
its officers, employees and independent contractors, and
                      , a government body within the State of Illinois (the
"Benefiting District") as follows:
1. The Benefiting District acknowledges that, except as otherwise provided in
the Village's ordinances and/or annexation agreements, the Village is not
obligated to cause the payment of money or the transfer of land to the
Benefiting District. The Benefiting District recognizes that the Village may,
at its sole discretion, amend its ordinances or annexation agreements or its
practices to discontinue the payment of subdivision contributions to the
Benefiting District.
2. A. In the event an objection filed under Section
11-4-8 or a lawsuit is filed against the Village, the Benefiting District, and/
or others by a developer that is subdividing property or any other person,
corporation or entity that challenges the appropriateness, amount, timing or
any other aspect of a subdivision contribution that, pursuant to the terms of
the Village's ordinances or annexation agreements, has been paid or is due to
the Benefiting District, then the Benefiting District does agree to pay the
costs and litigation expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees) incurred
by the Village in defending such lawsuit or legal action. The Benefiting
District shall pay the costs and expenses when and as incurred by the Village
but in no event more than once a month. As a condition precedent to the payment
of these costs and expenses, the Village shall submit to the Benefiting
District copies of the original statements reflecting the costs and expenses,
together with the non-privileged supporting documentation that may be
reasonably requested by the Benefiting District. If more than one Benefiting
District is affected by the litigation, each shall pay a portion of the costs
and expenses based upon their each Benefiting District's proportion of the
benefit that is being challenged.
B. The Village covenants and agrees that it shall employ competent and skilled
legal counsel to represent the Benefiting District and the Village, and further
covenants and agrees that it shall keep the Benefiting District fully advised
as to the progress and status of the litigation. In particular, the Village
shall provide to the Benefiting District copies of all pleadings filed in the
litigation and shall consult regularly (and shall cause its attorneys to
consult regularly) with the Benefiting District or its attorneys, as
applicable, as to the strategy for defending the lawsuit. In no event may such
litigation be compromised or settled by the Village without at least 30 days'
prior written notice to the Benefiting District. In the event that the
Benefiting District decides that it would prefer to be represented in the
litigation by legal counsel of its own choosing, then the Benefiting District
shall be free to retain its own legal counsel for that purpose and to intervene
in the litigation. In the event the Benefiting District shall intervene in the
litigation its legal counsel may take the lead in the litigation, however the
Village's legal counsel will continue to monitor the litigation and the
Benefiting District shall be responsible for such costs as may be incurred by
the Village. The Benefiting District shall still be liable for all sums that
have accrued pursuant to the above subparagraph 2-A and that remain due and
owing from the Benefiting District to the Village relating to the defense of
any lawsuit filed in connection with dedications required for cash in lieu
thereof collected for or distributed to the Benefiting District.
3. The Benefiting District shall further indemnify and hold harmless the
Village from any and all liability arising from Chapter
11-4 of the Subdivision Code of the Village, including but not limited to, the
general administration and handling of funds required by the Village and the
Benefiting District.
4. In the event that a final and nonappealable judicial determination is made
by a court of competent jurisdiction that contributions of land or money
received by the Benefiting District are, in whole or in part, excessive, the
Benefiting District shall promptly repay those contributions to the person who
procures such a judgment, together with all other amounts judged by the court
to be owing from the Benefiting District. In the event a judicial determination
should require the payment of damages or payment of the attorneys' fees of the
plaintiff's attorneys, in addition to the return of contributions held to be
excessive, the Benefiting District shall pay all additional amounts in the same
manner as is provided in paragraph 2-A.
5. In further consideration of the continued distribution of payments by the
Village to the Benefiting District of the subject contributions of land or
money, the Benefiting District agrees that its obligations under this Agreement
shall extend to both past and future cash and land contributions. All
distributions of cash payments shall be made in accordance with Village Code
Section
11-4-9, and any interest accrued prior to distribution by the Village shall be
retained by the Village.
6. Within ninety (90) days of the end of each fiscal year, every Benefiting
District that receives payments from the Village under this Agreement shall
submit a report to the Village describing the manner in which the payments have
been used and provide any additional information the Village may require. This
report shall include information requested by the Village, including, but not
limited to: the balance of funds held at the close of the prior fiscal year,
the amount of payments received during the fiscal year, the amount expended
during the fiscal year, the purpose of the expenditures and to whom paid, as
well as the balance of funds held by the Benefiting District at the end of the
fiscal year. When this Agreement provides that money turned over to Benefiting
District is to be used for a specific purpose or within a specific time period,
the report shall address those issues. If the Benefiting District should fail
to file such a report with the Village, the Village may delay the payment of
any additional funds due the Benefiting District until such time as a full
report containing adequate information is transmitted to the Village. The
Benefiting District understands that it will be asked to execute an indemnity
agreement similar to this Agreement on an annual basis and that the Village
shall not pay any additional funds due to the Benefiting District until such
time as the Village is in receipt of such annually executed indemnity
agreement.
This Agreement shall be terminable by either party for any reason or no reason
at all upon 30 days' prior written notice to the other party evidencing the
intention to so terminate this Agreement. But the termination of this Agreement
shall not affect the continuing obligation of the Benefiting District or the
Village with regard to claims or damages allegedly arising out of the Village's
efforts prior to termination to impose, collect or distribute contributions, or
to the actual distribution of subdivision contributions.
DATED this      day of                , 20    .
Village of South Barrington   Benefiting District:
                                                           
   Village President             Title:                   
   ATTEST:                   ATTEST:
                                                           
   Village Clerk                Secretary
(Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
11-4-13: AGREEMENT BETWEEN OWNER AND VILLAGE TO DELAY PAYMENT OF CASH
CONTRIBUTIONS:
   A.   Authorization Of Agreement: Any owner, subdivider or developer wishing
to delay the payment of the contribution required by this chapter, shall enter
into an agreement with the village in substantial conformance with the
agreement set forth in subsection B of this section. The village board must
authorize such agreement at the time of final plat.
   B.   Agreement For Delay Of Cash Contributions For Parks And Recreation,
Fire/Rescue, School Lands, And Library:
The Village of South Barrington (the "Village") and,
                                  ("Owner") agree as follows. For purposes of
this Agreement, "Owner" is defined as the subdivider, developer, individual,
firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, trust, or any other
legal entity having a proprietary interest of record in the subject property,
except that in the case of a trust the Owner shall be deemed to include the
beneficiary or beneficiaries and the trustee thereof. The term "Owner" also
includes the Owner's authorized agent or any person authorized by such owner to
apply for Village approval in connection with a final plat of subdivision,
building permit, or other improvement or development upon real property.
The Village has approved a final plat of subdivision or a final plat of a
planned development at the request of Owner for the real estate legally
described in Exhibit 1 attached hereto and made a part hereof (the "Land").
Accordingly, pursuant to the Village's Code of ordinances, Chapter
11-4, certain cash contributions in lieu of dedications for, park and
recreation, fire/rescue, school lands and library are immediately due from the
Owner.
1. Owner has, however, requested that the payment of the aforesaid cash
contributions be delayed and that the same become due and payable on a per
dwelling unit basis at the time the Village issues a building permit for the
particular dwelling unit.
2. In consideration for the Village agreeing to delay the required payment of
the cash contributions in accordance with Paragraph 1 above, Owner hereby
agrees as follows:
a. The amount of cash contributions owed shall be calculated based upon Title
11 Chapter 4 of the Village Code of South Barrington, or as provided for in
such other future ordinance amending or replacing such Chapter which is in
effect at the time of the issuance of a building permit; and
b. Notwithstanding any present or future law, regulation and/or legal precedent
to the contrary, the unit of local government or benefiting district that is
the ultimate recipient of the subject cash contributions may expend such
contributions for any of the following purposes intended to serve immediate or
future needs of the residents and children of the Owner's subdivision or
planned development: (1) for the acquisition of land; (2) for site improvements
such as, by way of example, streets, curbs, gutters, storm water control, and
utility extensions; (3) for construction of capital facilities, including, by
way of example, new buildings and structures, and the expansion or enhancement
of existing buildings and structures; and (4) for legal, architectural,
engineering and "soft" costs related to the foregoing items (1), (2) or (3)
above.
3. Developer has reviewed Title 11, Chapter 4 of the South Barrington Village
Code regarding the dedication of lands or cash contributions in lieu thereof,
as well as all of the methodology, formulae, calculations, projections,
assumptions, numbers and other factors used to arrive at the land dedication
requirements of cash contributions in lieu thereof that are the subject of this
Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the "Ordinance and Attendant
Calculations") and hereby acknowledges and agrees that:
a. Pursuant to the terms of the Ordinance, Developer has been offered the
opportunity to raise in a hearing before the Village, any objections relating
to acreage requirements, presumptions as to fair market value, the Table of
Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit, or any other application of
the Ordinance; Developer has not raised such objections; Developer has thereby
waived the right to assert those objections.
b. Developer hereby waives any future right to object to or to institute any
legal action regarding Ordinance and Attendant Calculations.
c. Developer hereby acknowledges that Ordinance and Attendant Calculations have
been properly passed, calculated and imposed.
4. This Agreement constitutes a covenant that is appurtenant to and runs with
the Land. Either this Agreement or a memorandum thereof may be recorded against
legal title to the Land by either party hereto; provided, however, it shall be
a condition of the Village's issuance of the first building permit for a
dwelling unit on the Land that Owner shall provide satisfactory evidence to the
Village that this Agreement or a memorandum thereof has been recorded against
legal title to the Land.
5. Owner represents and warrants to the Village that it is the sole holder of
record fee title to the Land and is authorized and empowered to enter into this
agreement.
6. Except as modified herein, all provisions of Title 11, Chapter 4 of the
Village Code of South Barrington shall apply to this subdivision (final plat)
and development.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF,
the Village and the Owner have caused this Agreement to be duly authorized,
executed and entered into as of the             day of
                         , 200    .
                                                        
   Village President          Owner
                     ATTEST:
                                                           
   Village Clerk
This agreement shall be recorded with the plat of subdivision. (Ord. 2004-708,
4-8-2004)
11-4-14: TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT:
   TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE SCHOOL POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
                                                   High
        Preschool Elementary Middle     Total      School    Adults   Total Per
Type Of           Grades K-  Grades 6-8 Grades K-8 Grades 9- 18 Years Dwelling
Unit    0-4 Years 5          11-13      5-13 Years 12        Plus     Unit
                  5-10 Years Years                 14-17
                                                   Years
                                Middle Total     High
           Preschool Elementary Grades Grades K- School    Adults   Total Per
Type Of              Grades K-  6-8    8         Grades 9- 18 Years Dwelling
Unit       0-4 Years 5          11-13  5-13      12        Plus     Unit
                     5-10 Years Years  Years     14-17
                                                 Years
                                                              
Detached Single-                                                
Family:
2 bedroom  0.113     0.136      0.048  0.184     0.020     1.700    2.017
3 bedroom  0.292     0.369      0.173  0.542     0.184     1.881    2.899
4 bedroom  0.418     0.530      0.298  0.828     0.360     2.158    3.764
5 bedroom  0.283     0.345      0.248  0.593     0.300     2.594    3.770
Attached Single-
Family:
1 bedroom  0.000     0.000      0.000  0.000     0.000     1.193    1.193
2 bedroom  0.064     0.088      0.048  0.136     0.038     1.752    1.990
3 bedroom  0.212     0.234      0.058  0.292     0.059     1.829    2.392
4 bedroom  0.323     0.322      0.154  0.476     0.173     2.173    3.145
Apartments:
Efficiency 0.000     0.000      0.000  0.000     0.000     1.294    1.294
1 bedroom  0.000     0.002      0.001  0.003     0.001     1.754    1.758
2 bedroom  0.047     0.086      0.042  0.128     0.046     1.693    1.914
3 bedroom  0.052     0.234      0.123  0.357     0.118     2.526    3.053
 
Source: Illinois School Consulting Service/Associated Municipal Consultants,
Inc., Naperville, Illinois 1996.
(Ord. 2004-708, 4-8-2004)
TITLE 12
WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 1
DEVELOPMENT IN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Purpose
12-1-2: Definitions
12-1-3: Administration Of Chapter In General
12-1-4: Duties Of Building Officer
12-1-5: Base Flood Elevation
12-1-6: Occupation And Use Of Flood Fringe Areas
12-1-7: Occupation And Use Of Designated Floodways
12-1-8: Occupation And Use Of SFHAs Where Floodways Are Not Identified
12-1-9: Permitting Requirements Applicable To All Floodplain Areas
12-1-10: Other Development Requirements
12-1-11: Variances
12-1-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
12-1-13: Penalty
12-1-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
12-1-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this
village by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-
30-8, and 5/11-31-2. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain this village's
eligibility in the national flood insurance program; to minimize potential
losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface
waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise
utilization of water and related land resources. This chapter is adopted in
order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
      1.   To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18(g),
rivers, lakes and streams act;
      2.   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or
drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to
erosion;
      3.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
      4.   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
      5.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and
relief operations;
      6.   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property
in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance
program;
      7.   To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood
insurance program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended;
      8.   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land
and water resources; and
      9.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of
watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water
impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and
riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic
benefits and enhance community and economic development. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-
2007)
      10.   If there are any conflicts between this chapter and chapter 2 of
this title, the most restrictive requirements shall apply. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-
19-2015)
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A nonhabitable structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
ACT: "An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of
the state of Illinois", 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and
will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are
as specified in subsection 12-1-7B of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location
is as defined in section
12-1-5 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. This term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more
than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form
of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross
section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.,
straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOOD MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction approval
by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to this chapter, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to
permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that FEMA
will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries
or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or flood
insurance rate map, once the as built plans are submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes
through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface
elevation.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood
protection should be required include emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). Examples
of critical facilities where flood protection is recommended include sewage
treatment plants, water treatment plants, and pumping stations.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs, restrictive
culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion
of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally depicted on
the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year
frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to
the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%)
increase in velocities.
   A.   The floodways are designated for on the countywide flood insurance rate
map of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008. When two (2)
floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall
prevail.
   B.   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village that may be annexed
into the village are designated for Poplar Creek and tributary A to Poplar
Creek on the countywide flood insurance rate map prepared by FEMA and dated
August 19, 2008.
   C.   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated
floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and located
on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation
is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary,
IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
   A.   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any
addition to a building.
   B.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel trailer or
recreational vehicle is on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, it
must be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
   C.   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges,
or similar projects.
   D.   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
   E.   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
   F.   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts;
channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials;
deposit of solid or liquid waste.
   G.   Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
   H.   Substantial improvement of an existing building.
Development does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase
in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do
not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a building has been elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave
action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per
Illinois Compiled Statutes including state, federal or local units of
government.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1,
1990.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79,
as amended.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway. See definition of Designated Floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the
special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year
frequency floods plus two feet (2') of freeboard at any given location in the
SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas,
ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA).
   A.   The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the village
that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood.
The SFHAs of the village are generally identified as such on panel numbers
17031 CO 155J; 17031 CO 156J; 17031 CO 157J; and 17031 CO 158J of the
countywide flood insurance rate map of the village prepared by the federal
emergency management agency and dated August 19, 2008.
   B.   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into
the village are generally identified as such on panel numbers 17031 CO 155J;
17031 CO 156J; 17031 CO 157J; and 17031 CO 158J of the countywide flood
insurance rate map prepared for Cook County by the federal emergency management
agency and dated August 19, 2008.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FLOODWAY: See definition of Designated Floodway.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency;
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analyses which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific
structure is not in a 100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevations, floodplains or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects
which floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety
and welfare. Examples of mitigation include excavation of compensatory storage,
soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration. Mitigation may
also include those activities taken to reduce a structure's susceptibility to
flooding.
NAVD 88: National American vertical datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the
national geodetic vertical datum of 1929 (NGVD).
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels, means those channels formed by the
existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April
1, 1990.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER: All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of, the state of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of
water directly accessible thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures, including a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and
proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude
the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a
flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGIONAL PERMITS: Regional permits are offered for preapproved projects which
are considered minor projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR part 3708 rules
for Northeastern Illinois regulatory floodways. A complete listing of the terms
and conditions for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR
website.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois,
under the Illinois land surveyors act 1 .
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the state of
Illinois, under the Illinois professional engineering practice act 2 .
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result
in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the
dimensions of a structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores storm water runoff
without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of storm
water runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or
storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent
stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term
does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of
sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): See definition of Floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The "actual start"
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
STATEWIDE PERMITS: Statewide permits are offered for preapproved projects that
are considered minor projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR part 3700
rules. A complete listing of the statewide permits and permit requirements can
be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage during a ten (10) year period equals or exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. This term includes repetitive
loss buildings (see definition of Repetitive Loss).
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a structure taking place during a ten (10) year period in which
the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%)
of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is
started.
   A.   "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building. This term includes structures which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.
   B.   This term does not, however, include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
      2.   Any alteration of a "historic structure" listed on the national
register of historic places or the Illinois register of historic places;
provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a
narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007; amd. Ord. 2008-
859, 6-12-2008; Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.
2 2. 225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.
12-1-3: ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER IN GENERAL:
   A.   The building officer shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the
duties listed in section
12-1-4 of this chapter.
   B.   To fulfill those duties, the building officer should first use the
criteria listed in section
12-1-5, "Base Flood Elevation", of this chapter to determine whether the
development site is located within a floodplain.
   C.   Once it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain,
the building officer must determine whether the development site is within a
flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within an SFHA or floodplain for which
no floodway has been identified.
      1.   If the site is within a flood fringe, the building officer shall
require that the minimum requirements of section
12-1-6 of this chapter be met.
      2.   If the site is within a floodway, the building officer shall require
that the minimum requirements of section
12-1-7 of this chapter be met.
      3.   If the site is located within an SFHA or floodplain for which no
detailed study has been completed and approved, the building officer shall
require that the minimum requirements of section
12-1-8 of this chapter be met.
   D.   In addition, the general requirements of section
12-1-9 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the
requirements of section
12-1-6,
12-1-7, or
12-1-8 of this chapter.
   E.   The building officer shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall
meet the requirements of section
12-1-10 of this chapter.
   F.   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the building officer
shall review the requirements of section
12-1-11 of this chapter to make sure they are met. In addition, the building
officer shall complete all notification requirements.
   G.   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in
this chapter, the building officer may take any and all actions as outlined in
section
12-1-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
12-1-4: DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICER:
The building officer shall be responsible for the general administration and
enforcement of this chapter, which shall include the following:
   A.   Determining The Floodplain Designation:
      1.   Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a
special flood hazard area (SFHA).
      2.   If they are in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway,
flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been
conducted and which drains more than one square mile.
      3.   Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA
(with a drainage area less than 1 square mile), indicating that the development
would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or inundation which
would be the basis for the applicant being required to delineate the floodplain
and floodway and be subject to the remaining sections of this chapter.
   B.   Professional Engineer (PE) Review:
      1.   If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one
square mile, the permit shall be referred to the village engineer for review to
ensure that the development meets section
12-1-7 or
12-1-8 of this chapter.
      2.   In the case of an appropriate use, the PE shall state in writing
that the development meets the requirements of section
12-1-7 of this chapter.
   C.   Dam Safety Requirements:
      1.   Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard/damage
potential in the event of failure.
      2.   The construction or major modification of all class I (high hazard)
and class II (moderate hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit.
      3.   Some class III (low hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety
permit, depending on the drainage area to the dam, the height of the dam and
the impounding capacity behind the dam. Most off channel detention basins that
have an embankment are nonjurisdictional class III dams. It is not required
that IDNR/OWR "sign off" on all nonjurisdictional class III dams.
      4.   A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge can estimate a
hazard classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit is
required.
      5.   A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR for the
construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams.
      6.   Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or
impoundment structures. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
   D.   Other Permit Requirements: Ensure any and all required federal, state
and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a watershed management
permit.
   E.   Plan Review And Permit Issuance:
      1.   Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the
jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of the WMO and the
requirements of this chapter; and
      2.   Issue a watershed management permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this community when the
development meets the conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
   F.   Inspection Review:
      1.   Inspect all development projects before, during and after
construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
      2.   Schedule on an annual basis an inspection of the floodplain and
document the results of the inspection.
   G.   Damage Determinations: Make damage determinations of all damaged
buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially damaged
structures which must comply with subsection 12-1-9C2b of this chapter.
   H.   Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates:
      1.   Maintain permit files including:
         a.   An elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building subject
to section
12-1-9 of this chapter; and/or
         b.   The elevation to which a nonresidential building has been
floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to
section
12-1-9 of this chapter.
   I.   Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and
furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies
of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional
letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and "as
built" elevation and floodproofing and/or elevation certificates for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
   J.   State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to sections
12-1-7 and
12-1-8 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to
the village. Upon acceptance of this chapter by IDNR/OWR and FEMA,
responsibility is hereby delegated to the village as per 92 Illinois
administrative code 708 for construction in the designated floodway and
floodplain when floodways have not been defined in sections
12-1-7 and
12-1-8 of this chapter. However, the following review approvals are not
delegated to the village and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
      1.   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per Illinois
Compiled Statutes;
      2.   IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in
section
12-1-2 of this chapter and all other state, federal or local unit of government
projects, including projects of the village and county, except for those
projects meeting the requirements of subsection 12-1-7B1 of this chapter;
      3.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per subsection 12-1-7B3e of this chapter;
      4.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection 12-1-
7B3d of this chapter;
      5.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in subsection 12-1-7B3 (subsections 12-1-
7B3a, B3b, B3h of this chapter);
      6.   Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly
navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
      7.   Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood profiles.
   K.   Cooperation With Other Agencies:
      1.   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve
the administration of this chapter;
      2.   Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a
regulatory map within six (6) months whenever a modification of the floodplain
may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain
map;
      3.   Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program;
and
      4.   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
   L.   Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject, however, to
the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter changes. (Ord.
2007-832, 9-5-2007)
12-1-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
   A.   This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance
study for the village.
      1.   If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is
not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be
according to the best existing data available from federal, state or other
sources.
      2.   When a party disagrees with the best available data, it shall submit
a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data
and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration prior to any
development of the site.
   B.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
Poplar Creek and tributary A to Poplar Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-
year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of Cook County prepared by
FEMA dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments to such study and maps as may
be prepared from time to time.
   C.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of Cook
County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments or
revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
   D.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA
delineated as an "AH zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook County. (Ord.
2008-859, 6-12-2008)
   E.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the
remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance
rate map of Cook County shall be according to the best existing data available
from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an
engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood
elevations in accordance with WMO section 601.6. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
12-1-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of
this chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe
shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of
section
12-1-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
   A.   Watershed Management Permit:
      1.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by
law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
watershed management permit from the building officer.
      2.   Application for a watershed management permit shall be made on a
form provided by the building officer.
         a.   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the
property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor;
existing grade elevations, using the North American vertical datum of 1988, and
all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and other applicable
requirements of article 3 of the WMO. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
         b.   For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of section
12-1-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
      3.   Upon receipt of a watershed management permit application, the
building officer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
         a.   Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher
than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map and which
has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
without a permit as required by this chapter is not in the SFHA and, therefore,
not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any development
located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically
connected, but shown on the current flood insurance rate map is subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
         b.   The building officer shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate
map identification.
      4.   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall
be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
      5.   The building officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or
waivers that may be required for this type of activity. The building officer
shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits
have been obtained.
   B.   Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall
create a threat to public health and safety.
      1.   LOMR Based On Fill: If fill is being used to elevate the site above
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall
submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for
the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
      2.   Compensatory Storage:
         a.   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
         b.   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
         c.   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
         d.   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
         e.   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse.
   C.   Construction Of The Lowest Floor Below The Base Flood Elevation (BFE):
A person, who has obtained a letter of map revision based on fill that removes
a site in the flood fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill to
elevate the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the village to
construct the lowest floor of a residential building below the BFE in the flood
fringe. The building officer shall not issue such a permit unless the applicant
has complied with all the criteria set forth in the following subsections:
      1.   Compensatory storage shall be provided per subsection B2 of this
section.
      2.   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e.,
window wells, accessways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation
(FPE). (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
      3.   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above the
FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet (10') beyond the outside face of the
structure.
      4.   The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a
distance of twenty feet (20') from the structure, shall be above the BFE. (Ord.
2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
      5.   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets
all requirements of this subsection and is at least five feet (5') thick under
the basement floor slab. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to
require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of a LOMR-F,
if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar classification
and degree permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML according
to ASTM standard D-2487, "Classification Of Soils For Engineering Purposes".
      6.   The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is, the
soil must be all of one material, and the engineering priorities must be in the
same direction.
      7.   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and
inspected by an Illinois registered professional engineer, as warranted by the
site conditions.
      8.   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than
five feet (5') below the BFE.
      9.   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab, and
minimum of one-fourth (1/4) horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply
shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four (4)
times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away
from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the
floor under the effect of the seepage pressure.
      10.   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.
      11.   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic
pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-
5-2007)
      12.   If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set
forth in the preceding subsections, the building officer may allow the
construction of a basement below the BFE only if the applicant demonstrates
that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and requirements set
forth in the WMO and FEMA technical bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe from
flooding. In order to demonstrate that the proposed structure is reasonably
safe from flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed engineering analysis
of the proposed fill and foundation wall. The engineered basement study shall
be completed in accordance with the latest edition of FEMA technical bulletin
10-01, with the analysis of the fill being prepared by an Illinois registered
professional engineer. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
      13.   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in
no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot
exceed eighteen inches (18"), as measured from the previously existing natural
grade. The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation,
if necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means to
drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-
2007)
12-1-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS:
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification
or building modification within a designated floodway. The designated floodway
for Poplar Creek and tributary A to Poplar Creek shall be as delineated on the
countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook County and referenced in section
12-1-2 of this chapter. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which
meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the
minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development
shall also meet the requirements of section
12-1-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
   A.   Watershed Management Permit: No person, firm, corporation or
governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a
floodway without first obtaining a watershed management permit from the
building officer and IDNR/OWR.
      1.   Application for a watershed management permit shall be made on a
form provided by the building officer. The application shall include the
following information: (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
         a.   Name and address of applicant;
         b.   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
         c.   Name of stream or body of water affected;
         d.   Description of proposed activity;
         e.   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
         f.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
         g.   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant;
         h.   Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent;
         i.   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other
authorized officer shall sign the application form;
         j.   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form; and
         k.   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign
the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit
shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust
by name and address and defining the respective interests therein.
         l.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as
a minimum:
            (1)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
            (2)   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American vertical datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance
between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated
floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed
channel modifications, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow,
and a graphic or numerical scale;
            (3)   Cross section views of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal
water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
            (4)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas.
This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to
mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance;
            (5)   A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any
proposed change in the designated floodway location.
         m.   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approval
letters that may be required for this type of development.
         n.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of subsection B of
this section.
         o.   If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may
be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.
         p.   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings
of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing
ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed
excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a
registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
12-1-9 of this chapter.
         q.   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
            (1)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed
work;
            (2)   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative
locations or methods (see subsection B3i of this section) to accomplish the
purpose of the proposed work;
            (3)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in subsection B3i of this section would have on
the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and
            (4)   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project,
considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the
body of water affected. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
         r.   Other applicable requirements of article 3 of the WMO. (Ord.
2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
      2.   The building officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits and approvals
that may be required for this type of activity. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
         a.   The building officer shall not issue the watershed management
permit unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained. (Ord.
2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
         b.   The village engineer shall review and approve applications
reviewed under this section.
   B.   Preventing Increased Damages And A List Of Appropriate Uses:
      1.   Approved Appropriate Uses: The only development in a floodway which
will be allowed are appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base
flood elevation, and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging
increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and
safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or
aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate
mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses
listed in 17 Illinois administrative code part 3708 will be allowed. The
approved appropriate uses are as follows:
         Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways
and any modification thereto.
         Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive
nonerosive slope toward a watercourse.
         Detached garages, storage sheds, or other nonhabitable accessory
structures that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage.
         Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife.
         Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing
structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the
structure.
         Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the
enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and which will not block flood flows including, but not limited to,
fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second story additions. If the
building is improved to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before
the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will
be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
         Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
         a.   The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will
not exceed 1.0 foot; or
         b.   The applicant of a short term recreational use facility parking
lot formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events and
accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all overbank
flooding events.
         Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems,
including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any 1
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open
air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall maximum) that will not block flood
flows nor reduce floodway storage.
         Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls.
         Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access
to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and
facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water dependent uses.
         The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building;
provided, that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building
was damaged to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the
damage occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood
protection elevation.
         Underground and overhead utilities.
      2.   Uses Not Included: Appropriate uses do not include the construction
or placement of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on
stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise
nonappropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting
designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically
defined above as an appropriate use.
      3.   Engineering And Mitigation Criteria: Within the designated floodway,
the construction of an appropriate use will be considered permissible;
provided, that the proposed project meets the following engineering and
mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans,
calculations and data by a registered professional engineer and provided that
any structure meets the protection requirements of section
12-1-9 of this chapter:
         a.   Preservation Of Flood Conveyance, So As Not To Increase Flood
Stages Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings,
on stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
            (1)   Designated floodway conveyance, "K" = (1.486/n)(AR2/3) where
"n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the cross
section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Ven Te
Chow, "Open Channel Hydraulics", McGraw-Hill, New York, 1959).
            (2)   The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing
and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal,
state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a nonvegetative
land cover.
            (3)   Transition sections shall be provided and used in
calculations of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following
expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer
can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more
abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
               (A)   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
               (B)   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's
length.
               (C)   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet
(10') of stream length shall be used.
               (D)   Transition sections shall be provided between cross
sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated
floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
               (E)   All cross sections used in the calculations shall be
located perpendicular to flood flows. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
         b.   Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream
Flooding:
            (1)   Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or
structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
            (2)   Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to
at least 1.5 times the volume of floodplain storage lost.
            (3)   The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood
elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All designated floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such
excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
            (4)   If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the
location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall
demonstrate through a determination of flood discharges and water surface
elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.
            (5)   There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a
result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to
reduce flooding at existing structure.
         c.   Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream
Erosion Or Flood Heights:
            (1)   For all appropriate uses, the requirements of section 601.1.B
of the WMO must be met.
            (2)   For all appropriate uses, the requirements of section 601.1.C
of the WMO must be met. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
         d.   Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway
Approaches:
            (1)   If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood
stages greater than 0.1 foot, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a
permit for a dam or waiver.
               (A)   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section
12-1-5 of this chapter. Bridges and culverts must be analyzed using any
commonly accepted FEMA approved hydraulic models.
               (B)   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per
subsection B3b of this section.
               (C)   Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection B3c of
this section.
               (D)   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is
used for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be
received.
               (E)   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the
bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by this
subsection B.
               (F)   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall
be designed per subsection B3h of this section. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
         e.   Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts, And
Approach Roads:
            (1)   The requirements of section 602.18 of the WMO must be met.
(Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
            (2)   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
            (3)   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing
is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with 17 Illinois administrative code part 3708 (floodway
construction in northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and
concurrence before a permit is issued. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
         f.   On Stream Structures Built For The Purpose Of Backing Up Water:
            (1)   The requirements of section 602.18 of the WMO must be met.
(Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
            (2)   A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must
be obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or flood flow.
            (3)   All dams and impoundment structures as defined in section
12-1-2 of this chapter shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Illinois
administrative code part 3702 (construction and maintenance of dams). If the
proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to
accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
               (A)   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest
by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater
detention;
               (B)   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of
indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of
their life cycle, such as for spawning;
               (C)   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded
water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual
bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a presedimentation
basin;
               (D)   A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants.
If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with
upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control;
               (E)   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of
this section.
         g.   Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial
Structures:
            (1)   If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of
the existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no farther than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building.
            (2)   Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be
required for floodproofing activities.
         h.   Excavation In The Floodway:
            (1)   When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and
culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing
bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance or other
appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation.
            (2)   The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used
unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering
calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the
same efficiency:
               (A)   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length;
and
               (B)   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's
length; and
               (C)   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet
(10') of stream length shall be used; and
               (D)   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream
and downstream of the transition sections.
         i.   Channel Modification: If the proposed activity involves a channel
modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
            (1)   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which
would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the
body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from
the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment
of a streamside buffer strip or greenbelt. Channel modification is acceptable
if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and
fish and wildlife habitat;
            (2)   Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values;
            (3)   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria:
               (A)   The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall
match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross
section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously
modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
               (B)   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at
both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they
will prevent erosion.
               (C)   One sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one
side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization
effects of the vegetation.
               (D)   Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to
that which is essential for construction of the channel.
               (E)   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable.
Native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or riprap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as concrete,
gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
               (F)   All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall
be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover.
               (G)   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom
diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such
features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and
flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established,
where appropriate.
               (H)   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end
of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
               (I)   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and
all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
               (J)   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is
justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
               (K)   Unless the modification is for a public flood control
project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage
outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and
            (4)   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
         j.   Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
(Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
         k.   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in
the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
            (1)   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the
maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the
time soil is exposed and unprotected.
            (2)   Stabilization of disturbed areas must, at a minimum, be
initiated within one working day whenever any clearing, grading, excavating, or
other earth disturbing activities have ceased on any portion of the site, or
temporarily ceased on any portion of the site and will not resume for a period
exceeding fourteen (14) calendar days. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
            (3)   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion
ditches, and sediment traps and basins.
            (4)   A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25')
in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along
existing channels (see subsection B3p of this section). Construction vehicle
use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be
constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or
along channels shall be restabilized immediately.
            (5)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures And Standards For Urban
Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois" (1988) also known as the
"green book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 1995).
         l.   Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects,
the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right of way or easements
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
            (1)   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated
floodway study, referenced in section
12-1-5 of this chapter, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If
the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR
shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base
conditions data to use.
            (2)   If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of
the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet:
               (A)   The requirements of this section for the 100-year
frequency flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and
               (B)   Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water
elevations.
            (3)   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or
a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
(5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
         m.   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision:
            (1)   If the appropriate use would result in a change in the
designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the
applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and
documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision
and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway
change before a permit is issued.
            (2)   The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA
until as built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging,
or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR.
            (3)   In the case of nongovernment projects, the municipality in
incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the
proposed conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval
can be given.
            (4)   No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued.
            (5)   After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no
activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is
issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
         n.   Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses
shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional
engineer.
         o.   Construction Within Twenty Five Feet Of Channel: For all
activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25')
of the channel, the following criteria shall be met:
            (1)   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within
at least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
            (2)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during
the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
         p.   Conditional Approval: After receipt of conditional approval of
the designated floodway change and issuance of a permit and a conditional
letter of map revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway
designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction
that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the designated
floodway map is changed and a final letter of map revision is received. The
designated floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by
IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as built" plans.
      4.   Development Activities In Delegated Communities Requiring State
Review: For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the
following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and
concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or
county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway:
         a.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed
bridge pursuant to subsection B3d of this section.
         b.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection B3e of this section.
         c.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
storage pursuant to subsection B3 of this section (subsections B3a, B3b, B3h of
this section).
         d.   The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in
section
12-1-2 of this chapter) and all other federal, state, or local units of
government projects, including projects of the municipality or county.
         e.   An engineer's determination that a proposed bridge affected by
backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening.
         f.   Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood
profiles.
         g.   Projects in public bodies of water. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
      5.   Other Permits:
         a.   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a
watershed management permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be
issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation
that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
         b.   No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the project
meets the requirements of regional permit 3.
         c.   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has
delegated this responsibility to the village.
      6.   Permits For Dams:
         a.   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
"dam" as defined in section
12-1-2 of this chapter per 17 Illinois administrative code part 3702 (rules for
construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam.
         b.   If the building officer finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/
OWR permit, the building officer shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett
office.
         c.   If the building officer finds a dam which is believed to be in an
unsafe condition, the building officer shall immediately notify the owner of
the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois emergency management
agency (IEMA).
      7.   Activities That Do Not Require A Registered Professional Engineer's
Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
         a.   Regional permit 3 authorizes, for example, underground and
overhead utilities, storm and sanitary sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios,
athletic fields, playground equipment and stream bank protection activities.
(Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
12-1-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHAs WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED:
   A.   In SFHAs or floodplains (including AE, AH, AO and unnumbered A zones)
where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square
mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the
proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and
structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of
the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation.
      1.   Watershed Management Permit:
         a.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted
by state law, shall commence any development in an SFHA or floodplain without
first obtaining a watershed management permit from the building officer.
         b.   Application for a watershed management permit shall be made on a
form provided by the building officer. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
            (1)   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations
and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a
licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all
buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of
section
12-1-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
            (2)   The application for a watershed management permit shall also
include the following information: (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
               (A)   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its
purpose, and intended use;
               (B)   Site location (including legal description) of the
property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether
it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
               (C)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of
activity;
               (D)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which
include as a minimum:
                  (i)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name
of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site,
graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;
                  (ii)   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American vertical datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is in or near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain
limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphical
or numerical scale;
                  (iii)   Cross section views of the project perpendicular to
the flow of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and
proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan
view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year
frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or
numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and
                  (iv)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for
disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
            (3)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection
A2 of this section. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
            (4)   Other applicable requirements of article 3 of the WMO.
            (5)   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or
approvals that may be required for this type of development. (Ord. 2015-1061,
3-19-2015)
         c.   Based on the best available existing data according to federal,
state or other sources, the building officer shall compare the elevation of the
site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
            (1)   Should no elevation information exist for the site, the
developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection 12-
1-5E of this chapter.
            (2)   Any development located on land that can be shown to have
been higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate
map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
            (3)   The building officer shall maintain documentation of the
existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance
rate map identification.
            (4)   The building officer shall be responsible for obtaining from
the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals
or waivers that may be required for this type of activity. The building officer
shall not issue the watershed management permit unless all required federal,
state, and local permits have been obtained. (Ord. 2015-1096, 11-12-2015)
      2.   Preventing Increased Damages:
         a.   Development Not To Create Damaging Increase In Flood Heights Or
Velocity: No development in the SFHA where a floodway has not been determined
shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural
hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair
existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.
         b.   Standards: Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not
been determined, the following standards shall apply:
            (1)   Project To Meet Engineering Requirements: The developer shall
have a registered professional engineer state in writing and show through
supporting plans, calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering
requirements of subsections 12-1-7B3a through B3i of this chapter for the
entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of subsection 12-1-5E of
this chapter.
               (A)   As an alternative, the developer should have an
engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering
study to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for acceptance as a designated floodway.
               (B)   Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the
developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of
section
12-1-7 of this chapter of the designated floodway. The "floodway" shall be
defined according to the definition in section
12-1-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
            (2)   IDNR/OWR Permit: A watershed management permit shall not be
issued unless the applicant first obtains an IDNR/OWR permit or a determination
has been made that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-
2015)
            (3)   Permits For Dams:
               (A)   Any work involving the construction, modification or
removal of a "dam" as defined in section
12-1-2 of this chapter per 17 Illinois administrative code part 3702 (rules for
construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam.
               (B)   If the building officer finds a dam that does not have an
IDNR/OWR permit, the building officer shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR
Bartlett office.
               (C)   If the building officer finds a dam which is believed to
be in unsafe condition, the building officer shall immediately notify the owner
of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois emergency management
agency (IEMA).
         c.   Permitted Activities: The following activities may be permitted
without a registered professional engineer's review or calculation of base
flood elevation and designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the
other requirements of this chapter.
            (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas
meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit 2;
            (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit 3;
            (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit 4;
            (4)   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide
permit 5;
            (5)   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit 6; activities not involving fill or positive change in
grade are covered by this permit;
            (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit 7;
            (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit 8;
            (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit 9;
            (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit 10;
            (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit 11;
            (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge
widenings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit 12;
            (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit 13;
            (13)   Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit 14; and
            (14)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located
entirely within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
         d.   Flood Carrying Capacity Maintained: The flood carrying capacity
of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
         e.   Compensatory Storage:
            (1)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use,
the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
            (2)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times
the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
            (3)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation
shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
            (4)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (Ord. 2007-832,
9-5-2007)
12-1-9: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in sections
12-1-6,
12-1-7, and
12-1-8 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, designated floodways,
and SFHAs or floodplains where no floodways have been identified, the following
requirements shall be met:
   A.   Public Health Standards:
      1.   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation (FPE) unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed
and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or
floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of subsection C
of this section.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer
lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
      5.   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
   B.   Carrying Capacity And Notification:
      1.   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
      2.   In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
   C.   Protecting Buildings:
      1.   All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as an
SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the following
situations:
         a.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively during a 10-year period. If substantially
improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood
protection standards of this section.
         b.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively during a 10-year period. If substantially
damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this
section.
         c.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do
not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage).
         d.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
         e.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
12-1-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
      2.   This building protection requirement may be met by one of the
following methods:
         a.   A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be
constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
            (1)   Lowest Floor Elevation Requirement: The lowest floor
(including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation; and
            (2)   Fill Requirements:
               (A)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six
inches (6") deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10')
beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection
elevation; and
               (B)   The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection
elevation. However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural
engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures; and
               (C)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour
during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or other structural measure; and
               (D)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not
incorporate debris or refuse materials; and
               (E)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties, and, when necessary, stormwater
management techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
         b.   A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following:
            (1)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl
space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood. Designs must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or the permanent openings, one on
each wall, shall be no more than one foot (1') above existing grade, and
consists of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation; and
            (2)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating
debris; and
            (3)   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage; and
            (4)   The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical,
heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility
meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation; and
            (5)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed; and
            (6)   The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be
used for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space; and
            (7)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by registered professional engineer or
architect.
         c.   Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules
and regulations for the Illinois mobile home tie down act issued pursuant to 77
Illinois administrative code part 870. In addition, all manufactured homes
shall meet the following elevation requirements:
            (1)   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved: a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or d) in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above
the flood protection elevation.
            (2)   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured
home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the
base flood elevation or the chassis is at least thirty six inches (36") in
height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of
equivalent strength, whichever is less.
         d.   Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to
meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of subsection C2c of this section
unless:
            (1)   They are on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days; and
            (2)   They are fully licensed, ready for highway use, and used only
for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent
dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
         e.   Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry
floodproofed (in lieu of elevation); provided, that:
            (1)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood
protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood.
            (2)   The building design shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice.
            (3)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms,
floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose
of this subsection).
         f.   A building may be constructed with a crawl space located below
the flood protection elevation; provided, that the following conditions are
met:
            (1)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and
            (2)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade; and
            (3)   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood
protection elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade; and
            (4)   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the
interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the foundation wall must not
exceed four feet (4') at any point; and
            (5)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event; and
            (6)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
            (7)   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation.
         g.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
         h.   Tool sheds, detached garages, and other minor accessory
structures on an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with
the lowest floor below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the
following:
            (1)   The building is not used for human habitation; and
            (2)   All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in
a designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as
not to block the flow of floodwaters and shall also meet the appropriate use
criteria of section
12-1-7 of this chapter. In addition, all other requirements of sections
12-1-6,
12-1-7, and
12-1-8 of this chapter must be met; and
            (3)   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation; and
            (4)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation; and
            (5)   The building shall be valued at less than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) and be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor
size; and
            (6)   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles
or tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar
uses and cannot be modified later into another use; and
            (7)   The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of
subsection C2b(1) of this section; and
            (8)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint,
insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection
elevation; and
            (9)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
         i.   Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall
also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section
12-1-7 of this chapter. Nonconforming structures located in a designated
floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally
altered in accordance with subsection 12-1-7B of this chapter. A nonconforming
structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or manmade disaster may
be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market value
before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this chapter. (Ord.
2007-832, 9-5-2007)
12-1-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The president and board of trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to
the extent that they are known in all official actions related to land
management, use and development.
   A.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and
planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure
that the proposed developments are consistent with sections
12-1-6,
12-1-7,
12-1-8, and
12-1-9 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans
for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs)
shall include a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the
plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
   B.   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer
parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home
parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations.
      1.   Where this information is not available from an existing adopted
study, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection 12-1-5E of this
chapter and the floodway delineation per the definition in section
12-1-2 of this chapter.
   C.   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
   D.   The board of trustees shall not approve any planned unit development
(PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not
to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-
2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
12-1-11: VARIANCES:
   A.   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
"designated floodway" as defined in section
12-1-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
      1.   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the MWRD or the
village for a variance. Only the MWRD can issue variances to the WMO
requirements, but the village may issue variances to standards that exceed the
WMO requirements. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
      2.   The building officer shall review the applicant's request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the village. The village may
attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to
further the flood protection intent of this chapter.
   B.   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all
of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA; and
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted; and
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary; and
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation
of a nuisance; and
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public
facilities; and
      6.   The provisions of subsections 12-1-6B and 12-1-8A2 of this chapter
shall still be met; and
      7.   The activity is not in a designated floodway; and
      8.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      9.   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved including existing stream uses; and
      10.   All other required state and federal permits or waivers have been
obtained.
   C.   The building officer shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of section
12-1-9 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage; and
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant will acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   D.   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site
or historic structure as defined in definition of "historic structure", in
section
12-1-2 of this chapter, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of subsections A and B of this section, subject to the conditions
that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure; and
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
12-1-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   A.   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.
   B.   Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or
natural causes.
   C.   This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside
of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.
   D.   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the village or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord.
2007-832, 9-5-2007)
12-1-13: PENALTY:
   A.   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The village may make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
      4.   The village shall record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   B.   The building officer shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      1.   The building officer is authorized to issue an order requiring the
suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing,
shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if
necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop
work order constitutes a suspension of the permit. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
      2.   No site watershed management permit shall be permanently suspended
or revoked until a hearing is held by the zoning board of appeals. Written
notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state: a) the
grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or revocation; and b) the time
and place of the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an
opportunity to present evidence on his/her behalf. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the zoning board of appeals shall determine whether the permit shall
be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 2015-1061, 3-19-2015)
   C.   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
12-1-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
   B.   Where this chapter and other chapters, easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions, shall prevail.
   C.   This chapter is intended to repeal the original chapter or resolution
which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program regulations, but
is not intended to repeal the resolution which the village passed in order to
establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. 2007-832, 9-5-2007)
CHAPTER 2
WATERSHED MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
SECTION:
12-2-1: Adoption Of The WMO
12-2-2: WMO And Amendments To The WMO
12-2-1: ADOPTION OF THE WMO:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the present and future residents of the village and
downstream drainage areas by providing for the protection, preservation, proper
maintenance and use of village watercourses, lakes, ponds, floodplain and
wetland areas. The watershed management ordinance (WMO) adopted by the
metropolitan reclamation district of Greater Chicago amended July 10, 2014, as
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as chapter 2 of this
title. This chapter is more specifically adopted. (Ord. 0-2015-1062, 3-19-2015)
12-2-2: WMO AND AMENDMENTS TO THE WMO:
The watershed management ordinance, commonly referred to as the WMO is hereby
amended and supplemented by the following provisions which correspond to the
articles as numbered in the code.
Article 1 see WMO
Article 2 see WMO
Article 3 see WMO
Add § 300.8 The co-permittee may be required by recommendation of the village
engineer and in accordance with subsection 11-2-2B9 of this code, to file with
the village a cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit, satisfactory to the
village attorney in an amount deemed sufficient by the village engineer to
cover all costs of the required improvements, landscaping, maintenance of
improvements and landscaping and soil erosion and sediment control measures for
such a period as specified by the village, and engineering and inspection costs
to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site.
Replace § 314.1 with "Construction activities authorized under a watershed
management permit must be initiated within 120 days following the date of the
permit issuance. Failure to commence construction activities within those 120
days renders the issued watershed management permit null and void."
Replace § 314.2 with "Construction activities authorized under a watershed
management permit must be completed within 180 days following the date of the
permit issuance."
Replace § 314.3 with "If construction activity has been started but is not
completed within 180 days of the date of issuance of a watershed management
permit and the co- permittee intends to pursue the permitted activity, then the
co-permittee shall submit a written request for an extension. Upon receipt of
such request, either the MWRD or the village may grant an extension for the
construction activities under the watershed management permit".
Article 4 see WMO
Replace § 401.6 with "Portions of the development site where construction
activities have temporarily or permanently ceased, must have stabilization
practices initiated within 1 working day and completed within 14 days except:
   A.   Where precluded by snow cover, erosion control practices shall be
completed as soon as possible; or
   B.   Where construction activity resumes on that portion of the site within
14 days from when the activity ceased."
Article 5 see WMO
Add § 500.8 "In the selection of a drainage plan for a development, the co-
permittee shall evaluate and implement, where practicable, site design features
which minimize the increase in runoff volumes and rates from the site. The co-
permittee's drainage plan shall adopt one or more of the following strategies
in order of preference. If the strategies with the highest preference are not
adopted, the drainage plan submitted shall include a rationale for not
selecting those strategies with a higher preference.
   A.   Preservation of the natural features of development sites, including
natural storage and infiltration characteristics.
   B.   Preservation of existing natural streams, channels and drainageways.
   C.   Minimization of new impervious surfaces.
   D.   Conveyance of stormwater in open vegetated channels.
   E.   Construction of best management practices (BMPs) that provide both
quantity and quality control with BMPs serving multiple sites being preferable
to those serving individual sites.
   F.   Construction of BMPs that provide only quantity control, with BMPs
serving multiple sites being preferable to those serving individual sites".
Add § 501.4 "Wetlands and other depressional storage areas shall be protected
from damaging modifications and adverse changes in runoff quality and quantity
associated with land developments. In addition to the other requirements of
this ordinance, the following requirements shall be met for developments whose
drainage flows into wetlands and depressional storage areas as appropriate:
   A.   Existing wetlands shall not be modified for the purposes of stormwater
detention unless it is demonstrated that the existing wetland is low in quality
and the proposed modifications will maintain or improve its habitat and ability
to perform beneficial functions. Existing storage and release rate
characteristics of wetlands and other depressional storage areas shall be
maintained and the volume of detention storage provided to meet requirements of
this section shall be in addition to this existing storage.
   B.   The existing wetland shall be protected during construction by
appropriate soil erosion and sediment control measures and shall not be filled.
   C.   Site drainage patterns shall not be altered to substantially decrease
or increase the existing area tributary to the wetland.
   D.   A buffer strip of at least twenty-five feet (25') in width, preferably
vegetated with native plant species, shall be maintained or restored around the
periphery of the wetland."
Replace § 502.12 with "Maximum flow depths on roads for all development shall
not exceed curb heights by more than one (1) inch during the base flood
condition and shall not remain flooded for more than eight (8) hours during the
base flood condition."
Replace § 502.13 with "Maximum detention depths on new parking lots shall be
designed for protection against damages caused by stormwater detention
inundation, which shall not exceed six (6) inches for more than four (4) hours.
The inundation hazard below the 100-year high water elevation shall be clearly
posted."
Add § 503.4 "Infiltration practices including basins, trenches, and porous
pavement should be located on soils in hydrologic groups "A" or "B" as
designated by the U.S. soil conservation service. Infiltration basins and
trenches designed to recharge groundwater shall not be located within seventy
five feet (75') of a water supply well or a building foundation. A sediment
settling basin may be required to remove coarse sediment from stormwater flows
before they reach infiltration basins or trenches. Stormwater shall not be
allowed to stand more than seventy two (72) hours over eighty percent (80%) of
a dry basin's bottom area for the maximum design event to be ex-filtrated. The
bottom of infiltration facilities shall be a minimum of four feet (4') above
the seasonal high water table and bedrock unless otherwise approved by the
enforcement officer"
Replace § 504.3.A with "0.15 cfs/acre of development for the storm event having
a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in a given year (100-
year storm event)."
Replace § 504.3.B with "0.04 cfs/acre of development for the storm event having
a fifty percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in a given year (2-
year storm event)."
Add § 504.11.H "Wet detention basins shall be designed so to remove stormwater
pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing, and, as much as feasible,
to be available for recreational use. Wet basins shall be at least three feet
(3') deep, excluding near shores, banks and safety ledges. If this habitat is
to be provided, it shall be at least ten feet (10') deep over twenty-five
percent (25%) of the bottom area to prevent winter freeze-out. The side slopes
at the normal pool elevation shall not be steeper than five to one (5:1)
horizontal to vertical. The permanent pool volume at normal depth shall be
equal to the runoff volume from its watershed for a 2-year event. To the extent
possible, the distance between detention inlets and outlets shall be maximized
and, if possible, should be at opposite ends of the basin."
Add § 504.11.I "The use of dry basins within the village is prohibited unless
the village engineer finds and the village board concurs that other detention
methods are inappropriate or ineffective. When so determined, such dry basins
shall be, in addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, designed to
remove stormwater pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing and, as
much as feasible, to be available for multiple uses. All detention basin areas
shall be designed to have standing water no longer than seventy two (72) hours
for any runoff event less than the 100-year event. Underdrains directed to the
outlet may be used to accomplish this requirement. Velocity dissipation
measures shall be incorporated into dry basin designs to minimize erosion at
inlets and outlets and to minimize the occurrence of suspended solids.
Stilling/sedimentation basins should be constructed at each major inlet. The
volume of the basins should be at least 500 cubic feet per acre of impervious
surface in the drainage area. Side slopes of the basins shall be no steeper
than three to one (3:1) (horizontal to vertical) and basin depths should be at
least three feet (3') to minimize the suspension of accumulated sediment. To
the extent possible, the distance between detention inlets and outlets shall be
maximized and, if possible, should be at opposite ends of the basin. There
should be no low flow bypass between the inlet and the outlet. Paved low flow
channels shall not be used."
Add § 504.11.J "Detention basins shall be designed to protect the safety of any
children or adults coming in contact with the system during runoff events. The
following design criteria in the design of these basins:
      1.   The side slopes of all detention basins at the 100 year capacity
shall be level as practicable to prevent accidental falls into the basin and
for stability and ease of maintenance and shall be no steeper than three to one
(3:1) (horizontal to vertical).
      2.   All wet detention basins shall have a safety ledge at least four
feet (4') in width located two and one- half feet (2.5') to three feet (3.0')
below the normal water depth.
      3.   Velocities throughout the surface drainage system shall be
controlled to safe levels taking into consideration rates and depths of flow."
Add § 504.11.K "The stormwater drainage system shall be designed to minimize
and facilitate maintenance. Vegetated side slopes shall be designed to allow
lawn mowing equipment to easily negotiate them. Wet basins shall be provided
with alternate outflows which can be used to completely drain the pool for
sediment removal. Pumping may be considered if drainage by gravity is not
feasible. Sedimentation basins shall be included where feasible for localizing
sediment deposition and removal. Access for heavy equipment shall be provided."
Replace § 504.12.E with "4 inches or larger in diameter and designed to be
self-cleaning and"
Article 6 see WMO
Replace § 602.9.A with "Equal to at least 1.5 times the volume of flood storage
lost below the BFE."
Replace § 603.9.A and B with "Fifty feet from the boundary of standard isolated
wetlands greater than or equal to one- half (0.50) of an acre in area."
Add § 604.20 "The following development activities may be permitted within
buffer areas only if, as a practical matter, they cannot be located outside the
buffer area. Such development activities will only be approved based upon a
report prepared by a qualified professional which demonstrates that they will
not adversely affect water quality; destroy, damage or disrupt significant
habitat areas; adversely affect drainage and stormwater retention capabilities;
adversely affect flood conveyance and storage; lead to unstable earth
conditions, create erosion hazards, or be materially detrimental to any other
property in the area of the subject property or to the village as a whole,
including the loss of open space or scenic vistas:
   A.   Minor improvements such as walkways, benches, comfort stations,
information displays, directional signs, foot bridges, observation decks and
docks;
   B.   The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing
highways and bridges, electrical transmission and telecommunication lines,
poles and towers;
   C.   The establishment and development of public and private parks and
recreational areas, outdoor education areas, historical natural and scientific
areas, game refuges, fish and wildlife improvement projects, game bird and
animal farms, wildlife preserves and boat launching ramps;
   D.   Limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of boat
launching ramps, swimming beaches, or the development of park shelters or
similar structures is allowed;
   E.   Limited development of roads, parking lots and other impervious
surfaces necessary for permitted uses where no alternate location outside the
buffer area is available;
   F.   Stormwater drainage swales between the developed area of the site
(including a stormwater detention facility on the site) and a stream, lake or
pond, or wetland. Detention basins within the buffer are generally discouraged
unless it can be shown that resultant modifications will not impair water
quality, habitat or flood storage functions;
   G.   Installation of piers for the limited development of walkways and
observation decks. Walkways and observation decks should avoid high quality
wetland areas and should not adversely affect natural areas designated in the
Illinois natural areas inventory or the habitat of rare or endangered species."
Add § 607.12 "Watercourse relocation or modification is not permitted as a
convenience for site design purposes. Under certain circumstances, relocation
and minor modification may be permitted where certain problems can be mitigated
by relocation and/or minor modification, specifically when:
   A.   Off-site hydrologic conditions are causing erosion, flooding and
related problems; or
   B.   On-site soil and geologic conditions are resulting in unstable
conditions that pose hazards to life, health and existing structures or
property; or
   C.   The quality of previously modified or relocated streams can be improved
through restoration; or
   D.   Officially adopted stormwater management plans call for placement of
detention or retention facilities in a stream; or
   E.   Public utilities, including sanitary sewers, pipelines and roadways
require stream crossing or relocation where there are not practical
alternatives."
Add § 607.13 "Stream modification, when permitted, is subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
   A.   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions must be
significantly improved by the modification; no significant habitat area may be
destroyed;
   B.   The amount of flow and velocity of a stream is not to be increased or
decreased as the stream enters or leaves a subject property, unless this
reflects an improvement over previous conditions in terms of reduced flooding,
reduced erosion, or enhanced low-flow conditions.
   C.   Stream channel enlargement or other modifications that would increase
conveyance, shall not be permitted if the intended purpose is to accommodate
development activities in the floodplain."
Add § 607.14 "Armoring in the form of bulkheads, riprap or other materials or
devices is not permitted except in accordance with the following:
   A.   Significant erosion cannot be prevented in any other way and the use of
vegetation and gradual bank slopes has not sufficiently stabilized the
shoreline or bank;
   B.   The bulkhead or other device is not placed within a wetland or between
a wetland and a lake or pond;
   C.   The bulkhead, riprap or other device will minimize the transmittal of
wave energy or currents to other properties; and
   D.   The change in the horizontal or vertical configuration of the land must
be kept to a minimum."
Add § 607.15 "Culverts are not permitted in streams except in accordance with
the following:
   A.   Where a culvert is necessary for creating access to a property. Use of
culverts as a convenience in order to facilitate general site design shall not
be permitted;
   B.   The culvert must allow passage of fish inhabiting the stream and
accommodate the 100 year flood event without increasing upstream flooding
except where a restricting culvert is desirable as part of an overall storm and
floodwater management plan;
   C.   The culvert must be maintained free of debris and sediment to allow
free passage of water and fish."
Add § 601.16 "Impoundments of streams is not permitted except in accordance
with the following:
   A.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing
regional stormwater detention, flood control or public recreation;
   B.   The impoundment will not prevent the upstream migration of indigenous
fish species;
   C.   A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream
watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the
input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals and other pollutants;
   D.   Impoundments without permanent low-flow pools are preferred except
where a permanent pool is necessary to achieve the intended benefits of the
impoundment (e.g. recreation or water quality mitigation); and
   E.   Impoundment design shall include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank
stabilization measures, and sedimentation basins."
Article 7 see WMO
Article 8 see WMO
Article 9 see WMO
Article 10 see WMO
Replace § 1000.4 with "Inspections shall verify compliance with this ordinance
and issued watershed management permits. The co-permittee shall notify the
village engineer within two (2) working days of the completion of the
construction stages specified below:
   A.   After mobilization and installation of initial erosion and sediment
control measures prior to any soil disturbance;
   B.   After rough grading;
   C.   During excavation for the construction of qualified sewer construction,
major stormwater systems and detention facilities;
   D.   After final grading, seeding and landscaping;
   E.   Completion of qualified sewer construction; and
   F.   Other stages as specified by the village engineer or the village
designated enforcement officer; and
   G.   If stripping, clearing grading and/or landscaping are to be done in
phases, the co-permittee shall give notice and request inspection at the
completion of the above work stages in each phase."
Add § 1000.6 "The co-permittee or his/her agent shall make regular inspections
of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on
the approved erosion and sediment control plans. The inspector shall be a
person knowledgeable in the principles and practices of erosion and sediment
control measures and the inspections shall be performed at least once every
seven (7) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of a storm
that produces a rainfall depth of one-half (0.5) inch or greater. The purpose
of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the
control plan and the need for additional control measures. All inspections
shall be documented in written form and submitted to the village engineer at
the time interval specified in the approved permit."
Article 11 see WMO
Article 12 see WMO
Article 13 see WMO
Article 14 see WMO
Signature page see WMO
Appendix A see WMO
Appendix B see WMO
Appendix C see WMO
Appendix D see WMO
Appendix E see WMO
Appendix F see WMO
Appendix G see WMO
(Ord. 0-2015-1062, 3-19-2015)
CHAPTER 3
ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
SECTION:
12-3-1: Purpose; Intent
12-3-2: Definitions
12-3-3: Applicability
12-3-4: Responsibility For Administration
12-3-5: Severability
12-3-6: Ultimate Responsibility
12-3-7: Discharge Prohibitions
12-3-8: Suspension Of MS4 Access
12-3-9: Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges
12-3-10: Monitoring Of Discharges
12-3-11: Requirement To Prevent, Control, And Reduce Stormwater Pollutants By
The Use Of Best Management Practices
12-3-12: Watercourse Protection
12-3-13: Notification Of Spills
12-3-14: Enforcement
12-3-15: Appeal Of Notice Of Violation
12-3-16: Enforcement Measures After Appeal
12-3-17: Cost Of Abatement Of The Violation
12-3-18: Injunctive Relief
12-3-19: Compensatory Action
12-3-20: Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
12-3-21: Civil Prosecution
12-3-22: Remedies Not Exclusive
12-3-1: PURPOSE; INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of South Barrington through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The
objectives of this chapter are:
   A.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user;
   B.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system;
   C.   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Employees or designees of the village president
of the village designated to enforce this chapter.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
Currently these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
five (5) acres or more. Beginning in March 2003, NPDES stormwater phase II
permits will be required for construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm
drain system, except as exempted in section
12-3-7 of this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
   A.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not
limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and
any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, or
   B.   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an appropriate jurisdictional agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined
in 40 CFR, section 122.26 (b)(14).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): The system of stormwater drainage
facilities, including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels and storm
drains, owned and operated by the village and used for collecting and/or
conveying stormwater. The municipal separate storm sewer system is not used for
collecting and/or conveying sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 USC section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an
individual, group, or general area wide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
humanmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water
from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A document which describes the best
management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060,
3-19-2015)
12-3-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated
on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
appropriate jurisdictional agency. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-
1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The village of South Barrington shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
appropriate jurisdictional agency may be delegated in writing by the director
of the appropriate jurisdictional agency to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-
2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-5: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-6: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011;
amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-7: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any
materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than stormwater.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm
drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
      1.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains, crawl space pumps, air conditioning
condensation, springs, storm sewer cleaning water, street wash water from
streets where spill or leaks of pollutants or toxic or hazardous materials has
not occurred (unless the pollutants or toxic or hazardous materials have been
removed), routine external building washing that does not use detergents,
noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools (if clean, nonchlorinated, and pH neutral), firefighting
activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
      2.   Discharges specified in writing by the appropriate jurisdictional
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
      3.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a notification
to the appropriate jurisdictional agency prior to the time of the test.
      4.   The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the federal environmental
protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
   B.   Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      2.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      3.   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-8: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
   A.   Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The
village of South Barrington may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the appropriate jurisdictional agency
may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
   B.   Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
appropriate jurisdictional agency will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the appropriate
jurisdictional agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
   C.   Offense Committed: A person commits an offense if the person reinstates
MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the appropriate jurisdictional agency. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011;
amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-9: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the village
of South Barrington prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. (Ord. 2011-
945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-10: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
   A.   Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.
   B.   Access To Facilities:
      1.   The village of South Barrington shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the appropriate
jurisdictional agency.
      2.   Facility operators shall allow the village of South Barrington ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional
duties as defined by state and federal law.
      3.   The village of South Barrington shall have the right to set up on
any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
appropriate jurisdictional agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's stormwater discharge.
      4.   The village of South Barrington has the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe,
proper and accurate operating condition by the discharger at its own expense.
      5.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the village of South Barrington and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
operator.
      6.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the village of South Barrington
access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit
and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES
permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an
offense if the person denies the appropriate jurisdictional agency reasonable
access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity
authorized or required by this chapter.
      7.   If the village of South Barrington has been refused access to any
part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the appropriate jurisdictional agency may
seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-11: REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The village of South Barrington will adopt requirements identifying best
management practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation, or facility which may
cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm
drain system, or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or
industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these
structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural
and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions
of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with
industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements
of the NPDES permit. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-
2015)
12-3-12: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060,
3-19-2015)
12-3-13: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. said
person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and
cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials
said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of
nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the appropriate jurisdictional
agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the village of South Barrington within three (3)
business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator
of such establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall
be retained for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord.
0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-14: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever the village of South Barrington finds
that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of
this chapter, the appropriate jurisdictional agency may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require,
without limitation:
      1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      3.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
      6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If abatement
of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice
shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be
completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to
remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by
a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall
be charged to the violator. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060,
3-19-2015)
12-3-15: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the
village. The notice of appeal must be received within ten (10) days from the
date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the village
administrator or his/her designee shall take place within fifteen (15) days
from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the village
administrator or his/her designee shall be final. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011;
amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-16: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth
in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten (10) days
of the decision of the village administrator or his/her designee upholding the
decision of the village, then representatives of the village may enter upon the
subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises
to refuse to allow the village or designated contractor to enter upon the
premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord.
0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-17: COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION:
Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of
the assessment within seven (7) days. If the amount due is not paid within a
timely manner as determined by the decision of the village administrator or by
the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become
a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable
to the village by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not
more than twelve (12) equal payments. Interest at the rate of ten percent (10%)
per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the thirtieth day
following discovery of the violation. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-
2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-18: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the village may petition
for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from
activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to
perform abatement or remediation of the violation. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011;
amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-19: COMPENSATORY ACTION:
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this
chapter, the village administrator or his/her designee may impose upon a
violator, alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-
2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-20: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord.
0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-21: CIVIL PROSECUTION:
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be
liable to civil prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be
subject to a civil penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day.
The appropriate jurisdictional agency may recover all attorney fees, court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including
sampling and monitoring expenses. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-
1060, 3-19-2015)
12-3-22: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the appropriate jurisdictional agency to seek cumulative
remedies. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
CHAPTER 4
POSTCONSTRUCTION STORMWATER CONTROL OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
12-4-1: Definitions
12-4-2: Design
12-4-3: Routine Maintenance
12-4-4: Nonroutine Maintenance
12-4-5: Inspections
12-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Structural device, measure, facility, or
activity that helps to achieve stormwater management control objectives at a
designated site.
PLAN: A document approved at the site design phase that outlines the measures
and practices used to control stormwater runoff at a site. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-
11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-4-2: DESIGN:
   A.   All stormwater BMPs shall be designed in a manner to minimize the need
for maintenance and reduce the chances of failure. Design guidelines are
outlined in this code.
   B.   Stormwater easements and covenants shall be provided by the property
owner for access for facility inspections and maintenance. Easements and
covenants shall be recorded with the village of South Barrington prior to the
issuance of a permit.
   C.   Final design shall be approved by the village of South Barrington.
(Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-4-3: ROUTINE MAINTENANCE:
   A.   All stormwater BMPs shall be maintained according to the measures
outlined in this code, or in guidance documents provided by the village, and as
approved in the permit.
   B.   The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall be
designated in the plan. Options include:
      1.   Property owner.
      2.   Homeowners' association, provided that provisions for financing
necessary maintenance are included in deed restrictions or other contractual
agreements.
      3.   The village of South Barrington.
   C.   Maintenance agreements shall specify responsibilities for financing
maintenance. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-4-4: NONROUTINE MAINTENANCE:
Nonroutine maintenance includes maintenance activities that are expensive but
infrequent, such as pond dredging or major repairs to stormwater structures.
   A.   Nonroutine maintenance shall be performed on an as needed basis based
on information gathered during regular inspections.
   B.   If nonroutine maintenance activities are not completed in a timely
manner or as specified in the approved plan, the village of South Barrington
may complete the necessary maintenance at the owner's/operator's expense. (Ord.
2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060, 3-19-2015)
12-4-5: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall
inspect stormwater BMPs on a regular basis as outlined in the plan.
   B.   Authorized representatives of the village of South Barrington may enter
at reasonable times to conduct on site inspections or routine maintenance.
   C.   For BMPs maintained by the property owner or homeowners' association,
inspection and maintenance reports shall be filed with the village of South
Barrington as provided for in the plan.
   D.   Authorized representatives of the village of South Barrington may
conduct inspections to confirm the information in the reports filed under
subsection C of this section. (Ord. 2011-945, 8-11-2011; amd. Ord. 0-2015-1060,
3-19-2015)
 
