VILLAGE OF SPAULDING, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Current through Ordinance 2025-09, passed 9-15-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This Village Code of the Village of Spaulding, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-09, passed September 15, 2025.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the Village Office in order to ascertain whether any
particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
SPAULDING VILLAGE CODE   1
SAVING CLAUSE   2
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION   3
GENERAL PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT   4
OFFICIAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS   5
MAYOR   6
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES   7
VILLAGE CLERK   8
VILLAGE FINANCE DEPARTMENT   9
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL   10
   VILLAGE ATTORNEY   10A
   VILLAGE ENGINEER   10B
   VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR   10C
ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS   11
CHAPTER 1: SPAULDING VILLAGE CODE
Section
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-5: Jurisdiction
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Village Code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of Spaulding. This
Village Code shall be known and cited as the SPAULDING VILLAGE CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the Board of Trustees and shall be
supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the Village as
provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the Village Attorney, acting for
the Board of Trustees. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this Village Code by title in any legal documents. (1990 Code § 1-1-1; amd.
2019 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of
the State as the ordinances of the Village of general and permanent effect,
except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title.
(1990 Code § 1-1-2)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Village Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section numbers of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Village Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifier, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Village Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the Village Code .
(1990 Code § 1-1-3; amd. 2019 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
   A.   It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or
deface in any way any section or any page of this Village Code in such a manner
that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement
pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized
by the Board of Trustees. The Village Clerk shall see that the replacement
pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the Office of
the Clerk.
   B.   Any person having in his custody an official copy of the Village Code
shall make every effort to maintain said Code in an up-to-date and efficient
manner. Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement
pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the
Office of the Village Clerk. Said Code Books, while in actual possession of
officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the
Village and shall be returned to the Office of the Clerk upon termination of
office or separation of duties.
(1990 Code § 1-1-4)
1-1-5: JURISDICTION:
Unless otherwise provided herein, this Code applies to acts performed within
the corporate limits of the Village. Provisions of this Code also apply to acts
performed outside the corporate limits and up to the limits prescribed by law,
where the law confers power on the Village to regulate such particular acts
outside the corporate limits.
(1990 Code § 1-1-5)
CHAPTER 2: SAVING CLAUSE
Section
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Court Proceedings
1-2-3: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this
Village Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Village
Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Tax levy ordinances;
   B.   Appropriation ordinances;
   C.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
   D.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations;
   E.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants;
   F.   Salary ordinances;
   G.   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places;
   H.   Improvement ordinances;
   I.   Bond ordinances;
   J.   Ordinances relating to elections;
   K.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the Village; and
   L.   All special ordinances.
(1990 Code § 1-1-8; amd. 2019 Code)
1-2-2: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the Village herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this Village Code.
(1990 Code § 1-1-10)
1-2-3: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Village Code, or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference, is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any codes or portions
of codes adopted herein by reference. The Village Board of Trustees hereby
declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
(1990 Code § 1-1-11; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 3: DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
Section
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the Village President and Board of Trustees may
be fully carried out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other Village officer to do some act or perform
some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or
other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   D.   Gender: The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to
be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
   E.   May; Shall: The word “may” is permissive; the word “shall” is
mandatory.
   F.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   G.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   H.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words “of the Village of Spaulding”.
   I.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   J.   Ordinance: The word “ordinance” contained in the ordinances of the
Village has been changed in the content of this Village Code to “title”,
“chapter”, “section” and/or “subsection” or words of like import for
organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to Village
ordinances is not meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original
ordinances.
(1990 Code §§ 1-1-13, 1-1-14; amd. 2019 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the Village Board of Trustees of
the Village of Spaulding, Illinois.
CODE: The Village Code of the Village of Spaulding.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The Mayor and the Village Board of Trustees.
COUNTY: The County of Sangamon, State of Illinois.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year for the Village shall begin on June 1 of each year
and end on May 31 of the following year.
ILCS: Illinois Compiled Statutes.
MAYOR: See definition of Village President.
MUNICIPAL YEAR: The Municipal year shall commence on May 1 and shall end on the
following April 30. No appointments shall be made during the last month of the
Municipal year in the year of a Mayoral election.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
VILLAGE: The Village of Spaulding, County of Sangamon, State of Illinois.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The President of the Village may be referred to as “Mayor”
or “President” of the Village.
(1990 Code §§ 1-1-14, 1-2-27, 1-2-28; amd. 2019 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the Village Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the sections and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(1990 Code § 1-1-15; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 4: GENERAL PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
1-4-1: Adoption Of Statute
1-4-2: Definitions
1-4-3: Code Hearing Department
1-4-4: Hearing Procedures Not Exclusive
1-4-5: Instituting Proceedings
1-4-6: Subpoenas; Defaults
1-4-7: Hearings; Evidence
1-4-8: Qualifications Of Hearing Officers
1-4-9: Findings, Decision And Order
1-4-10: Review Under Administrative Review Law
1-4-11: Judgment On Findings, Decision And Order
1-4-12:   Vehicle Violations; Failure To Appear; Service Of Additional Notices;
License Suspension
1-4-13: Imposition Of Penalty
1-4-14: Revocation Of License Or Permit
1-4-15: Application Of Provisions
1-4-16: Liability Of Officers
1-4-17: Settlements
1-4-1: ADOPTION OF STATUTE:
The Village adopts ILCS Division 2.2 of Article I as it may be amended from
time to time and as allowed by said division. (65 ILCS 1-2.2-1 et seq.)
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING INSPECTOR. Any full- or part-time Village employee whose duties
include the inspection or examination of structures in the Village to determine
whether a code violation exists.
CODE: The Village Code, except for any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code
or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of
vehicles and except for any reportable offense under Section 6-204 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code.
HEARING OFFICER: An employee, official, contractor or agent of the Village,
other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
      1.   Preside at an administrative hearing to determine whether or not a
code violation exists;
      2.   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties
relevant to the existence of a code violation;
      3.   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing
and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
      4.   Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether
a code violation exists.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-3: CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT:
   A.   There is hereby established a Code Hearing Department in the Village.
Its function is to expedite the prosecution and correction of all code
violations in the manner set forth in this chapter.
   B.   The Code Hearing Department shall adjudicate any violation of the code
except for any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense
that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for
any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-4: HEARING PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
This chapter does not preclude the Village from using other methods to enforce
the code.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-5: INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   When an individual authorized to issue a code violation finds a code
violation to exist, he or she shall note the violation on a multiple-copy
violation notice and report form that indicates:
      1.   The name and address of the defendant;
      2.   The type and nature of the violation;
      3.   The date and time the violation was observed; and
      4.   The names of the witnesses of the violation, if any.
   B.   The violation report form shall be forwarded to the Code Hearing
Department where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report
and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose
on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than
forty (40) days after the violation is reported. However, if the code violation
involves a municipal ordinance regulating truants, the hearing date shall not
be less than seven (7) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is
reported.
   C.   One (1) copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the
files of the Code Hearing Department and shall be part of the record of
hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual
representing the municipality in the case so that he or she may prepare
evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the date
indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first class mail
to the defendant along with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the
hearing.
   D.   Service of any violation notice shall be made as follows:
      1.   In the case of violation of a vehicle regulation by:
         a.   Affixing the original or a copy of the notice to the vehicle;
         b.   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator, or lessee
of the vehicle, if present; or
         c.   Handing the notice to the responsible person or leaving the
notice with any person thirteen (13) years of age or older at the residence of
the registered owner.
      2.   In the case of any violation other than a violation of a vehicle
regulation by:
         a.   Handing the notice to the person responsible for the violation;
         b.   Handing the notice to the responsible person or leaving the
notice with any person thirteen (13) years of age or older at the residence of
the responsible owner;
         c.   Mailing the notice by first class mail to the person responsible
for the violation; or
         d.   Posting the notice upon the property where the violation is found
when the person is the owner or manager of the property.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-6: SUBPOENAS; DEFAULTS:
At any time prior to the hearing date, the Hearing Officer assigned to hear the
case may, at the request of either party, issue subpoenas directing witnesses
to appear and give testimony at the hearing or produce tangible things. If, on
the date set for the hearing, the defendant or his or her attorney fails to
appear, the Hearing Officer may find the defendant in default and proceed with
the hearing and enter an order by default.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-7: HEARINGS; EVIDENCE:
At the hearing, a Hearing Officer shall preside, shall hear testimony and shall
accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a code
violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply to hearings authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-8: QUALIFICATIONS OF HEARING OFFICERS:
   A.   Prior to conducting proceedings under this chapter, Hearing Officers
shall successfully complete a training program that includes the following:
      1.   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will
conduct;
      2.   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they
will administer; and
      3.   Observation of administrative hearings.
   B.   In addition, every Hearing Officer must be an attorney in good standing
and licensed to practice law in the State for at least three (3) years.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-9: FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER:
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether a code violation exists.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-10: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW:
The findings, decision and order of the Hearing Officer shall be subject to
review pursuant to the Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-11: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER:
A fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction
or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure to
exhaust judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review Law (735
ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.) shall be a debt due and owing the Village and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-12: VEHICLE VIOLATIONS; FAILURE TO APPEAR; SERVICE OF ADDITIONAL NOTICES;
LICENSE SUSPENSION:
In the case of vehicle violations:
   A.   Failure to make an appearance shall result in additional notices of
violation as provided in this section being sent by first class mail to the
registered owner of the vehicle at his or her address as recorded with the
Secretary of State.
   B.   A second notice of violation shall be sent to the owner of the cited
vehicle upon the failure of the recipient of a violation notice to make an
appearance. The recipient may appear by either paying the indicated fine and
assessed penalty for late charges or by requesting a hearing on the merits of
the citation in the time and manner specified on the second notice and
attending such hearing at the time, date and place specified by the Hearing
Officer. Failure to appear in the manner herein prescribed shall result in a
final determination of parking violation liability for the cited violation.
   C.   A notice of final determination of violation liability shall be sent to
the owner of the cited vehicle upon failure to appear pursuant to the second
notice of violation and after a final determination of violation liability has
been rendered. The recipient may appear by paying the fine and penalty within
the time specified on the notice and shall be advised that failure to do so may
result in the Village filing a petition in the Circuit Court to have the unpaid
fine or penalty rendered a judgment and that proceedings to suspend the owner’s
driver’s license be initiated for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten
(10) or more parking violations.
   D.   A notice of impending driver’s license suspension shall be sent to the
person for whom a final determination of liability was rendered in accordance
on each of ten (10) or more unpaid parking violations. Failure to pay the fines
and/or penalties owing within forty five (45) days of the notice’s date shall
result in notification to the Secretary of State of the owner’s eligibility for
initiation of driver’s license suspension proceedings.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-13: IMPOSITION OF PENALTY:
   A.   General Penalty Imposed: Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this
code, ordinances, or State statute, any person found to have been in violation
of any of the terms and provisions of this code shall be fined in accordance
with the classifications and fines set forth in subsections B and C of this
section.
   B.   Classifications: The following classifications are established to
reflect the relative seriousness of violations of the various sections of this
code and its ordinances:
      1.   Class A Violations: Actions which present an immediate risk to
health and safety. The fine for a Class A violation shall be a minimum of five
hundred dollars ($500.00). The maximum fine for each day there is found to be a
violation shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day.
      2.   Class B Violations: Actions which disrupt the neighborhood, detract
from the residential character of the community, and activity which could
result in substandard housing or unacceptable construction. Violations here are
viewed as presenting a limited health risk. The fine for Class B violations
shall be a minimum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The maximum fine for
each day there is found to be a violation shall be five hundred dollars
($500.00) per day.
      3.   Class C Violations: Nuisances which have a minimal effect on
neighbors, property values, safety or construction quality. The fine for Class
C violations shall be a minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The maximum
fine for each day there is found to be a violation shall be two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) per day.
   C.   Continued Violations: Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed to be a separate offense. Fines may be imposed for each day a violation
is found to exist. A penalty for each offense may also include a requirement
that the offending party perform some reasonable public service work such as,
but not limited to, picking up litter in public parks or upon public highways
or performing maintenance of public facilities. A violation hereof may be
established by a preponderance of the evidence.
   D.   Specific Violations: Except as provided elsewhere in this code,
ordinances, or state statute, the following specific violations shall be
classified as set forth below:
      1.   The following shall be classified as Class A violations (five
hundred dollars ($500.00) to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) fine):
         a.   The discharge of a firearm as more particularly set forth in
section
7-5-2 of this code.
         b.   The storage of explosives as more particularly set forth section
7-5-4 of this code.
      2.   The following shall be classified as Class B violations (two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) to five hundred dollars ($500.00) fine):
         a.   Building Code violations as more particularly set forth in
chapter 10-10 of this code.
         b.   Public health violations as more particularly set forth in title
5 of this code.
         c.   The violation of the general traffic and driving rules as more
particularly set forth in sections
8-2-5 and 8-3-1 of this code.
         d.   The violation of the vehicle equipment rules as more particularly
set forth in chapter 8-6 of this code.
         e.   The failure to remove abandoned vehicles as more particularly set
forth in chapter 8-7 of this code.
         f.   The failure to remove weeds, garbage, rubbish, and solid waste as
more particularly set forth in chapters 5-2 through 5-5 of this code.
         g.   The violation of the nuisance provisions as more particularly set
forth in chapter 5-1 of this code.
         h.   The failure to adhere to the anti-litter provisions.
         i.   The violation of the rules regulating fireworks as more
particularly set forth in chapter 6-4 of this code.
         j.   The violation of the street regulations as more particularly set
forth in chapter 9-1 of this code.
      3.   The following shall be classified as Class C violations (one hundred
dollars ($100.00) to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) fine): The violation
of any other rule, regulation, ordinance, state statute or otherwise where the
violation, classification, or penalty is not specifically provided for in this
code.
   E.   Costs And Attorneys’ Fees: In any case in which a defendant has failed
to comply with a judgment ordering a defendant to correct a code violation or
imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of a code violation, any
expenses incurred by the Village to enforce the judgment, including, but not
limited to, attorney’s fees, court costs, and costs related to property
demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of competent
jurisdiction or a Hearing Officer, shall be a debt due and owing the Village
and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses
being fixed by a Hearing Officer pursuant to this subsection E, the Village
shall provide notice to the defendant that states that the defendant shall
appear at a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Officer to determine
whether the defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall
set the date for such a hearing, which shall not be less than seven (7) days
from the date that notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven (7)
day period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the
mail. (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-55)
   F.   Limitations; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of subsection A of
this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that established
by State statute for the same offense.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-14: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any
license or permit previously issued to him or her by the Village may be revoked
by the court or by action of the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-15: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any
section of this code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or
where any act which is of a continuing nature or declared to be unlawful, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act
continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the Prosecuting Officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-16: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
The failure of any officer or employee to perform any official duty imposed by
this code shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for
violation of this code, unless a penalty is specifically provided for.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
1-4-17: SETTLEMENTS:
   A.   A Village police officer or the Village Attorney may, in his or her
discretion, refrain from filing formal charges of any ordinance violation under
the Village ordinances or this code against a defendant under the following
circumstances:
      1.   The defendant has not been convicted of or settled without formal
charge a similar offense under the Village ordinances or this code within one
(1) year of the alleged offense;
      2.   The offense involved is not a traffic offense which would be
reportable to the Secretary of State in the event of conviction and any other
offense that would be reportable to the State or the Federal government;
      3.   The offense involved is not related to a controlled substance;
      4.   The only possible disposition or remedy for the alleged offense is a
fine; and
      5.   The time for a defendant to take advantage of the alternative
disposition under this chapter has not expired.
   B.   The police officer or the Village Attorney may, in lieu of issuing and
filing a formal charge of a Village ordinance violation or a violation of this
code, issue a notice to the potential defendant on a form approved by the Chief
of Police and the Village Attorney, that in lieu of prosecution, the potential
defendant may pay an amount to the Village in compromise and settlement of the
potential charge, which is equal to the minimum fine which could be imposed if
a charge were filed under the section of the Village ordinance or this code
alleged to be in violation, and a conviction obtained under such section. The
compromise amount equal to the minimum fine shall be paid within thirty (30)
days of the date of the notice of the availability of the alternative
disposition.
   C.   Payment shall be by money order or cashier’s check. The payment shall
be considered to have been received on the postmark date in the event the
payment is mailed or the date the payment called for under this section is hand
delivered to the Village at the Village hall.
   D.   All such amounts paid in lieu of formal prosecution and in settlement
and compromise of the alleged offense shall be paid to the Village at the
Village hall, and amounts received by the Village shall be deposited with the
Village Treasurer. The Village shall furnish a receipt to the defendant, and
keep a record of all such amounts paid in settlement and compromise of alleged
violations.
   E.   The police officer or the Village Attorney may issue a formal charge of
an ordinance violation or a violation of this code and require appearance of
the defendant in court if a defendant does not settle and compromise the
alleged violation within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice.
(Ord. 2020-6-1, 6-8-2020)
CHAPTER 5: OFFICIAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Section
1-5-1: Corporate Seal
1-5-2: Elections
1-5-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
   A.   The Corporate Seal of the Village shall be the same as that used by the
Village. It shall be circular in form with the words, "Village of Spaulding,
Sangamon County, Illinois" in the exterior circle and the words, “Incorporated
November 16, 1905” in the center.
   B.   The Corporate Seal shall be used as such seal in all cases provided for
by law or by the ordinances of the Village and in all other cases in which, by
law and custom, it is usual and necessary for the corporation to use a seal.
The seal shall be and remain with the Village Clerk who shall be the legal
custodian.
(1990 Code § 1-2-18)
1-5-2: ELECTIONS:
   A.   Election Procedure: The provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
3.1-10-10 et seq., and 10 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., concerning
municipal elections shall govern the conduct of the Village elections.
   B.   Inauguration: The inauguration of newly elected Village officials shall
occur at the first regular or special meeting of the Village Board in the month
of May following the consolidated election in April.
(1990 Code § 1-2-19)
CHAPTER 6: MAYOR
Section
1-6-1: Election
1-6-2: Vacancy
1-6-3: Supervisory Powers
1-6-4: Deciding Vote
1-6-5: Appointment And Removal Of Officers
1-6-6: Designation Of Officers’ Duties
1-6-7: Other Duties Of Mayor
1-6-8: Act As Certain Commissioners
1-6-9: Mayor Pro Tem
1-6-1: ELECTION:
The Mayor shall be elected for a 4-year term and shall serve until his
successor is elected and has qualified.
(1990 Code § 1-2-35)
1-6-2: VACANCY:
If a vacancy occurs in the Office of the Mayor and there remains an unexpired
portion of the term of at least twenty eight (28) months and the vacancy occurs
at least one hundred thirty (130) days before the general Municipal election
next scheduled under the general election law, the vacancy shall be filled at
that general Municipal election. The Village Board shall elect one of its
members as “Acting Mayor” who shall perform the duties and possess all the
rights and powers of the Mayor until a successor to fill the vacancy has been
elected and has qualified.
(1990 Code § 1-2-36)
1-6-3: SUPERVISORY POWERS:
The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the Village, shall preside
over the meetings of the Board, and shall perform such duties as may be
required of him by statute or law. He shall have supervision over all of the
executive officers and employees of the Village and shall have the power and
authority to inspect all books and records pertaining to Village affairs and
kept by any officer or employee of the Village at any reasonable time.
(1990 Code § 1-2-37)
1-6-4: DECIDING VOTE:
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Village Board. He shall not vote
on any ordinance, resolution or motion, except: a) where the vote of the
Trustees has resulted in a tie; or b) where one-half (½) of the Trustees
elected have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion, even though
there is no tie; or c) where a vote greater than a majority of the Corporate
Authorities is required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes to adopt an
ordinance, resolution or motion. In each instance specified, the Mayor shall
vote. Nothing in this section shall deprive an Acting Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem
from voting in his capacity as Trustee, but he shall not be entitled to another
vote in his capacity as Acting Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem.
(1990 Code § 1-2-49)
1-6-5: APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF OFFICERS:
   A.   Appointment:
      1.   At the first annual meeting in May, the Mayor shall appoint, by and
with the advice and consent of the Village Board, all officers of the Village
whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for, and said officers
shall hold their offices for the ensuing month or year, and until their
respective successors are appointed and qualified (see also definition of
MUNICIPAL YEAR in section
1-3-2 of this title).
      2.   Any vacancy occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the
same manner.
      3.   The Mayor shall issue a commission or certificate of appointment to
all persons appointed to office in the Village.
(1990 Code § 1-2-38)
   B.   Removal: The Mayor shall have the power to remove any officer appointed
by him on any formal charge whenever he is of the opinion that the interests of
the Village demand such removal. He shall report the reasons for such removal
to the Board at a meeting to be held not less than five (5) days nor more than
ten (10) days after such removal. If the Mayor shall fail or refuse to file
with the Clerk a statement of the reasons for such removal, or if the Board, by
a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members authorized by law to be elected by
yeas and nays to be entered upon its record, disapprove of such removal, such
officer shall thereupon become restored to the office from which he was
removed, but he shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer
shall be removed a second time for the same offense.
(1990 Code § 1-2-39)
1-6-6: DESIGNATION OF OFFICERS' DUTIES:
Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any
appointed officer of the Village, this dispute shall be settled by the Mayor,
after consultation with the Village Attorney; and the Mayor shall have the
power to delegate to any appointive officer, any duty which is to be performed
when no specific officer has been directed to perform that duty.
(1990 Code § 1-2-40)
1-6-7: OTHER DUTIES OF MAYOR:
   A.   Signature: The Mayor shall sign all Village warrants, commissions,
permits and licenses granted by authority of the Board, except as otherwise
provided, and such other acts and deeds as law or ordinance may require his
official signature.
(1990 Code § 1-2-42)
   B.   Formal Occasions: The Mayor shall act for and on behalf of the Village
on formal occasions and receptions, but in his absence or inability to attend
any such function, the Mayor may select any other Village officer to so act.
(1990 Code § 1-2-43)
   C.   General Duties: The Mayor shall perform all the duties which are
prescribed by law, and shall take care that the laws and ordinances are
faithfully executed.
(1990 Code § 1-2-44)
1-6-8: ACT AS CERTAIN COMMISSIONERS:
   A.   Business License Commissioner: The Mayor is hereby designated as
License Commissioner to issue and revoke any and all business licenses as
prescribed by law, with the advice and consent of the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 1-2-46)
   B.   Liquor Commissioner: The Mayor is hereby designated as Liquor
Commissioner with all the powers to license and/or revoke any Village liquor
license, according to State and Village laws.
(1990 Code § 1-2-47)
   C.   Health Commissioner: The Mayor is hereby declared to be Health
Commissioner with all powers to abate and remove all nuisances or health
hazards within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Village authority as
prescribed by law.
(1990 Code § 1-2-48)
1-6-9: MAYOR PRO TEM:
During a temporary absence or disability of the Mayor which incapacitates him
from the performance of his duties, but does not create a vacancy in the
office, the Mayor shall appoint, and if he cannot, the Trustees shall appoint
one of its members to act as Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor Pro Tem, during this
absence or disability, shall perform his duties and possess all the rights and
powers of the Mayor. The Mayor may appoint an officer to administer the affairs
of the Village, with the advice and consent of the Village Board, whenever the
Village Board considers it necessary and expedient.
(1990 Code § 1-2-41)
CHAPTER 7: VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Section
1-7-1: Composition And General Powers
1-7-2: Compensation
1-7-3: Village Board Meetings
1-7-4: Vacancy
1-7-5: Committees
1-7-6: Rules And Order Of Business
1-7-7: Ordinances, Procedure For Passage
1-7-1: COMPOSITION AND GENERAL POWERS:
The Village Board shall consist of six (6) Trustees, elected in conformity with
this Code and State law governing elections in villages and shall have such
powers as are granted by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended. The term of
office shall be for four (4) years, or until their successors are elected and
have qualified.
(1990 Code § 1-2-1)
1-7-2: COMPENSATION:
Each Trustee shall receive a salary as provided in subsection
1-10-10A2 of this title. Each Trustee shall be entitled to reimbursement for
actual expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
(1990 Code § 1-2-2)
1-7-3: VILLAGE BOARD MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The regular stated meetings of the Village Board
shall be held in the Village Hall Building on the second Monday of each month
at seven o' clock (7:00) P.M.
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the Village Board may be held
from time to time, but written notice of such special meeting must be served
upon the Mayor, Village Clerk, and each member of the Village Board by mailing
or delivering a notice to each such person at least twenty four (24) hours in
advance of the special meeting. The notice must state the purpose for which the
special meeting is called. No business may be transacted at the special
meeting, except that for which it is called, unless all members of the Village
Board are present and agree to the transaction of other business. Public notice
of such special meeting shall also be given by posting a copy of the notice at
the building where the meeting is to be held, and such notice shall be posted
at least forty eight (48) hours in advance of the special meeting.
   C.   Holidays: If the second Monday of the month is a public holiday, the
Village Board shall meet at the same hour on a day determined by the Village
Board before or following the public holiday.
   D.   Location: All regular and special meetings of the Village Board shall
be held at a designated placed designated by the Village.
   E.   Adjourned Meetings: A regular or special meeting may be adjourned to a
later date, provided it is not beyond the date of the next regular meeting of
the Village Board. Any subject may be considered at an adjourned regular
meeting that might have been considered at the original regular meeting. No
subject may be considered at any adjourned special meeting that might not have
been considered at the original special meeting unless all members of the
Village Board are present and agree to the transaction of other business.
   F.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the Village Board shall be open to the
public, except the following:
      1.   The appointment, employment, compensation, discipline, performance,
or dismissal of specific employees of the Village or Village Attorney,
including hearing testimony on a complaint lodged against an employee of the
Village or against the Village Attorney to determine its validity.
      2.   Collective negotiating matters between the city and its employees or
their representatives, or deliberations concerning salary schedules for one or
more classes of employees.
      3.   The selection of a person to fill a “public office”, as defined by 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/2, including a vacancy in a public office, when
the city is given power to appoint under law or ordinance, or the discipline,
performance or removal of the occupant of a public office, when the city is
given power to remove the occupant under law or ordinance.
      4.   Evidence or testimony presented in open hearing, or in closed
hearing where specifically authorized by law, to a “quasi-adjudicative body”,
as defined by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/2; provided, that the body
prepares and makes available for public inspection a written decision setting
forth its determinative reasoning.
      5.   The purchase or lease of real property for the use of the city,
including meetings held for the purpose of discussing whether a particular
parcel should be acquired.
      6.   The setting of a price for sale or lease of property owned by the
Village.
      7.   The sale or purchase of securities, investments, or investment
contracts.
      8.   Security procedures and the use of personnel and equipment to
respond to an actual, a threatened, or a reasonably potential danger to the
safety of employees, students, staff, the public, or public property.
      9.   Student disciplinary cases.
      10.   The placement of individual students in special education programs
and other matters relating to individual students.
      11.   Litigation, when an action against, affecting or on behalf of the
city has been filed and is pending before a court or administrative tribunal,
or when the Village finds that an action is probable or imminent, in which
case, the basis for the finding shall be recorded and entered into the minutes
of the closed meeting.
      12.   The establishment of reserves or settlement of claims as provided
in the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, if
otherwise the disposition of a claim or potential claim might be prejudiced, or
the review or discussion of claims, loss or risk management information,
records, data, advice or communications from or with respect to any insurer of
the Village or any intergovernmental risk management association or self-
insurance pool of which the Village is a member.
      13.   Conciliation of complaints of discrimination in the sale or rental
of housing, when closed meetings are authorized by the law or ordinance
prescribing fair housing practices and creating a commission or administrative
agency for their enforcement.
      14.   Informant sources, the hiring or assignment of undercover personnel
or equipment, or ongoing, prior or future criminal investigations, when
discussed by a public body with criminal investigatory responsibilities.
      15.   Professional ethics or performance when considered by an advisory
body appointed to advise a licensing or regulatory agency on matters germane to
the advisory body's field of competence.
      16.   Self-evaluation, practices and procedures or professional ethics,
when meeting with a representative of a statewide association of which the city
is a member.
      17.   The recruitment, credentialing, discipline or formal peer review of
physicians or other healthcare professionals for a hospital, or other
institution providing medical care, that is operated by the Village.
      18.   Deliberations for decisions of the prisoner review board.
      19.   Review or discussion of applications received under the
Experimental Organ Transplantation Procedures Act.
      20.   The classification and discussion of matters classified as
confidential or continued confidential by the State Government Suggestion Award
Board.
      21.   Discussion of minutes of meetings lawfully closed under this
subsection, whether for purposes of approval by the body of the minutes or
semiannual review of the minutes as mandated by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
120/2.06.
      22.   Deliberations for decisions of the State Emergency Medical Services
Disciplinary Review Board.
      23.   The operation by the city of a municipal utility or the operation
of a municipal power agency or municipal natural gas agency when the discussion
involves: a) contracts relating to the purchase, sale, or delivery of
electricity or natural gas; or b) the results or conclusions of load forecast
studies.
      24.   Meetings of a residential healthcare facility resident sexual
assault and death review team or the executive council under the Abuse
Prevention Review Team Act.
      25.   Such other exemptions authorized by law as now or hereafter
amended.
   G.   Taped Meetings:
      1.   All meetings of the Village Board shall be taped and maintained by
the Village Clerk.
      2.   The Village Clerk shall maintain all tape recordings of meetings of
the Village Board in compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations
of the state and the Village.
      3.   The Village Clerk shall use the tape recordings in the preparation
of the minutes of the respective meetings of the Village Board. The tape
recordings shall not constitute the official record of the Village Board.
      4.   All tape recordings shall be maintained until approval by the
Village Board of the minutes of the respective meeting. Upon approval of the
minutes of the meeting, the Village Board shall erase the tape recording;
provided, however, that all tape recordings of any executive session of the
Village Board shall be maintained on a separate tape and shall be retained as
provided and required by law.
   H.   Recording Meetings; Electronic Attendance:
      1.   Recording Of Meetings: Any person may record, by tape, film, digital
media, or other means, Board of Trustee meetings which are open to the public.
In order to facilitate the timely conduct of the meeting and the observation
and/or participation of all attendees, the following rules shall apply:
         a.   The Mayor shall be given advance notice to the extent
practicable.
         b.   The person planning to record the meeting will make advance
arrangements, if needed, to set up equipment so that the meeting is not
disrupted or delayed.
         c.   Any equipment used and the person or persons using it shall, to
the greatest extent possible, not block the view of other attendees, nor shall
they cause a distraction by talking or moving other than what is absolutely
necessary to the operation of the equipment.
         d.   If any person wishing to address the meeting refuses to do so if
he or she is being recorded, the mayor may require that recording be stopped
for the duration of that person’s presentation to the Village Board.
         e.   Should the recording process, or the person or persons making the
recording become disruptive to the conduct of the meeting, the mayor may order
the recording stopped and equipment removed or, alternatively, turned off and
left in place, until the meeting is concluded.
      2.   Electronic Attendance: When a member of the Village Board cannot
physically be present at a Board meeting, he or she may be permitted to attend
electronically when the following conditions are met:
         a.   A quorum of the Village Board is physically present.
         b.   The member who is prevented from physically attending the council
attests to the reason which must be one of the following:
         (1)   Personal illness or disability;
         (2)   Employment purposes or the business of the Village; or
         (3)   A family or other emergency.
         c.   A majority of the quorum physically present, by roll call vote,
agrees to allow the member to participate.
         d.   A member of the Village Board, who anticipates not being able to
attend the meeting physically, shall notify the Village Clerk in advance of the
meeting. Should the member not know in advance or not be able to communicate
with the Village Clerk in advance, that member shall still be able to
participate so long as the requirements above are met.
   I.   Rules And Order Of Business:
      1.   Order Of Business: The order of business of the Village Board shall
be as follows:
         a.   Roll call.
         b.   Minutes of preceding meeting.
         c.   Reports of officers.
         d.   Reports of committees.
         e.   Other business.
      2.   Resolutions: Any resolution submitted to the Village Board shall be
reduced to writing before being voted upon on the request of any two (2)
members of the Board.
      3.   Addressing Meetings: No person other than a member of the Village
Board shall address that body at any regular or special meeting except upon
consent of a majority of the members present.
      4.   Robert’s Rules Of Order: “Robert’s Rules Of Order” shall govern the
deliberations of the Board except when in conflict with any rule, resolution or
ordinance adopted by the Board.
(Ord. 2019-5-1, 5-6-2019)
1-7-4: VACANCY:
When a vacancy occurs, if more than twenty eight (28) months remain in the term
and the vacancy occurs not less than one hundred thirty (130) days before the
next consolidated election, the office shall be filled for the unexpired
portion of the term by special election at that consolidated election. During
the period from the time that the vacancy occurs until the next election of
Trustees, the vacancy may be filled by the appointment of a Trustee by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 1-2-5)
1-7-5: COMMITTEES:
   A.   Standing Committees:
      1.   The following standing committees of the Village Board are hereby
established:
         a.   Finance and Ordinances.
         b.   Streets and Public Works.
         c.   Health and Animals.
         d.   Police and Public Safety.
         e.   Liquor.
      f.   Parks.
      2.   The committees shall be appointed annually by the Mayor.
      3.   The Mayor shall be ex officio Chair of each and every standing
committee.
      4.   The first named Trustee of each committee shall be the Chair.
      5.   So far as is practicable, reports of committees shall be in writing.
      6.   As provided by law, any report of a committee of the Board shall be
deferred for final action thereon to the next regular meeting of the same after
the report is made, upon the request of any two (2) Trustees present.
      7.   Each standing committee of the Village Board shall exercise a
general supervision over the affairs of the department of Municipal government
with which it is connected; shall ascertain the condition and needs of said
department; shall, from time to time, report the same to the Mayor and Village
Board so that a full understanding thereof may be had, and generally, shall do
all acts necessary to promote the efficiency of the department.
(1990 Code § 1-2-6)
   B.   Special Committees: Special committees may be appointed by the Mayor
subject to the advice and consent of the Trustees as may be needed from time to
time.
(1990 Code § 1-2-7)
1-7-6: RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations and
meetings of the Village Board:
   A.   Order Of Business: The order of business shall be as follows:
      1.   Call to order by presiding officer.
      2.   Roll call.
      3.   The reading of the journal of the proceedings of the last preceding
meeting or meetings, and correction and approval of the same, unless dispensed
with by the Village Board and correction of the journal of the proceedings of
previous meetings.
      4.   Reports and communications from the Mayor and other Village
officers.
      5.   Reports of committees.
      6.   Unfinished business.
      7.   Miscellaneous business.
All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided by the
Chair without debate, subject to appeal.
   B.   Duties Of Presiding Officer: The presiding officer shall preserve order
and decorum and may speak to points of order in preference to other Trustees,
and shall decide all questions of order, subject to appeal.
   C.   Duties Of Members:
      1.   While the presiding officer is putting the question, no member shall
walk across or out of the Board Chamber.
      2.   Every member, prior to his speaking, making a motion or seconding
the same shall not proceed with his remarks until recognized and named by the
Chair. He shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding
personalities and refraining from impugning the motives of any other Trustee’s
argument or vote.
   D.   Visitors: No person other than a member of the Board shall address that
body on the same question unless such person has been recognized by the
presiding officer.
   E.   Presentation Of New Business: When a Trustee wishes to present a
communication, petition, order, resolution, ordinance or other original matter,
he shall send it to the desk of the Clerk who shall read such matter when
reached in its proper order.
   F.   Debate:
      1.   No Trustee shall speak more an once on the same question, except by
consent of the presiding officer, or unless three-fourths (3/4) of the
Corporate Authorities agree to one’s right to debate should be limited to speak
only once, and then not until every other Trustee desiring to speak shall have
had an opportunity to do so; provided, however, that the proponent of the
matter under consideration, as the case may be, shall have the right to open
and close debate. No Trustee shall speak longer than ten (10) minutes at any
one time, except by consent of the Village Board; and in closing debate on any
question, as above provided, the speaker shall be limited to five (5) minutes,
except by special consent of the Board.
      2.   The Village Board, by motion, may limit debate. The presiding
officer shall have the right to participate in debate.
      3.   While a member is speaking, no Trustee shall hold any private
discussion, nor pass between the speaker and the Chair.
   G.   Call Of Trustees To Order: A Trustee, when called to order by the
Chair, shall thereupon discontinue speaking and take his seat and the order or
ruling of the Chair shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to the right
to appeal.
   H.   Appeals From Decision Of Chair:
      1.   Any Trustee may appeal to the Board from a ruling of the Chair, and
if the appeal is seconded, the Trustee making the appeal may briefly state his
reason for the same, and the Chair may briefly explain his ruling; but there
shall be no debate on the appeal and no other person shall participate in the
discussion. The presiding officer shall have the right to participate in
discussion.
      2.   The Chair shall then put the question, "Shall the decision of the
Chair be sustained?". If a majority of the Trustees present vote "No", the
decision of the Chair shall be overruled, otherwise it shall be sustained.
   I.   Question Of Personal Privilege: The right of a member to address the
Board on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which
his integrity, character, or motives are assailed, questioned or impugned.
   J.   Voting: Every other member who shall be present when a question is
stated from the Chair shall vote thereon, unless he is personally interested in
the question, in which case, he shall take whatever steps are necessary to
ensure that his vote is not taken.
   K.   Special Order Of Business: Any matter before the Village Board may be
set down as a special order of business at a time certain if two-thirds (2/3)
of the Trustees present vote in the affirmative, but not otherwise.
   L.   Seconding Of Motions Required; Written Motions: No motion shall be put
or debated in the meeting or in committee unless it be seconded. When a motion
is seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer before debate, and
every motion in the Board, except motions of procedure, shall be reduced to
writing, if required by a member, and the proposer of the motion shall be
entitled to the floor.
   M.   Division Of Questions: If any question under consideration contains
several distinct propositions, the Trustees, by a majority vote of the Trustees
present, may divide such question.
   N.   Record Of Motions: In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered
in the journal, the name of the Trustee moving the same shall be entered also.
   O.   Announcement And Changes Of Vote: The result of all votes by yeas and
nays shall not be announced by the Clerk, but shall be handed by him to the
Chair for announcement, and no vote shall be changed after the tally list has
passed from the hands of the Clerk.
   P.   Precedence Of Motions: When a question is under debate, the following
motions shall be in order and shall have precedence over each other in order,
as listed:
      1.   To adjourn to a day certain.
      2.   To adjourn.
      3.   To take a recess.
      4.   To lay on the table.
      5.   The previous question.
      6.   To refer.
      7.   To amend.
      8.   To defer or postpone to a time certain.
      9.   To defer or postpone (without reference to time).
      10.   To defer or postpone indefinitely.
Numbers 2, 4, and 5 to be decided without debate.
   Q.   Motions To Adjourn:
      1.   A motion to adjourn the meeting shall always be in order, except:
         a.   When a Trustee is in possession of the floor.
         b.   While the yeas and nays are being called.
         c.   When the members are voting.
         d.   When adjournment was the last preceding motion.
         e.   When it has been decided that the previous question shall be
taken.
      2.   A motion simply to adjourn shall not be subject to amendment or
debate, but a motion to adjourn to a time certain shall be.
      3.   The Village Board may, at any time, adjourn over one or more regular
meetings, on a vote of a majority of all the Trustees authorized by law to be
elected.
   R.   Previous Question: When the previous question is moved on the main
question and seconded, it shall be put on this form: "Shall the main question
now be put?". If such motion be carried, all further amendments and all further
motions and debate shall be excluded, and the question put without delay upon
the pending amendment in proper order and then upon the main question.
   S.   Motions To Lay On The Table And To Take From The Table:
      1.   A motion simply to lay the question on the table shall not be
debatable, but a motion to lay on the table and publish, or with any other
condition shall be subject to amendment and debate.
      2.   A motion to take any motion or other proposition from the table may
be proposed at the same meeting at which such motion or proposition was laid
upon the table, provided two-thirds (2/3) of the Trustees vote therefor.
      3.   A motion to lay any particular motion or proposition on the table
shall apply to that motion or proposition only. An amendment to the main
question or other pending question may be laid on the table and neither the
main question nor such other pending question shall be affected thereby.
   T.   Indefinite Postponement, Motion To Defer Or Postpone Without Any
Reference To Time:
      1.   When consideration of a motion or other proposition is postponed
indefinitely, it shall not be again taken up at the same meeting.
      2.   A motion to postpone indefinitely shall not open the main question
to debate.
      3.   A motion to defer or postpone without any reference to time shall
not be construed as a motion to postpone indefinitely, but shall be considered
to be of the same general nature and to possess the same general attributes so
far as applicable under these rules, as a motion to postpone indefinitely or to
a time certain.
   U.   Motion To Refer: A motion to refer to a standing committee shall take
precedence over a similar motion to refer to a special committee.
   V.   Motion To Amend:
      1.   A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend
an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.
      2.   An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order;
but an amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order.
      3.   On an amendment to "Strike Out and Insert", the paragraph to be
amended shall first be read as it stands, then the words proposed to be
stricken out, then those to be inserted, and finally, the paragraph as it will
stand if so amended shall be read.
      4.   An amendment to the main question or other pending questions may be
referred to a committee and neither the main question nor such other pending
question shall be affected thereby.
   W.   Filling Of Blanks: When a blank is to be filled, and different sums or
times proposed, the question shall be taken first on the least sum or the
longest time.
   X.   Motion To Substitute: A substitute for any original proposition under
debate or for any pending amendment of such proposition may be entertained
notwithstanding that at such time, further amendment is admissible; and if
accepted by the Trustees by a vote shall entirely supersede such original
proposition or amendment, as the case may be, and cut off all amendments
appertaining thereto.
   Y.   Reconsideration:
      1.   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the same
meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A motion for
reconsideration having been once made and decided in the negative shall not be
renewed, nor shall a motion to reconsider be reconsidered.
      2.   A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by Trustees who
voted on the prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered, unless
otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that where a motion has received
a majority vote in the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on the ground
that a greater number of affirmative votes is required by statute for the
passage or adoption of such motion, then in such case, a motion to reconsider
may be made and seconded only by those who voted in the affirmative on such
question to be reconsidered.
   Z.   Adoption Of Robert's “Rules Of Order Revised”: The rules of
parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published edition of Robert’s
“Rules of Order Revised” shall govern the Board in all cases to which they are
applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the special rules of the
Board.
   AA.   Temporary Suspension Of Rules; Amendment Of Rules: These rules may be
temporarily suspended by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Corporate
Authorities entitled by law to be elected and shall not be repealed, altered or
amended, unless by concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of all the Corporate
Authorities entitled by law to be elected.
   BB.   Censure Of Trustees; Expulsion Of Trustees: Any Trustee acting or
appearing in a lewd or disgraceful manner, or who uses opprobrious, obscene and
insulting language to or about any member of the Board, or who does not obey
the order of the Chair, shall be, on motion, censured by a majority vote of the
members present, or expelled by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all Trustees
elected.
(1990 Code § 1-2-12)
1-7-7: ORDINANCES, PROCEDURE FOR PASSAGE:
   A.   Attorney: It shall be the duty of the Village Attorney to prepare such
ordinances as may be required by the Board of Trustees.
   B.   Vote Required; Yeas And Nays Record: The passage of all ordinances for
whatever purpose, and of any solution or motion: 1) to create any liability
against a Village, or 2) for the expenditure or appropriation of its money,
shall require the concurrence of a majority of all members then holding office
on the Village Board, including the Mayor, unless otherwise expressly provided
by this Code or any statute governing the passage of any ordinance, resolution,
or motion; provided, that where the Board consists of an odd number of
Trustees, the vote of the majority of the trustees shall be sufficient to pass
an ordinance. The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage
of the designated ordinances, resolutions, or motions and recorded in the
Journal of the Village Board. In addition, the Corporate Authorities at any
meeting may by unanimous consent take a single vote by yeas or nays on the
several questions of the passage on any two (2) or more of the designated
ordinances, orders, resolutions or motions placed together for voting purposes
in a single group, which single vote shall be entered separately in the journal
under the designation “omnibus vote”, and in such event the Clerk may enter the
words “omnibus vote” in the journal in each case in lieu of entering names of
the members of the Village Board voting “yea” and of those voting “nay” on the
passage of each of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions and motions
included in such omnibus group. The taking of such single or omnibus vote and
such entries of the words “omnibus vote” in the journal shall be a sufficient
compliance with the requirements of this section to all intents and purposes
and with like effect as if the vote in each case had been taken separately by
yeas and nays on the question of the passage of each ordinance, order,
resolution and motion included in such omnibus group, and separately recorded
in the journal. Likewise, the yeas and any other resolution or motion at the
request of any Trustees and shall be recorded in the journal.
   C.   Approval; Veto: All resolutions and motions: 1) which create any
liability against the Village, or 2) which provide for the expenditure or
appropriation of its money, or 3) to sell any Village property, and all
ordinances, passed by the Village Board shall be deposited with the Village
Clerk. If the Mayor approves them, he shall sign them. Those of which he
disapproves he shall return to the Village Board, with his written objections,
at the next regular meeting of the Village Board occurring not less than five
(5) days after their passage. The Mayor may disapprove of any one or more sums
appropriated in any ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation,
and, if so, the remainder shall be effective. However, the Mayor may disapprove
entirely of an ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation. If the
Mayor fails to return any ordinance or any specified resolution or motion with
his written objections, within the designated time, it shall become effective
despite the absence of his signature.
(1990 Code § 1-2-15)
CHAPTER 8: VILLAGE CLERK
Section
1-8-1: Election
1-8-2: Administration Of Oaths
1-8-3: Attend Board Meetings: Keep Journal
1-8-4: Deliver Books And Records To Successor
1-8-5: Submit Appropriation To Village Board
1-8-6: Duties Enumerated
1-8-1: ELECTION:
The Village Clerk shall be elected at the same election as the Mayor for a 4-
year term and shall serve until his successor is elected and has qualified.
(1990 Code § 1-2-52)
1-8-2: ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS:
The Village Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths or affirmations for
all lawful purposes.
(1990 Code § 1-2-58)
1-8-3: ATTEND BOARD MEETINGS; KEEP JOURNAL:
The Village Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Village Board and shall keep
in a suitable book to be styled “The Journal of the Village Board”, a full and
faithful record of its proceedings. The Village Clerk shall record and properly
index in a book kept for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the Village
Board, and at the foot of the record of each ordinance so recorded, he shall
make a memorandum of the date of the passage, when published, and a memorandum
of the publication of such ordinance. He shall also record in proper books for
the purpose, all official bonds and note upon each bond so recorded, when the
same was entered of record and the book and pages where recorded.
(1990 Code § 1-2-53)
1-8-4: DELIVER BOOKS AND RECORDS TO SUCCESSOR:
The Village Clerk shall carefully preserve in his office, all books, records,
papers, maps and effects of every detail and description belonging to the
Village or pertaining to his office, and not in actual use and possession of
other Village officers; and upon the expiration of his official term, he shall
deliver all such books, records, papers and effects to his successor in office.
(1990 Code § 1-2-61)
1-8-5: SUBMIT APPROPRIATION TO VILLAGE BOARD:
   A.   The Village Clerk shall, on or before the May 15 in each year, and
before the annual appropriations to be made by the Village Board, submit to the
Village Board a report of his estimates as nearly as may be of monies necessary
to defray the expenses of the corporation during the current fiscal year. The
Clerk shall, in said report, classify the different objects and branches of
expenditures, giving as nearly as may be the amount required for each; and for
the purpose of making such a report, he is hereby authorized to require of all
officers their statements of the condition and expenses of their respective
offices or departments with any proposed improvements, and the probable expense
thereof, all contracts made and unfinished and the amount of any and all
unexpended appropriations of the preceding year.
   B.   The Clerk shall, in such report, show the aggregate income of the
preceding fiscal year, from all sources, the amount of liabilities outstanding
upon which interest is to be paid, the bonds and debts payable during the year,
when due and when payable; and in such report, he shall give such other
information to the Village Board as he may deem necessary to the end that the
Village Board may fully understand the money exigencies and demands upon the
corporation for the current year.
(1990 Code § 1-2-65)
1-8-6: DUTIES ENUMERATED:
   A.   Deliver Papers To officers: The Clerk shall deliver to the several
committees of the Village Board and to the officers of the Village, all
petitions, communications, reports and resolutions, orders, claims and other
papers referred to those committees or officers by the Board on demand
therefor. He shall also, without delay, deliver to the Mayor, all ordinances or
resolutions, orders and claims in his charge which may require to be approved
or otherwise acted upon by the Mayor.
(1990 Code § 1-2-54)
   B.   Prepare Documents, Commissions And Licenses: The Clerk shall prepare
all commissions, licenses, permits and other official documents required to be
issued by him under this Code and shall attest the same with the Corporate
Seal, and he shall, in like manner, attest all deeds for the sale of real
estate owned and conveyed by the Village.
(1990 Code § 1-2-55)
   C.   Report Of Licenses: The Clerk shall report to the Village Board at its
regular meeting each month and more often if the Board so requires the data
contained in his license register with respect to licenses issued during the
previous month.
(1990 Code § 1-2-56)
   D.   License Plates, Tags Or Stickers: In all cases where the Village
requires a license to be obtained for the purpose of engaging in or carrying on
any business or occupation, and the licensee is required to obtain from the
Clerk, plates, tags or stickers, it shall be the duty of the Clerk to deliver
such plates, tags or stickers to the person paying the license fee.
(1990 Code § 1-2-57)
   E.   Keep List Of Outstanding Bonds: The Clerk shall keep in his office in a
book or books kept expressly for that purpose, a correct list of all the
outstanding bonds of the Village, showing the number and amount of each, for
and to whom the bonds are issued; and when the Village bonds are issued, or
purchased, or paid, or canceled, the book or books shall show the fact (and in
his annual report, the Clerk shall describe particularly the bond sold during
the year and the terms of sale, with each and every item of expense thereof).
(1990 Code § 1-2-59)
   F.   Report Monies Received And Warrants Drawn:
      1.   The Clerk shall, on or before the regular meeting in each month,
make out and submit to the Village Board a statement or report in writing of
all the monies received and warrants drawn by him during the preceding month,
showing therein from what sources and on what account monies were received, and
for what purposes and on what account the warrants were drawn or paid.
(1990 Code § 1-2-60)
      2.   The Clerk shall keep an accurate register of warrants drawn upon the
Treasury, specifying the date, to whom payable, the amount, and the particular
fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable.
(1990 Code § 1-2-63)
   G.   Bookkeeping: The Clerk shall, under the direction of the Finance and
Ordinance Committee, keep an open and complete set of books in which, among
other things, shall be set forth the appropriations of the fiscal year for each
distinct object and branch of expenditures, and also the receipts from each and
every source of revenue so far as he can ascertain the same.
(1990 Code § 1-2-62)
   H.   Other Duties: In addition to the duties outlined in this chapter, the
Clerk shall perform all such other duties pertaining to his office as are or
may be imposed upon him by law or resolution or ordinance of the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 1-2-67)
CHAPTER 9: VILLAGE FINANCE DEPARTMENT
Section
1-9-1: Department Established
1-9-2: Finance Supervision
1-9-3: Village Treasurer
1-9-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a department of the Municipal government of the
Village which shall be known as the Finance Department. It shall embrace the
Village Board and the Village Treasurer.
(1990 Code § 1-2-71)
1-9-2: FINANCE SUPERVISION:
The Village Board shall exercise a general supervision over the affairs of the
Finance Department. The Village Board shall ascertain the condition and needs
thereof and in such a manner that a full understanding thereof shall be had
and, generally, shall do all the acts necessary to promote the efficiency of
the Finance Department.
(1990 Code § 1-2-72)
1-9-3: VILLAGE TREASURER:
   A.   Appointment: The Village Treasurer shall be appointed for a two-year
term with the advice and consent of the Village Board. He shall serve until his
successor is appointed and has qualified.
(1990 Code § 1-2-73)
   B.   Bond: The Treasurer shall give bond conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his duties and to indemnify the Village for any loss due to
neglect of duty or wrongful act on his part; and the amount of such bond shall
be not less than the amount established in subsection
1-10-5B of this title.
(1990 Code § 1-2-77)
   C.   Duties:
      1.   Receive Monies; Pay Warrants:
         a.   The Village Treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the
Village and shall pay all warrants signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the
Village Clerk and not otherwise; and shall keep a separate account of each fund
or appropriation and the debits and credits belonging thereto. He shall give to
every person paying money into the Village Treasury a receipt therefor,
specifying the date of payment, and upon what account paid, and he shall file
copies of such receipts with the Clerk with his monthly reports.
         b.   The Treasurer shall prepare monthly an itemized list of all
monies received and shall deliver a copy of the same to the Village Board and
shall also pay over to the Village Treasury all monies received by him and take
a receipt therefor.
(1990 Code § 1-2-74)
      2.   Warrant Register: The Treasurer shall keep a register of all
warrants redeemed and paid by him, showing the number, date and amount of each,
the fund from which paid, and the name of the person to whom and when paid, and
he shall cancel all warrants as soon as redeemed by him.
(1990 Code § 1-2-75)
      3.   Separation Of Funds: The Treasurer shall keep all monies in his
hands belonging to the Village separate and distinct from his own money, and he
shall not use, either directly or indirectly, the Village monies or warrants in
his custody and keeping for his own use and benefit, or that of any other
person. Any violation of this subsection C3 shall subject him to removal from
office by the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 1-2-76)
   D.   Special Assessments: The Treasurer shall collect all payments on
special assessments and shall see to it that the same are properly recorded and
credited to the particular account entitled thereto.
(1990 Code § 1-2-78)
   E.   Bookkeeping: The Treasurer shall keep his books and accounts in such a
manner as to show with accuracy all monies received and disbursed by him for
the Village, stating from whom and on what account received, and to whom and on
what account paid out, and in such a way that the books and accounts may be
readily investigated and understood, and the books and accounts and all files
and papers of his office shall be, at all times, open to examination by the
Village Board.
(1990 Code § 1-2-79)
   F.   Statements: The Treasurer shall report to the Corporate Authorities at
the regular monthly meeting, a full and detailed account of all receipts and
expenditures of the Village, as shown by his books up to the time of the
report.
(1990 Code § 1-2-80)
   G.   Year-End Report: Within six (6) months after the end of each fiscal
year, the Treasurer shall prepare and file with the Village Clerk annually an
account of monies received and expenditures incurred during the preceding
fiscal year as specified in this subsection. The Treasurer shall show in such
account the following:
      1.   All monies received by the Village, indicating the total amounts in
the aggregate received in each account of the Village, with a general statement
concerning the source of such receipts; provided, however, for the purposes of
this subsection G1, the term "account" shall not be construed to mean each
individual taxpayer, householder, licensee, utility user, or such other persons
whose payments to the Village are credited to a general account; and
      2.   Except as provided in subsection G3 of this section, all monies paid
out by the Village where the total amount paid during the fiscal year exceeds
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), giving the name of each person to whom paid,
on what account paid, and the total amount in the aggregate paid to each person
from each such account; and
      3.   All monies paid out by the Village as compensation for personal
services, giving the name of each person to whom paid, on what account paid,
and the total amount in the aggregate paid to each person from each such
account; and
      4.   A summary statement of operations for all funds and account groups
of the Village, as excerpted from the annual financial report as filed with the
appropriate State agency of the State of Illinois.
      5.   Upon receipt of such account from the City Treasurer, the Village
Clerk shall publish the account at least once in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in the Village,
(1990 Code § 1-2-81)
CHAPTER 10: VILLAGE OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
Section
1-10-1: Effect Of Chapter
1-10-2: Appointment Of Officers; Term
1-10-3: Conservators Of The Peace
1-10-4: Qualifications
1-10-5: Bonds Of Officers
1-10-6: Oath Of Office
1-10-7: Offices Vacated
1-10-8: Leaves Of Absence
1-10-9: Offices Consolidated
1-10-10: Compensation
1-10-11: Conflict Of Interest
1-10-12: Fees
1-10-13: Books Open To Inspection; Delivered To Successor
1-10-14: Other Duties, Rules And Regulations
1-10-1: EFFECT OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply alike to all officers and employees
of the Village, regardless of the time of creation of the office or position or
the time of the appointment of the officer or employee.
(1990 Code § 1-2-20)
1-10-2: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS; TERM:
At the first meeting of May in each year, or as soon thereafter as possible,
there shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
Village Board, all appointive Village officers who shall hold their several
offices for the term of one year and until their successors are appointed and
qualified.
(1990 Code § 1-2-20)
1-10-3: CONSERVATORS OF PEACE:
The Mayor, Trustees and police officers are designated as conservators of the
peace with power to make arrests as provided by law.
(1990 Code § 1-2-20)
1-10-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be eligible to any Village office unless he is a qualified
elector of the Village and has resided therein at least one year next preceding
his election or appointment. However, these requirements shall not apply to the
Village Engineer, Village Attorney or other officers who require technical
training or knowledge. However, no person shall be eligible to any Village
office who is a defaulter to the Village.
(1990 Code § 1-2-21)
1-10-5: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
   A.   General Requirement: Every officer and employee shall, if required by
the Village Board upon entering upon the duties of such office, give a bond in
such amount and with such sureties as may be determined by the Board,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office or
position.
(1990 Code § 1-2-20)
   B.   Bond Amounts: Bonds of Village officers required under 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-10-30 shall be executed in the following penal sums:
 
Mayor                                                $100,000.00
Village Treasurer                                    100,000.00
Village Clerk                                        100,000.00
Police officers (includes acting commanding officer) 100,000.00
 
   C.   Premium Payment By Village: The surety bonds required by law shall be
paid by the Village.
   D.   Surety: The Village Board shall not receive or approve any bond or
security whereon the name of the Village Board, any one of the Trustees or any
elected or appointed officer of the Village appears as bondsman or security.
If, by mistake, a bond containing the name of any such officer is approved by
the Village Board or if any bondsman, after becoming such is elected or
appointed to any Village office, this section shall not act as a release of any
such obligation incurred.
(1990 Code § 1-2-22)
1-10-6: OATH OF OFFICE:
Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all Village
officers, whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe to the
following oath:
   I, __________ do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the
United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois and that I will
faithfully discharge the duties of the office of ___________, according to the
best of my ability.
(1990 Code § 1-2-20)
1-10-7: OFFICES VACATED:
Any officer of the Village who leaves the Village with the intention of
permanently residing outside the limits thereof shall be deemed to have vacated
his office.
(1990 Code § 1-2-20)
1-10-8: LEAVES OF ABSENCE:
Any officer desiring to be temporarily absent from the Village shall apply to
the Mayor for a leave of absence which may, in the discretion of the Mayor, be
granted in writing for any time, and when granted, shall be filed with the
Village Clerk.
(1990 Code § 1-2-20)
1-10-9: OFFICES CONSOLIDATED:
   A.   The Village Board may, from time to time by law, impose upon any
officer filling any office created by the ordinances of the Village, any such
other or further duties as shall be consistent with the laws of this State, and
may consolidate any two (2) or more of the offices and impose the duties
thereof upon any other officer and may make any such regulations respecting
such offices as shall be consistent with the laws of this State.
   B.   In case the Village Board consolidates any offices created thereby, the
person performing the duties of the offices so consolidated shall not be
entitled on account thereof to receive any salary or compensation which he
would not have been entitled to receive if such consolidation had not taken
place.
(1990 Code § 1-2-23)
1-10-10: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Elected Officials:
      1.   No salary or compensation of any elected Village officer who is
elected for a definite term of office shall be increased or diminished during
such term.
(1990 Code § 1-2-25)
      2.   Salaries of elected officials shall be as follows:
         a.   Mayor: The salary of the Mayor shall be one hundred twenty five
dollars ($125.00) per meeting attended.
         b.   Village Clerk: The salary of the Village Clerk shall be the sum
of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) per meeting attended.
         c.   Trustees: The members of the Village Board of Trustees shall
receive the sum of sixty dollars ($60.00) per meeting attended.
   B.   Appointed Officials: No salary or compensation of any appointed
official who is appointed for a definite term of office shall be decreased
during such term, but may be increased.
(1990 Code § 1-2-25)
   C.   Reimbursement Of Expenses:
      1.   Generally: Any Village officer or employee is entitled to
reimbursement for any reasonable actual expenses incurred by him in the
performance of his duties.
(1990 Code § 1-2-29)
      2.   Expense Reimbursement Policy: The Expense Reimbursement Policy,
designated as exhibit A, attached to ordinance 2019-4-2, and on file in the
Office of the Village Clerk, is hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. 2019-4-2, 4-1-2019)
1-10-11: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No Village officer shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in any
contract, work, or business which: a) belongs to the Village; or b) is sold for
taxes or assessments; or c) is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of
the Village.
(1990 Code § 1-2-31)
1-10-12: FEES:
   A.   Not Entitled To Receive: No officer of the Village shall be entitled to
charge or receive any fees against the Village.
   B.   Report Of Fees: All officers of the Village entitled to receive fees
shall keep a correct account thereof and make a report thereof, under oath, to
the Village Board prior to the regular meeting each month. In the report, they
shall specify from whom such fees were received, for what service, and when
received. All fees received shall be paid into the Village Treasury.
(1990 Code § 1-2-20)
1-10-13: BOOKS OPEN TO INSPECTION; DELIVERED TO SUCCESSOR:
   A.   Open To Inspection: Every officer shall at all times, when required,
submit the books and papers of his office to the inspection of the Mayor, or
any committee or member of the Board.
   B.   Delivered To Successor: Every officer shall, upon going out of office,
deliver to his successor, all books, papers, furniture, and other things
appertaining to such office, and which are the property of the Village. Within
five (5) days after notification and request, any person who has been an
officer of the Village is required to deliver to his successor in office all
property, books and effects in his possession belonging to the Village or
pertaining to the office he has held. Upon his refusal to do so, he shall be
liable for all damages caused thereby, and shall, upon conviction, be penalized
according to the provisions of section
1-4-1 of this title.
(1990 Code § 1-2-20)
1-10-14: OTHER DUTIES, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Every officer of the Village shall perform such other duties and be subject to
such other rules and regulations as the Board may provide by law.
(1990 Code § 1-2-20)
ARTICLE A: VILLAGE ATTORNEY
Section
1-10A-1: Services Of Attorney
1-10A-2: Appointment
1-10A-3: Duties
1-10A-1: SERVICES OF ATTORNEY:
The Village Attorney shall have full charge of the law affairs of the Village.
(1990 Code § 1-2-86)
1-10A-2: APPOINTMENT:
The attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of the
Village Board, for the term of one year unless sooner removed for cause, and
until his successor shall have been appointed and qualified.
(1990 Code § 1-2-87)
1-10A-3: DUTIES:
   A.   Prosecute For Village: The Village Attorney shall prosecute or defend
on behalf of the Village in all cases in which the interests of the corporation
or any officer thereof are involved; and the Village Clerk shall furnish him
with certified copies of any ordinance, bond or paper in his keeping necessary
to be filed or used in any suit or proceedings.
   B.   Preparation Of Ordinances: The Village Attorney shall, when required,
advise the Village Board or any officer in all matters of law in which the
interests of the corporation are involved, and he shall draw such ordinances,
bonds, forms and contracts, or examine and pass upon the same, as may be
required of him by the Mayor, the Village Board or any committee thereof.
   C.   Judgments: The Village Attorney shall direct executions to be issued
upon all judgments recovered in favor of the Village, and he shall direct their
prompt service. He shall examine all the bills of the officers of courts, and
of other officers of the law, and shall certify to their correctness and
liability of the Village therefor.
   D.   Commissions: The Village Attorney shall act as the legal advisor for
the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Plan Commission and he shall perform the
legal services required of same.
   E.   Violations Of Ordinances: The Village Attorney shall institute and
prosecute an action in every case of violation of a Village ordinance, when
instructed to do so by the Mayor, Village Board, or any committee thereof.
   F.   Prosecution Of Suits: The Village Attorney shall not be required to
prosecute any suit or action arising under the ordinances of the Village when,
upon investigation of the same, he shall become satisfied that the complaint
was instituted maliciously, vexatiously, or without just cause; and he shall
dismiss or discontinue any such suit or proceeding upon such terms as he may
deem just or equitable.
   G.   Collection Of Taxes: The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and
instructed to enforce the collection of any and all taxes and special
assessments in the collection of which the Village is interested and to attend
all sales of real or personal property made to enforce the collection of such
taxes or special assessments and to bid thereat in behalf of the Village.
(1990 Code § 1-2-88)
ARTICLE B: VILLAGE ENGINEER
Section
1-10B-1: Appointment; Term
1-10B-2: Duties; Salary
1-10B-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
With the advice and consent of the Village Board, the Mayor may appoint a
Village Engineer, who shall serve for the term of the Mayor or for such period
not exceeding the term of the Mayor, as may be designated by the Mayor and the
Village Board.
(1990 Code § 1-2-92)
1-10B-2: DUTIES; SALARY:
   A.   Duties: The Village Engineer shall make and submit plans, estimates and
specifications for any public works which may be proposed or ordered by the
Village Board. He shall also examine all public works under his charge and see
that the plans, estimates and specifications for the same are properly
executed.
   B.   Salary: The Village Engineer shall also receive a salary as established
in the annual budget.
(1990 Code § 1-2-93)
ARTICLE C: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
Section
1-10C-1: Position Created
1-10C-2: Appointment; Qualifications
1-10C-3: Term
1-10C-4: Duties
1-10C-5: Compensation
1-10C-6: Effect on Elected Village Officials
1-10C-1: POSITION CREATED:
There is hereby created the position of Village Administrator subject to the
provisions of this article and the provisions of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes. This shall be a part-time position.
(Ord. 2019-8-1, 8-12-2019)
1-10C-2: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS:
The Village Administrator shall be appointed by the Village President, with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. This selection shall be based
solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special
reference to specific professional education for actual experience in and
knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the administration of local
government and to the duties of the office as herein specified. The person so
appointed need not be a resident of the Village.
(Ord. 2019-8-1, 8-12-2019)
1-10C-3: TERM:
The Village Administrator shall be appointed to term of office that runs
concurrently with the term of the Village President. The Village Administrator
shall at all times be subject to the direction of the Village President or as
collectively authorized by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 2019-8-1, 8-12-2019)
1-10C-4: DUTIES:
The Village Administrator shall be responsible to the Village President and
Board of Trustees for the proper implementation and administration of the
policies and directives of the Village President and Board of Trustees. The
Village Administrator shall act as the administrative arm of the Village. The
Village Administrator shall have the following specific duties:
   A.   Attend regular and special meetings of Village Board, board committees,
community groups and other governmental agencies when appropriate, and other
meetings as necessary to accomplish goals and objectives of Village;
   B.   Direct, supervise, and coordinate the administration of all departments
and affairs of the Village except as otherwise provided by law;
   C.   Act for the Village President and Board of Trustees in daily
operations, including management, public relations, intergovernmental affairs,
and communications;
   D.   In concert with the Village Attorney, monitor Village compliance with
State and Federal laws, local ordinances, and precedents; and advise the
Village President and Board of Trustees of the application of sound local
government practices, and fair and equal treatment under the laws;
   E.   Advocate for the Village in relations with other governments, community
groups and/or individuals;
   F.   Act as a liaison between the Village President and Board of Trustees
and the various commissions, boards, and offices inside and outside the
Village;
   G.   Investigate and prepare or cause to be prepared applications for any
State and Federal grant(s) to which the Village may be entitled as directed by
the Village President and/or the Board of Trustees;
   H.   Assist citizens in resolving local issues as appropriate to Village
policy and goals;
   I.   Work with Village committees and/or other Village personnel in
initiating and implementing policies and goals established by the Village
President and/or Board of Trustees; and
   J.   Perform such other duties as may from time to time be assigned by the
Village President and/or the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 2019-8-1, 8-12-2019)
1-10C-5: COMPENSATION:
The salary of the Village Administrator shall be determined by the Board of
Trustees.
(Ord. 2019-8-1, 8-12-2019)
1-10C-6: EFFECT ON ELECTED VILLAGE OFFICIALS:
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to diminish or detract from the
statutory powers and authority of the Village’s elected officials.
(Ord. 2019-8-1, 8-12-2019)
CHAPTER 11: ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS
Section
1-11-1: Definitions
1-11-2: Policy
1-11-3: Individual Privacy Protected
1-11-4: Public Records Available
1-11-5: Freedom Of Information Act Officer
1-11-6: Requests to Be In Writing
1-11-7: Fees
1-11-8: Time Limit For Compliance With Request
1-11-9: Extension Of Time Limit (Noncommercial Purpose); Notice
1-11-10: Unduly Burdensome Requests
1-11-11: Certain Information Exempt From Inspection And Copying
1-11-12: Notice Of Denial Of Request; Request For Review
1-11-13: Public Access Counselor; Opinions
1-11-14: Granting Of Request; Procedure For Inspection
1-11-15: Written Request Not Required For Certain Documents
1-11-16: Special Provisions Pertaining To Certain Law Enforcement Records
1-11-17: Dissemination Of Information About Public Bodies
1-11-18: List Of Categories of Records
1-11-19: Appendix A; Exempt Materials Per The FOIA
1-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE: The use of any part of a public record or records, or
information derived from public records, in any form for sale, resale, or
solicitation or advertisement for sales or services. For purposes of this
definition, requests made by news media and nonprofit, scientific, or academic
organizations shall not be considered to be made for a COMMERCIAL PURPOSE when
the principal purpose of the request is: a) to access and disseminate
information concerning news and current or passing events, b) for articles of
opinion or features of interest to the public, or c) for the purpose of
academic, scientific, or public research or education.
COPYING: The reproduction of any public record by means of any photographic,
electronic, mechanical, or other process, device or means now known or
hereafter developed and available to the Village.
EXEMPT MATERIALS: Materials which are exempt from disclosure pursuant to
sections 7 and 7.5 of the Freedom of Information Act. See section
1-11-19 of this chapter.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT OR FOIA: The Illinois Freedom of Information Act, 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1.1 et seq.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, organization, or
association, acting individually or as a group.
PRIVATE INFORMATION: Unique identifiers, including a person's social security
number, driver’s license number, employee identification number, biometric
identifiers, personal financial information, passwords or other access codes,
medical records, home or personal telephone numbers, and personal e-mail
addresses. PRIVATE INFORMATION also includes home address and personal license
plates, except as otherwise provided by law or when compiled without
possibility of attribution to any person.
PUBLIC ACCESS COUNSELOR: An Illinois attorney general office appointee
responsible for various duties described in section 9.5 of the Illinois Freedom
of Information Act and section 7 of the Attorney General Act (15 ILCS 205/7).
Contact information for the Public Access Counselor is as follows:
      Public Access Bureau
      500 S. 2nd Street
      Springfield, IL 62706
      217-558-0486
      publicaccess@atg.state.il.us
PUBLIC RECORD:
   A.   All records, reports, forms, writings, letters, memoranda, books,
papers, maps, photographs, microfilms, cards, tapes, recordings, electronic
data processing records, electronic communications, recorded information and
all other documentary materials pertaining to the transaction of public
business, regardless of physical form or characteristics, having been prepared
by or for, or having been or being used by, received by, in the possession of,
or under the control of the Village.
   B.    PUBLIC RECORD also includes the following:
      1.   All records relating to the obligation, receipt, and use of public
funds.
      2.   Certified payroll records submitted to the village under section 5
(a)(2) of the Prevailing Wage Act (820 ILCS 130/5) are public records; except
that contractors’ employees addresses, telephone numbers, and social security
numbers must be redacted by the Village prior to disclosure.
      3.   Arrest reports (except for arrests of persons under the age of
twenty one (21) subject to the juvenile court act of 1987). (See section
1-11-16 of this chapter for further provisions with respect to arrest reports.)
      4.   Criminal history records (except for arrests of persons under the
age of twenty one (21) subject to the Juvenile Court Act of 1987), including,
but not limited to:
         a.   Court records that are public;
         b.   Records that are otherwise available under state or local law;
and
         c.   Records in which the requesting party is the individual
identified, except as provided under section 7(1)(d)(vi) of the Freedom of
Information Act (5 ILCS 140/7).
VILLAGE: The Village of Spaulding, Illinois.
1-11-2: POLICY:
It is declared to be the public policy of the Village that all persons are
entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs of the Village.
The official acts and policies of the public officials and public employees of
the Village shall be consistent with the terms of this chapter.
1-11-3: INDIVIDUAL PRIVACY PROTECTED:
This chapter is not intended to be used to violate individual privacy or to
disrupt the duly undertaken work of the Village.
1-11-4: PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE:
All official records, including the corporate seal and financial documents,
shall be kept in the Village Hall. The Village shall make available to any
person for inspection or copying all public records, as provided in the Freedom
of Information Act.
1-11-5: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT OFFICER:
   A.   The Village shall designate one or more officials or employees to act
as its Freedom of Information Act officer (“FOIA officer”). The Chief of Police
is hereby designated as Deputy FOIA officer for FOIA requests involving the
Police Department and the Village Attorney is designated as Deputy FOIA Officer
in the place and stead of the FOIA Officer if the FOIA Officer is unavailable.
Except in instances when records are furnished immediately, the FOIA Officer,
or designee, shall receive requests submitted to the village under this chapter
and issue responses accordingly. All Village officers and employees who receive
an FOIA request from any source whatsoever shall notify the FOIA Officer within
one (1) working day. If the FOIA Officer is not available, the Village Attorney
shall be notified.
   B.   Upon receiving a request for a public record, the FOIA Officer shall:
      1.   Note the date the Village receives the written request;
      2.   Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and
make a notation of that date on the written request;
      3.   Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including
all documents submitted with the request until the request has been complied
with or denied; and
      4.   Create a file for the retention of the original request, a copy of
the response, a record of written communications with the requester, and a copy
of other communications.
   C.   The Village FOIA Officer and deputies shall, by July 1, 2010,
successfully complete an electronic training curriculum to be developed by the
public access counselor and thereafter successfully complete an annual training
program. Thereafter, whenever a new FOIA Officer is designated by the Village,
that person shall successfully complete the electronic training curriculum
within thirty (30) days after assuming the position. Successful completion of
the required training curriculum within the periods provided shall be a
prerequisite to continue serving as an FOIA Officer.
1-11-6: REQUESTS TO BE IN WRITING:
   A.   All requests for inspection or copying of public records shall be in
writing and shall be addressed to the FOIA Officer. The requester shall include
the following information in any request for public records:
      1.   The requester’s full name, mailing address and telephone number at
which the requester can be reached during normal business hours;
      2.   A description of the records sought, as specific as possible;
      3.   An indication of whether the records are requested for a commercial
purpose and whether the requester seeks a fee waiver; and
      4.   A statement as to whether the request is for inspection, copying, or
both.
   B.   The FOIA Officer shall make available a form for use by requesters;
however, no request shall be denied for failure to use the form.
   C.   All requests for inspection and copying received by the Village shall
immediately be forwarded to its FOIA Officer or designee.
1-11-7: FEES:
   A.   The Village hereby establishes and shall charge fees reasonably
calculated to reimburse its actual cost for reproducing and certifying public
records and for the use, by any person, of the equipment of the Village to copy
records. Such fees exclude the costs of any search for and review of the
record, and shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction and certification,
unless otherwise provided by state statute. The charge for copying shall be ten
cents ($0.10) per page for photocopies, five cents ($0.05) per page for
computer printouts, and two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) per audiotape, CD, or
DVD. No fees shall be charged for the first fifty (50) pages of black and
white, letter or legal sized copies requested by a requester. If the village
provides copies in color or in a size other than letter or legal, it shall
charge the actual cost for reproducing the records. In calculating the actual
cost for reproducing records or for the use of the equipment of the Village to
reproduce the records, the Village shall not include the costs of any search
for and review of the records or other personnel costs associated with
reproducing the records. The cost for certifying a record shall be one dollar
($1.00).
   B.   Documents shall be furnished without charge or at a reduced charge
where the Village determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the
public interest because furnishing information can be considered as primarily
benefiting the general public. Waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public
interest if the principal purpose of the request is to access and disseminate
information regarding the health, safety and welfare or the legal rights of the
general public and is not for the principal purpose of personal or commercial
benefit. For purposes of this subsection, “commercial benefit” shall not apply
to requests made by news media when the principal purpose of the request is to
access and disseminate information regarding the health, safety, and welfare or
the legal rights of the general public. In setting the amount of the waiver or
reduction, the Village may take into consideration the amount of materials
requested and the cost of copying them.
1-11-8: TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLIANCE WITH REQUEST:
   A.   Compliance With Request (Noncommercial Purpose): The Village shall
either comply with or deny a request for public records within five (5)
business days after its receipt. If the Village fails to respond to a request
within the requisite periods in this section but thereafter provides the
requester with copies of the requested public records, it may not impose a fee
for such copies. If the Village fails to respond to a request received, it may
not treat the request as unduly burdensome under section
1-11-10 of this chapter. Denials shall be in writing and in accordance with
section
1-11-12 of this chapter.
   B.   Compliance With Request (Commercial Purpose): The Village shall respond
to a request for records to be used for a commercial purpose within twenty one
(21) working days after receipt. The response shall:
      1.   Provide to the requester an estimate of the time required by the
village to provide the records requested and an estimate of the fees to be
charged, which the Village may require the person to pay in full before copying
the requested documents;
      2.   Deny the request pursuant to one or more of the exemptions set out
in this chapter;
      3.   Notify the requester that the request is unduly burdensome and
extend an opportunity to the requester to attempt to reduce the request to
manageable proportions; or
      4.   Provide the records requested.
   C.   Unless the records are exempt from disclosure (see section
1-11-19 of this chapter), the Village shall comply with a request within a
reasonable period considering the size and complexity of the request, and
giving priority to records requested for noncommercial purposes. No person
shall knowingly obtain a public record for a commercial purpose without
disclosing that it is for a commercial purpose, if requested to do so by the
Village.
1-11-9: EXTENSION OF TIME LIMIT (NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSE); NOTICE:
   A.   The time limit prescribed in subsection
1-11-8A of this chapter may be extended in each case for not more than five (5)
additional business days from the original due date for any of the following
reasons:
      1.   The requested records are stored in whole or in part at other
locations other than the office having charge of the requested records.
      2.   The request requires the collection of a substantial number of
specified records.
      3.   The request is couched in categorical terms and requires an
extensive search for the records responsive to it.
      4.   The requested records have not been located in the course of routine
search and additional efforts are being made to locate them.
      5.   The requested records require examination and evaluation by
personnel having the necessary competence and discretion to determine if they
are exempt from disclosure under the terms of the Illinois freedom of
information act or should be revealed only with appropriate deletions.
      6.   The request for records cannot be complied with by the Village
within the time limits prescribed by the foregoing subsection without unduly
burdening or interfering with the operations of the Village.
      7.   There is a need for consultation, which shall be conducted with all
practicable speed, with another public body or among two (2) or more components
of a public body having a substantial interest in the determination or in the
subject matter of the request.
   B.   The person making a request and the village may agree in writing to
extend the time for compliance for a period to be determined by the parties. If
the requester and the Village agree to extend the period for compliance, a
failure by the Village to comply with any previous deadlines shall not be
treated as a denial of the request for the records.
   C.   When additional time is required for any of the above reasons, the FOIA
Officer shall notify the person making the request, by letter, within the five
(5) business days after receipt of the request, of the reasons for the delay
and the date by which the records will be made available or denial will be
forthcoming. In no instance may the delay in processing last longer than five
(5) business days. A failure to render a decision within the time permitted for
extension shall be considered a denial of the request.
   D.   If the Village fails to respond to a request within the time permitted
for extension but thereafter provides the requester with copies of the
requested public records, the Village may not impose a fee for those copies. If
the Village requests an extension and subsequently fails to respond to the
request, it may not treat the request as unduly burdensome under section
1-11-10 of this chapter.
1-11-10: UNDULY BURDENSOME REQUESTS:
   A.   Requests calling for all records falling within a category shall be
complied with unless compliance with the request would be unduly burdensome for
the Village, there is no method of narrowing the request, and the burden on the
Village strongly outweighs the public interest in the information. Before
invoking this exemption, the Village shall extend to the person making the
request an opportunity to confer with it in an attempt to reduce the request to
manageable proportions. If the Village responds to a categorical request by
stating that compliance would unduly burden its operation and the conditions
described above are met, it shall do so in writing signed by the FOIA Officer
specifying the reasons why it would be unduly burdensome and the extent to
which compliance will so burden the operation of the Village. Such a response
shall be treated as a denial of the request for information.
   B.   Repeated requests for the same public records by the same person shall
be deemed unduly burdensome. Repeated requests from the same person for the
same records that are unchanged or identical to records previously provided or
properly denied under this chapter shall be deemed unduly burdensome.
1-11-11: CERTAIN INFORMATION EXEMPT FROM INSPECTION AND COPYING:
   A.   Information exempted by sections 7 and 7.5 of the Freedom of
Information Act shall be exempt from inspection and copying (see section
1-11-19 of this chapter). If a record contains both exempt and nonexempt
information, the village may elect to redact the information that is exempt and
make the remainder of the record available for inspection and copying.
   B.   Moreover, information described in the definition for PUBLIC RECORD may
be withheld if it is determined that disclosure would: a) interfere with
pending or actually and reasonably contemplated law enforcement proceedings
conducted by any law enforcement agency; b) endanger the life or physical
safety of law enforcement or correctional personnel or any other person; or c)
compromise the security of any correctional facility.
1-11-12: NOTICE OF DENIAL OF REQUEST; REQUEST FOR REVIEW:
   A.   The FOIA Officer, when denying a request for public record, shall
notify the requester, by letter, of the decision to deny the information, the
reason for the denial, including a detailed factual basis for the application
of any exemption claimed, and the names and titles or positions of each person
responsible for the denial.
   B.   Each notice of denial by the FOIA Officer shall inform the person of
the right to review by the Public Access Counselor and provide the address and
phone number for the Public Access Counselor.
   C.   Each notice of denial shall also inform such person of his or her right
to judicial review in accordance with section 11 of the Freedom of Information
Act.
   D.   When a request is denied on the grounds that the records are exempt
under the provisions of this chapter, the notice of denial shall specify the
exemption claimed to authorize the denial and briefly explain how the exemption
applies to the specified records withheld.
   E.   Copies of all notices of denials shall be retained by the Village in a
single central office file that is open to the public and indexed according to
the type of exemption asserted and, to the extent feasible, according to the
types of records requested.
   F.   Any person making a request for public records shall be deemed to have
exhausted his or her administrative remedies with respect to that request if
the Village fails to act within the time periods provided in sections
1-11-8 and 1-11-9 of this chapter.
1-11-13: PUBLIC ACCESS COUNSELOR; OPINIONS:
   A.   A person whose request to inspect or copy a public record is denied by
the village may file a request for review with the public access counselor
established in the Office of the Attorney General not later than sixty (60)
days after the date of the final denial. The request for review must be in
writing, signed by the requester, and include: 1) a copy of the request for
access to records and 2) any responses from the public body.
   B.   If the Village receives a request for records, and asserts that the
records are exempt under general exemptions (1)(C) or (1)(F) (see section
1-11-19 of this chapter), it shall, within the time periods provided for
responding to a request, provide written notice to the requester and the public
access counselor of its intent to deny the request in whole or in part. The
notice shall include:
      1.   A copy of the request for access to records;
      2.   The proposed response from the public body; and
      3.   A detailed summary of the public body's basis for asserting the
exemption.
   C.   In accordance with FOIA, upon receipt of a notice of intent to deny
from the Village, the Public Access Counselor determines whether further
inquiry is warranted. Within five (5) working days after receipt of the notice
of intent to deny, the Public Access Counselor notifies the Village and the
requester whether further inquiry is warranted. If the Public Access Counselor
determines that further inquiry is warranted, the procedures set out in this
section regarding the review of denials, including the production of documents,
shall also be applicable to the inquiry and resolution of a notice of intent to
deny from the Village. Times for response or compliance by the Village under
sections
1-10-8 and 1-10-9 of this chapter shall be tolled until the public access
counselor concludes his or her inquiry.
   D.   In accordance with FOIA, upon receipt of a request for review, the
Public Access Counselor determines whether further action is warranted. If the
Public Access Counselor determines that the alleged violation is unfounded, he
or she so advises the requester and the village and no further action shall be
undertaken. In all other cases, the Public Access Counselor forwards a copy of
the request for review to the Village within seven (7) working days after
receipt and specifies the records or other documents that the village shall
furnish to facilitate the review. Within seven (7) working days after receipt
of the request for review, the FOIA Officer shall provide copies of records
requested and shall otherwise fully cooperate with the Public Access Counselor.
If the FOIA Officer fails to furnish specified records pursuant to this
section, or if otherwise necessary, the Attorney General may issue a subpoena
to any person or public body having knowledge of or records pertaining to a
request for review of a denial of access to records under the Freedom of
Information Act. By statute, to the extent that records or documents produced
by the Village contain information that is claimed to be exempt from disclosure
under section
1-10-19 of this chapter, the Public Access Counselor does not further disclose
that information.
   E.   In accordance with FOIA, within seven (7) working days after it
receives a copy of a request for review and request for production of records
from the public access counselor, the FOIA Officer may, but is not required to,
answer the allegations of the request for review. The answer may take the form
of a letter, brief, or memorandum. The Public Access Counselor forwards a copy
of the answer to the person submitting the request for review, with any alleged
confidential information to which the request pertains redacted from the copy.
The requester may, but is not required to, respond in writing to the answer
within seven (7) working days and shall provide a copy of the response to the
Village. In addition to the request for review, and the answer and the response
thereto, if any, a requester or the Village may furnish affidavits or records
concerning any matter germane to the review.
   F.   1.   In accordance with FOIA, unless the public access counselor
extends the time by no more than twenty one (21) business days by sending
written notice to the requester and the village that includes a statement of
the reasons for the extension in the notice, or decides to address the matter
without the issuance of a binding opinion, the attorney general examines the
issues and the records, makes findings of fact and conclusions of law, and
issues to the requester and the village an opinion in response to the request
for review within sixty (60) days after its receipt. The opinion is binding
upon both the requester and the village, subject to administrative review under
section 11.5 of the Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/11.5).
      2.   Upon receipt of a binding opinion concluding that a violation of
FOIA has occurred, the FOIA Officer shall either take necessary action
immediately to comply with the directive of the opinion or shall initiate
administrative review under section 11.5 of FOIA. If the opinion concludes that
no violation of FOIA has occurred, the requester may initiate administrative
review under section 11.5 of FOIA. If the village discloses records in
accordance with an opinion of the Attorney General, it is immune from all
liabilities by reason thereof and shall not be liable for penalties under FOIA.
   G.   In accordance with FOIA, the Attorney General may also issue advisory
opinions to the Village regarding compliance with FOIA. A review may be
initiated upon receipt of a written request from the Mayor or the Village
Attorney, which shall contain sufficient accurate facts from which a
determination can be made. The Public Access Counselor may request additional
information from the Village in order to assist in the review. If the Village
relies in good faith on an advisory opinion of the Attorney General in
responding to a request, it is not liable for penalties under FOIA, so long as
the facts upon which the opinion is based have been fully and fairly disclosed
to the public access counselor.
1-11-14: GRANTING OF REQUEST; PROCEDURE FOR INSPECTION:
When a freedom of information request is granted, the documents will be made
available for inspection at the Village Hall during regular business hours.
Copies shall be made upon request as set forth in section
1-11-7 of this chapter.
1-11-15: WRITTEN REQUEST NOT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN DOCUMENTS:
The following documents shall be made available for inspection and copying
without a written request; however, the requester shall contact the FOIA
Officer or designee in advance to set a mutually convenient time. These
documents, if copied, shall be subject to the copying fee set forth in section
1-11-7 of this chapter:
   A.   Ordinances and written resolutions.
   B.   The journal of the board of trustees, not including executive session
minutes.
   C.   Any personnel code, building code, other technical code, or any other
regulation of the Village adopted by the Village, whether by ordinance,
resolution or otherwise.
1-11-16: SPECIAL PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO CERTAIN LAW ENFORCEMENT RECORDS:
The following chronologically maintained arrest and criminal history
information maintained by the Police Department shall be furnished as soon as
practical, but in no event later than seventy two (72) hours after the arrest,
notwithstanding the time limits otherwise provided for in section
1-11-8 of this chapter:
   A.   Information that identifies the individual, including the name, age,
address, and photograph, when and if available;
   B.   Information detailing any charges relating to the arrest;
   C.   The time and location of the arrest;
   D.   The name of the investigating or arresting law enforcement agency;
   E.   If the individual is incarcerated, the amount of any bail or bond; and
   F.   If the individual is incarcerated, the time and date that the
individual was received into, discharged from, or transferred from the Police
Department’s custody.
1-11-17: DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ABOUT PUBLIC BODIES:
   A.   The Village shall prominently display at the Village Hall, make
available for inspection and copying without charge, and shall send through the
mail if requested, each of the following:
      1.   A brief description of itself, which will include, but not be
limited to, a short summary of its purpose, a block diagram giving its
functional subdivisions, the total amount of its operating budget, the number
and location of all of its separate offices, the approximate number of full and
part time employees, and the identification and membership of any board,
commission, committee, or council which operates in an advisory capacity
relative to the operation of the Village, or which exercises control over its
policies or procedures, or to which the Village is required to report and be
answerable for its operations;
      2.   A brief description of the methods whereby the public may request
information and public records, a directory designating for the FOIA Officer or
officers, the address where requests for public records should be directed, and
any fees allowable under section
1-10-7 of this chapter; and
   B.   The Village shall also post this information on its website, if one is
maintained.
1-11-18: LIST OF CATEGORIES OF RECORDS:
As to public records prepared or received after the effective date hereof, the
FOIA Officer shall maintain and make available for inspection and copying a
reasonably current list of all types or categories of records under its
control. The list shall be reasonably detailed in order to aid persons in
obtaining access to public records pursuant to this chapter. The FOIA Officer
shall furnish upon request a description of the manner in which public records
stored by means of electronic data processing may be obtained in a form
comprehensible to persons lacking knowledge of computer language or printout
format.
1-10-19: APPENDIX A; EXEMPT MATERIALS PER THE FOIA:
Section 7 Of FOIA:
General Exemptions
      1.   The following shall be exempt from inspection and copying:
         A.   Information specifically prohibited from disclosure by federal or
state law or rules and regulations implementing federal or state law.
         B.   Private information, unless disclosure is required by another
provision of this act, a state or federal law or a court order.
         C.   Personal information contained within public records, the
disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal
privacy, unless the disclosure is consented to in writing by the individual
subjects of the information. “Unwarranted invasion of personal privacy” means
the disclosure of information that is highly personal or objectionable to a
reasonable person and in which the subject’s right to privacy outweighs any
legitimate public interest in obtaining the information. The disclosure of
information that bears on the public duties of public employees and officials
shall not be considered an invasion of personal privacy.
         D.   Records in the possession of the village created in the course of
administrative enforcement proceedings, and any law enforcement or correctional
agency for law enforcement purposes, but only to the extent that disclosure
would:
            (i)   Interfere with pending or actually and reasonably
contemplated law enforcement proceedings conducted by any law enforcement or
correctional agency that is the recipient of the request;
            (ii)   Interfere with active administrative enforcement proceedings
conducted by the village that is the recipient of the request;
            (iii)   Create a substantial likelihood that a person will be
deprived of a fair trial or an impartial hearing;
            (iv)   Unavoidably disclose the identity of a confidential source,
confidential information furnished only by the confidential source, or persons
who file complaints with or provide information to administrative,
investigative, law enforcement, or penal agencies; except that the identities
of witnesses to traffic accidents, traffic accident reports, and rescue reports
shall be provided by agencies of local government, except when disclosure would
interfere with an active criminal investigation conducted by the agency that is
the recipient of the request;
            (v)   Disclose unique or specialized investigative techniques other
than those generally used and known or disclose internal documents of
correctional agencies related to detection, observation or investigation of
incidents of crime or misconduct, and disclosure would result in demonstrable
harm to the agency or public body that is the recipient of the request;
            (vi)   Endanger the life or physical safety of law enforcement
personnel or any other person; or
            (vii)   Obstruct an ongoing criminal investigation by the agency
that is the recipient of the request.
         E.   Records that relate to or affect the security of correctional
institutions and detention facilities.
         F.   Preliminary drafts, notes, recommendations, memoranda and other
records in which opinions are expressed, or policies or actions are formulated,
except that a specific record or relevant portion of a record shall not be
exempt when the record is publicly cited and identified by the Mayor.
         G.   Trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained
from a person or business where the trade secrets or commercial or financial
information are furnished under a claim that they are proprietary, privileged
or confidential, and that disclosure of the trade secrets or commercial or
financial information would cause competitive harm to the person or business,
and only insofar as the claim directly applies to the records requested.
            (i)   All trade secrets and commercial or financial information
obtained by the village, including a public pension fund, from a private equity
fund or a privately held company within the investment portfolio of a private
equity fund as a result of either investing or evaluating a potential
investment of public funds in a private equity fund. The exemption contained in
this item does not apply to the aggregate financial performance information of
a private equity fund, nor to the identity of the fund’s managers or general
partners. The exemption contained in this item does not apply to the identity
of a privately held company within the investment portfolio of a private equity
fund, unless the disclosure of the identity of a privately held company may
cause competitive harm.
         Nothing contained in this paragraph G shall be construed to prevent a
person or business from consenting to disclosure.
         H.   Proposals and bids for any contract, grant, or agreement,
including information which if it were disclosed would frustrate procurement or
give an advantage to any person proposing to enter into a contractor agreement
with the Village, until an award or final selection is made. Information
prepared by or for the Village in preparation of a bid solicitation shall be
exempt until an award or final selection is made.
         I.   Valuable formulae, computer geographic systems, designs, drawings
and research data obtained or produced by any public body when disclosure could
reasonably be expected to produce private gain or public loss. The exemption
for “computer geographic systems” provided in this paragraph I does not extend
to requests made by news media as defined in section 2 of the FOIA when the
requested information is not otherwise exempt and the only purpose of the
request is to access and disseminate information regarding the health, safety,
welfare, or legal rights of the general public.
         J.   Architects’ plans, engineers' technical submissions, and other
construction related technical documents for projects not constructed or
developed in whole or in part with public funds and the same for projects
constructed or developed with public funds, including but not limited to power
generating and distribution stations and other transmission and distribution
facilities, water treatment facilities, airport facilities, sport stadiums,
convention centers, and all government owned, operated, or occupied buildings,
but only to the extent that disclosure would compromise security.
         K.   Minutes of meetings of public bodies closed to the public as
provided in the open meetings act until the public body makes the minutes
available to the public under section 2.06 of the Open Meetings Act.
         L.   Communications between the Village and its Attorney or Auditor
representing the Village that would not be subject to discovery in litigation,
and materials prepared or compiled by or for the Village in anticipation of a
criminal, civil or administrative proceeding upon the request of the Village
Attorney advising the Village, and materials prepared or compiled with respect
to internal audits of the Village.
         M.   Records relating to the village's adjudication of employee
grievances or disciplinary cases; however, this exemption shall not extend to
the final outcome of cases in which discipline is imposed.
         N.   Administrative or technical information associated with automated
data processing operations, including but not limited to software, operating
protocols, computer program abstracts, file layouts, source listings, object
modules, load modules, user guides, documentation pertaining to all logical and
physical design of computerized systems, employee manuals, and any other
information that, if disclosed, would jeopardize the security of the system or
its data or the security of materials exempt under this section.
         O.   Records relating to collective negotiating matters between the
Village and its employees or representatives, except that any final contract or
agreement shall be subject to inspection and copying.
         P.   Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data used to
determine the qualifications of an applicant for a license or employment.
         Q.   The records, documents and information relating to real estate
purchase negotiations until those negotiations have been completed or otherwise
terminated. With regard to a parcel involved in a pending or actually and
reasonably contemplated eminent domain proceeding under the Eminent Domain Act,
records, documents and information relating to that parcel shall be exempt
except as may be allowed under discovery rules adopted by the Illinois Supreme
Court. The records, documents and information relating to a real estate sale
shall be exempt until a sale is consummated.
         R.   Any and all proprietary information and records related to the
operation of an intergovernmental risk management association or self-insurance
pool or jointly self-administered health and accident cooperative or pool.
Insurance or self-insurance (including any intergovernmental risk management
association or self-insurance pool) claims, loss or risk management
information, records, data, advice or communications.
         S.   Information contained in or related to examination, operating, or
condition reports prepared by, on behalf of, or for the use of the village
responsible for the regulation or supervision of financial institutions or
insurance companies, unless disclosure is otherwise required by State law.
         T.   Information that would disclose or might lead to the disclosure
of secret or confidential information, codes, algorithms, programs, or private
keys intended to be used to create electronic or digital signatures under the
Electronic Commerce Security Act.
         U.   Vulnerability assessments, security measures, and response
policies or plans that are designed to identify, prevent, or respond to
potential attacks upon a community’s population or systems, facilities, or
installations, the destruction or contamination of which would constitute a
clear and present danger to the health or safety of the community, but only to
the extent that disclosure could reasonably be expected to jeopardize the
effectiveness of the measures or the safety of the personnel who implement them
or the public. Information exempt under this item may include such things as
details pertaining to the mobilization or deployment of personnel or equipment,
to the operation of communication systems or protocols, or to tactical
operations.
         V.   Maps and other records regarding the location or security of
generation, transmission, distribution, storage, gathering, treatment, or
switching facilities owned by a utility, by a power generator, or by the
Illinois power agency.
         W.   Information contained in or related to proposals, bids, or
negotiations related to electric power procurement under section 1-75 of the
Illinois Power Agency Act and section 16-111.5 of the Public Utilities Act that
is determined to be confidential and proprietary by the Illinois power agency
or by the Illinois commerce commission.
      2.   A public record that is not in the possession of the Village but is
in the possession of a party with whom the agency has contracted to perform a
governmental function on behalf of the Village, and that directly relates to
the governmental function and is not otherwise exempt under this Act, shall be
considered a public record of the Village, for purposes of the FOIA.
Section 7.5 Of FOIA:
Statutory Exemptions
To the extent provided for by the statutes referenced below, the following
shall be exempt from inspection and copying:
   A.   All information determined to be confidential under section 4002 of the
Technology Advancement and Development Act (20 ILCS 700/4002).
   B.   Library circulation and order records identifying library users with
specific materials under the Library Records Confidentiality Act (75 ILCS 70/
1 et seq.)
   C.   Applications, related documents, and medical records received by the
experimental organ transplantation procedures board and any and all documents
or other records prepared by the experimental organ transplantation procedures
board or its staff relating to applications it has received.
   D.   Information and records held by the department of public health and its
authorized representatives relating to known or suspected cases of sexually
transmissible disease or any information the disclosure of which is restricted
under the Illinois Sexually Transmissible Disease Control Act (410 ILCS 325/
1 et seq.)
   E.   Information the disclosure of which is exempted under section 30 of the
Radon Industry Licensing Act (420 ILCS 44/30).
   F.   Firm performance evaluations under section 55 of the Architectural,
Engineering, and Land Surveying Qualifications Based Selection Act (30 ILCS
535/55).
   G.   Information the disclosure of which is restricted and exempted under
section 50 of the Illinois Prepaid Tuition Act (110 ILCS 979/50).
   H.   Information the disclosure of which is exempted under the State
Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/-1 et seq.), and records of any
lawfully created state or local inspector general’s office that would be exempt
if created or obtained by an executive inspector general’s office under that
Act.
   I.   Information contained in a local emergency energy plan submitted to a
municipality in accordance with a local emergency energy plan ordinance that is
adopted under section 11-21.5-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-
21.5-5).
   J.   Information and data concerning the distribution of surcharge moneys
collected and remitted by wireless carriers under the Wireless Emergency
Telephone Safety Act (50 ILCS 751/1 et seq.)
   K.   Law enforcement officer identification information or driver
identification information compiled by a law enforcement agency or the
Department of Transportation under section 11-212 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
(625 ILCS 5/11-212).
   L.   Records and information provided to a residential health care facility
resident sexual assault and death review team or the executive council under
the Abuse Prevention Review Team Act (210 ILCS 28/1 et seq.)
   M.   Information provided to the predatory lending database created pursuant
to article 3 of the Residential Real Property Disclosure Act (765 ILCS 77/70 et
seq.), except to the extent authorized under that article.
   N.   Defense budgets and petitions for certification of compensation and
expenses for court appointed trial counsel as provided under sections 10 and 15
of the Capital Crimes Litigation Act (725 ILCS 124/10 and 725 ILCS 124/15).
This subsection N shall apply until the conclusion of the trial of the case,
even if the prosecution chooses not to pursue the death penalty prior to trial
or sentencing.
   O.   Information that is prohibited from being disclosed under section 4 of
the Illinois Health and Hazardous Substances Registry Act (410 ILCS 525/4).
   P.   Security portions of system safety program plans, investigation
reports, surveys, schedules, lists, data, or information compiled, collected,
or prepared by or for the regional transportation authority under section 2.11
of the Regional Transportation Authority Act (70-3615/2.11) or the St. Clair
County transit district under the Bi-State Transit Safety Act (45-111/1 et
seq.)
   Q.   Information prohibited from being disclosed by the Personnel Records
Review Act.
   R.    Information prohibited from being disclosed by the Illinois School
Student Records Act (105 ILCS 10/1 et seq.)
   S.   Information the disclosure of which is restricted under section 5-108
of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/5-108).
TITLE 2: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter
PLAN COMMISSION   1
CHAPTER 1: PLAN COMMISSION
Section
2-1-1: Commission Established; Membership; Terms
2-1-2: Officers; Rules And Regulations
2-1-3: Powers And Duties
2-1-4: Land Subdivision Or Resubdivision; Official Map
2-1-5: Improvements
2-1-6: Expenditures
2-1-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS:
   A.   Established: A Plan Commission is hereby created under authority of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-4 through 5/11-12-12.
(1990 Code § 4-1-1)
   B.   Membership: The Plan Commission shall consist of seven (7) members,
said members to be residents within the jurisdictional limits of the Village,
appointed by the Mayor on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty
on the Plan Commission and subject to the approval of the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 4-1-2)
   C.   Terms; Vacancies; Compensation: The members shall serve for a period of
three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired
term only. All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation,
except that if the Board deems it advisable, they may receive such compensation
as provided by the appropriation ordinance.
(1990 Code § 4-1-3)
2-1-2: OFFICERS; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Plan Commission shall elect such officers as it may deem necessary and
adopt rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with the
Village Code and State law. The Commission shall keep written records of its
proceedings. It shall be open at all times for and to the inspection of the
public, and the commission shall file an annual report with the Mayor and
Village Board, setting forth its transactions and recommendations.
(1990 Code § 4-1-4)
2-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   To prepare and recommend to the Village Board a Comprehensive Plan for
the present and future development or redevelopment of the Village and
contiguous unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles
beyond the corporate limits of the Village and not included in any other
municipality. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or
functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the Official
Comprehensive Plan or part thereof of the Village. Such plan shall be advisory,
except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by ordinances duly
enacted by the Village Board. All requirements for public hearing, filing of
notice of adoption with the County Recorder of Deeds and filing of the plan and
ordinances with the Village Clerk shall be complied with as provided by law. To
provide for the health, safety, comfort, and convenience of the inhabitants of
the Village and contiguous territory, such plan or plans shall establish
reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of
unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public
improvements as herein defined and shall establish reasonable requirements
governing the location, width, course, and surfacing of public highways and
streets, alleys, ways for public service facilities, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for
residential purposes, stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution,
sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment. The requirements
specified herein shall become regulatory only when adopted by law.
   B.   To designate land suitable for annexation to the Village and the
recommended zoning classification, if any, for such land upon annexation.
   C.   To recommend to the Village Board, from time to time, such changes in
the Comprehensive Plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary.
   D.   To prepare and recommend to the Village Board, from time to time, plans
and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance to the Official
Comprehensive Plan.
   E.   To give aid to the officials of the Village charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the Official Plan, or parts
thereof, to further the making of such improvements and generally, to promote
the realization of the Official Comprehensive Plan.
   F.   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities
for the general purpose of public understanding.
   G.   To cooperate with municipal or regional plan commissions and other
agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area, subject to approval of the
Village Board.
   H.   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under
authority of an act of the General Assembly of the State of Illinois as may be
conferred by the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 4-1-5)
2-1-4: LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION; OFFICIAL MAP:
At any time or times before or after the formal adoption of the Official
Comprehensive Plan by the Corporate Authorities, an Official Map may be
designated by ordinance, which may consist of the whole area included within
the Official Comprehensive Plan or one or more geographical or functional parts
and may include all or any part of the contiguous unincorporated area within
one and one-half (11/2) miles from the corporate limits of the Village. All
requirements for public hearing, filing notice of adoption with the County
Recorder of Deeds and filing of the plan and ordinances, including the Official
Map, with the Clerk shall be complied with as of the Village or within
contiguous territory which is not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles
beyond the corporate limits shall be entitled to record or shall be valid
unless the subdivision shown thereon provides for standards of design, and
standards governing streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service
facilities, streetlights, public grounds, size of lots to be used for
residential purposes and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection
and treatment in conformity with the applicable requirements of this Code,
including the Official Map.
(1990 Code § 4-1-6)
2-1-5: IMPROVEMENTS:
The Village Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission for its consideration a
copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any
nature. The Plan Commission may report in relation thereto, if it deems a
report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 4-1-7)
2-1-6: EXPENDITURES:
Expenditures of the commission shall be at the discretion of the Village Board,
and if the commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice or
services, it shall be done upon authority of the Village Board and
appropriations by the Village Board therefor.
(1990 Code § 4-1-8)
TITLE 3: FINANCES AND TAXATION
Chapter
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS   1
CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES   2
VILLAGE TAXES   3
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
Section
3-1-1: Claims
3-1-2: Insurance And Indemnification
3-1-3: Deposit Of Funds
3-1-4: Investments
3-1-1: CLAIMS:
   A.   Presentation: All claims against the Village for goods purchased,
damages, or originating in any other way, except for claims for salaries and
other allowances that are fixed by ordinance, must be presented on or before
the seventh day of each month to the Village Clerk. All such claims must be in
writing and items shall be specified.
   B.   Exception: Subsection A of this section does not prohibit the Village
Board from passing on any claims not previously presented to the Village Clerk
if, in the opinion of the Board, justice to the claimant requires it.
(1990 Code § 1-2-26)
3-1-2: INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Insurance: The Village Board shall have the power to purchase liability
insurance covering and insuring all Municipal officers, employees and elected
officials; said insurance to cover incidents occurring while in the performance
of their duties, which insurance may insure, cover and protect any liability
which the Municipal Corporation, officer, employee or elected official may
incur. When said insurance has been purchased, the Village shall be responsible
for all premium and deductible charges called for by any valid liability
insurance policy covering the Municipal Corporation, officer, employee or
elected official.
   B.   Indemnification:
      1.   If the Village Board elects not to purchase liability insurance
covering and insuring Municipal officers, elected officials and employees as
provided in this section, then the Village shall indemnify and cause to defend
Municipal officers, elected officials and employees from any claim filed by an
individual, partnership or corporation when said claim is founded on any act or
omission of the Municipal officers, elected officials or employees while in the
performance of their official duties, except the Village will not indemnify,
but will defend any Municipal officer, elected official or employee from any
claim made by an individual, partnership, or corporation wherein the claim
alleges that the Municipal officer, elected official or employee acted
intentionally, maliciously, or wantonly, and further will not indemnify or
cause to defend said officials or employees where the claim is directly and
indirectly related to the negligent care or use of a vehicle as defined by the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, and the Village will not indemnify any Municipal
officer, elected official or employee from any claim made by a Municipal
officer, elected official or employee.
      2.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the Village will
not indemnify or cause to defend any Municipal officers, elected officials or
employees if the Municipal officers, elected officials or employees have
liability insurance insuring the Municipal officers, elected officials or
employees from the alleged claim; however, the Village will indemnify the
Municipal officer, elected official or employee the personal deductible limits
of their personal policy.
(1990 Code § 1-2-34)
3-1-3: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
   A.   Designation By Board: The Treasurer is hereby required to keep all
funds and monies in his custody belonging to the Village in such places of
deposit as have been designated by section
3-1-4 of this chapter. When requested by the Treasurer, the Corporate
Authorities shall designate a bank or banks in which may be kept the funds and
monies of the Village in the custody of the Treasurer. When a bank has been
designated as a depository, it shall continue as such depository until ten (10)
days have elapsed after a new depository is designated and has qualified as
provided by law. When a new depository is designated, the Corporate Authorities
shall notify the sureties of the Treasury of that fact in writing at least five
(5) days before the transfer of funds.
   B.   Qualifications Of Bank: No bank shall be qualified to receive Village
funds or monies until it has furnished the Corporate Authorities with copies of
the last two (2) sworn statements of resources and liabilities which the bank
is required to furnish to the Auditor of Public Accounts or to the Comptroller
of Currency. Each bank designated as a depository for such funds or monies
shall, while acting as such depository, furnish the Corporate Authorities with
a copy of all statements of resources and liabilities which it is required to
furnish to the Auditor of Public Accounts or to the Comptroller of Currency.
   C.   Discharge From Liability: The Treasurer shall be discharged from
liability for all funds or monies which he deposits in a designated bank while
the funds and monies are so deposited. If the Village funds or monies are
deposited in a designated bank, however, the amount of such deposits shall not
exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the bank's capital stock and surplus, and
the Treasurer shall be responsible for funds or monies deposited in the bank in
excess of this limitation.
(1990 Code § 1-2-82)
3-1-4: INVESTMENTS:
The Village Treasurer is hereby authorized to invest surplus funds or reserve
funds of the Village in the following types of investments:
   A.   General obligation securities of the United States of America or of the
State of Illinois.
   B.   Certificates of deposit and time deposits in any bank where such
investments are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Company.
   C.   Short term discount obligations of the Federal National Mortgage
Association.
   D.   Money market accounts.
(1990 Code § 1-2-83)
CHAPTER 2: CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES
Section
3-2-1: Bidding And Contract Procedures
3-2-2: Interest In Contracts Prohibited
3-2-1: BIDDING AND CONTRACT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Competitive Bidding Required: Any work or other public improvement
which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or
special taxation, and all purchases of and contracts for supplies, materials,
and services shall, except as specifically provided herein, be based whenever
possible on competitive bids.
   B.   Formal Contract Procedure: All work or other public improvement which
is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special
taxation, and all purchases, orders or contracts for supplies, materials,
equipment or contractual services, except as otherwise provided herein, when
the estimated cost thereof shall exceed twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00), shall be purchased from the lowest responsible bidder, after due
notice inviting bids, unless competitive bidding is waived by a vote of two-
thirds (2/3) of the Trustees then holding office.
   C.   Notice Inviting Bids: Notice inviting bids shall be published at least
once in a newspaper with general circulation within the Village. The Village
shall also advertise all pending work or purchases by posting a notice on the
public bulletin board in the Village Hall.
   D.   Scope Of Notice: The newspaper notice required herein shall include a
general description of the work to be performed or the articles to be
purchased, shall state where specifications may be secured, and the time and
place for opening bids.
   E.   Bid Deposits: When deemed necessary by the Village Board, bid deposits
shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders
shall be entitled to the return of their bid deposits upon the award of the
contract by the Village Board. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid
deposit required by the Village Board upon failure on his part to enter into a
contract within ten (10) days after the award.
   F.   Bid Opening Procedure:
      1.   Sealed: Bids shall be submitted sealed to the Village and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope.
      2.   Opening: Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated
in the public notice.
      3.   Tabulation: A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the
Village Board or by a Village employee, in which event, a tabulation of the
bids shall be furnished to the Village Board at its next regular meeting.
   G.   Rejection Of Bids: The Village shall have the authority to reject all
bids or parts of all bids when the public interest will be served thereby.
   H.   Bidders In Default To Village: The Village shall not accept the bid of
a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other
monies due the Village.
   I.   Award Of Contract:
      1.   Authority In Village: The Village Board shall have the authority to
award contracts within the purview of this section.
      2.   Lowest Responsible Bidder: Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best interest of the
Village to accept. In awarding the contract, in addition to price, the Village
Board shall consider:
         a.   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract to provide the service required;
         b.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
         c.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
         d.   The quality of the performance of previous contracts or services;
         e.   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service;
         f.   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
         g.   The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
         h.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract;
         i.   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
      3.   Performance Bonds: The Village Board shall have the authority to
require a performance bond, before entering into a contract, in such amounts as
it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the
Village.
   J.   Open Market Procedure: All work and purchases of supplies, materials
and services of less than the estimated value of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) shall be made in the open market, without newspaper advertisement
and without observing the procedure prescribed by this section for the award of
formal contracts.
   K.   Professional Services Exempt From Bidding Requirements: All contracts
for professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers,
real estate appraisers and architects and any other profession whose ethical
code involved prohibits or discourages involvement in normal bidding
procedures, may be entered into by the Village without observing the bidding
procedures prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts.
   L.   Emergency Purchases: In case of an apparent emergency which requires
immediate work or purchase of supplies, materials or services, the Village
Board shall be empowered to secure by open market procedure as herein set
forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any work, supplies, materials or
services regardless of the amount of the expenditure.
   M.   Cooperative Purchasing: The Village shall have the authority to join
with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best
interests of the Village would be served thereby.
(1990 Code § 1-2-24)
3-2-2: INTEREST IN CONTRACTS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person holding any office, either by election or appointment under
the laws or Constitution of the State, may be in any manner interested, either
directly or indirectly, in his own name or in the name of any other person,
association, trust or corporation, in any contract or the performance of any
work in the making or letting of which such officer may be called upon to act
or vote. No such officer may represent, either as agent or otherwise, any
person, association, trust or corporation, with respect to any application or
bid for any contract or work in regard to which such officer may be called upon
to vote. Nor may any such officer take or receive, or offer to take or receive,
either directly or indirectly, any money or other thing of value as a gift or
bribe or means of influencing his vote or action in his official character. Any
contract made and procured in violation hereof is void.
   B.   However, any elected or appointed member of the Governing Body may
provide materials, merchandise property, services or labor if they meet the
exemption requirements provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-55-10
(b).
(1990 Code § 1-2-33)
 
CHAPTER 3: VILLAGE TAXES
Section
3-3-1: Corporate Rate
3-3-2: Police Tax
3-3-3: Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
3-3-4: Municipal Cannabis Retailer’s Occupation Tax
3-3-1: CORPORATE RATE:
The maximum rate for general corporate purposes of the Village shall be and the
same is hereby established at 0.4375 percent (65 ILCS 5/8-3-1).
(1990 Code § 36-1-1)
3-3-2: POLICE TAX:
The maximum rate for police protection purposes of the Village shall be and the
same is hereby established at 0.075 percent (65 ILCS 5/11-1-3).
(1990 Code § 36-1-2)
3-3-3: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX:
There is hereby imposed a simplified Municipal telecommunications tax pursuant
to 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 636/5-1 et seq. Copies of said tax are on file
in the Office of the Village Clerk for public use and inspection.
(2019 Code)
3-3-4: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILER’S OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed; Rate:
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the Village at the rate of
three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of
that business.
      2.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
sections
8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22).
   B.   Collection Of Tax By Retailers:
      1.   The tax imposed by this section shall be remitted by such retailer
to the Illinois Department of Revenue (Department). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
      2.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 2019-11-1, 11-12-2019)
TITLE 4: BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter
GENERAL LICENSE AND PERMIT PROVISIONS   1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES   2
SOLICITORS   3
AUCTIONS AND YARD SALES   4
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS   5
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL LICENSE AND PERMIT PROVISIONS
Section
4-1-1: Application For License Or Permit
4-1-2: Persons Subject To License Or Permit
4-1-3: Term And Form Of License
4-1-4: Investigations
4-1-5: Fees And Charges
4-1-6: Building And Premises
4-1-7: Location Restrictions
4-1-8: Posting License; Displaying Vehicle Sticker
4-1-9: Nuisances Prohibited
4-1-10: Working Conditions
4-1-11: Inspections And Analyses
4-1-12: Suspension Or Revocation Of License Or Permit
4-1-13: Appeal Mayor’s Decision
4-1-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT:
   A.   Applications for all licenses and permits required by this title shall
be made in writing to the Village Clerk in the absence of provision to the
contrary.
   B.   Each application shall contain:
      1.   The name of the applicant;
      2.   The permit or license desired;
      3.   The location to be used, if any;
      4.   The time covered; and
      5.   The fee to be paid.
   C.   Each application shall also contain the number of the certificates of
registration required under the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/1 et
seq.), Service Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.), and/or Use Tax Act
(35 ILCS 105/1 e seq.), if applicable. Each application shall contain such
additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the Village
officials in the issuing of the license or permit for which applied.
(1990 Code § 7-1-1)
4-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Whenever, in this Code or in any Municipal ordinance, a license or permit is
required for the maintenance, operation, or conduct of any business or
establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation,
any person, firm or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by
himself or itself or through an agent, employee or partner, he or it is held
forth as being engaged in the business, activity or occupation, or if he or it
solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively, or if he or it performs or
attempts to perform any part of such business, activity or occupation in the
Village.
(1990 Code § 7-1-2)
4-1-3: TERM AND FORM OF LICENSE:
   A.   Annual License: No license shall be granted for a longer term than one
year, and all licenses, unless otherwise provided by ordinance, shall expire on
April 30 next following their issue.
   B.   Signing Of License: Every license shall be signed by the Mayor and
attested by the Village Clerk under the Corporate Seal, and no license shall be
valid until signed and countersigned as aforesaid, nor shall any person be
deemed to be licensed until the same shall have been issued to him in due form.
(1990 Code § 7-1-3)
   C.   Termination Of License:
      1.   All annual licenses shall be operative and the license year for the
Village shall commence on May 1 of each year and shall terminate on April 30 of
the following year, where no provision to the contrary is made.
      2.   The Village Clerk shall notify all licensees of the Village of the
time of expiration of the license held by the licensee (if an annual) three (3)
weeks prior to the date of such expiration. Provided, however, that a failure
to make such notification or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall
not excuse the licensee from the obligation to obtain a new license or a
renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action based upon operation
without a license.
(1990 Code § 7-1-6)
4-1-4: INVESTIGATIONS:
   A.   Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where an
investigation or inspection is required by ordinance before the issuance of
such permit or license, or where an inspection or investigation shall be deemed
reasonably necessary or appropriate, the Village Clerk, within forty eight (48)
hours, shall refer the application to the appropriate official(s) for the
making of such investigation or inspection.
   B.   The official(s) to whom the application has been referred shall make a
report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving
such application or a copy thereof.
   C.   The Chief of Police shall make or cause to be made an inspection
regarding such permits and licenses as relate to the care and handling of food,
the prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease, and the protection of
health. The Zoning Administrator, if any, shall make or cause to be made any
inspections which relate to compliance with the zoning regulations, if any, and
other related regulations. All other investigations, except where otherwise
provided, shall be made by the Chief of Police or by some other officer
designated by the Mayor.
   D.   Upon receipt of all related investigative reports, the Village Clerk
shall forward such reports, together with the application, to the Mayor for
evaluation and determination.
   E.   If it shall appear to the Corporate Authorities that the matters and
circumstances relating to an application require further information before a
proper determination can be made, such application shall be returned to the
Village Clerk for the inclusion of such additional information as may be
specified necessary and appropriate.
   F.   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and the related investigative reports, the Corporate Authorities
shall determine that the matters concerning the application are unsatisfactory,
they may disapprove such application, indicating the reasons therefor.
Thereupon, the Village Clerk shall be directed to promptly notify the applicant
that his application is disapproved and that no license or permit will be
issued.
   G.   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and the related investigative reports, the Corporate Authorities
shall determine that the application is satisfactory, they shall approve the
application. Thereupon, the Village Clerk shall be directed to promptly notify
the applicant that his application is approved and the license or permit may be
issued.
(1990 Code § 7-1-4)
4-1-5: FEES AND CHARGES:
   A.   In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor
is made to the Village Clerk in the amounts prescribed by the Corporate
Authorities. When an applicant has not engaged in the business or activity
until after the expiration of the current license year, the license fee shall
be prorated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter or fraction thereof
during which the business or activity has been or will be conducted. Except as
otherwise provided, all license and permit fees shall become a part of the
Corporate Fund. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any license
or permit fee, or part thereof by reason of death or departure of the licensee
or permittee; nor shall any rebate or refund be made by reason of nonuse of the
license or discontinuance of the operation or conduct of the licensed
establishment, business or activity.
   B.   Any person applying for an annual license when the remaining period in
the fiscal year is six (6) months or less is required to pay only one-half (½)
of the annual license fee with no discount. The license fee shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00) per annum, unless otherwise provided by ordinance.
(1990 Code § 7-1-5)
4-1-6: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
   A.   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no
permit shall be issued for any purpose or activity, if the premises and
building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Village and the State of Illinois.
   B.   No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any
business or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the
zoning regulations of the Village, if any.
(1990 Code § 7-1-7)
4-1-7: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Separate License For Each Location: No license for the operation of a
business or establishment in the Village shall be construed to permit the
operation of a licensed business or establishment in more than one location in
the Village; a separate license shall be required for each location of a
licensed establishment. For the purpose of this chapter, the existence of a
single location shall be evidenced by the fact that all buildings containing
the principal or accessory uses shall be connected or shall be located on the
same lot or parcel, shall be operated and managed by the same person or owner,
and shall be an establishment with the same classification.
(1990 Code § 7-1-9)
   B.   Change Of Location: The location of any licensed business or
occupation, or the location of any permitted act may be changed; provided, that
ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the Village Clerk in the absence of
any provision to the contrary; provided, however, that all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Village shall be complied with.
(1990 Code § 7-1-8)
4-1-8: POSTING LICENSE; DISPLAYING VEHICLE STICKER:
   A.   Posting License: It shall be the duty of every person conducting a
licensed business in the Village to keep his license posted in a prominent
place on the premises used for such business at all times.
(1990 Code § 7-1-15)
   B.   Displaying Vehicle Sticker: Whenever the number of vehicles used is the
basis in whole or in part for a license fee, the Village Clerk shall furnish
the licensee with a tag or sticker for each vehicle covered by the license and
such tag or sticker shall be posted or affixed in a conspicuous place on each
such vehicle.
(1990 Code § 7-1-16)
4-1-9: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Generally: No business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall
be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact, and no
building, vehicle or structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof shall be
used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be dangerous to life
or detrimental to health.
(1990 Code § 7-1-10.1)
   B.   Unsafe Or Unhealthful Business:
      1.   No building or structure utilized, constructed or maintained in
connection with any business or occupation shall evidence an unsanitary,
unsafe, or dangerous condition.
      2.   No substance, matter, or thing of any kind whatever which would be
dangerous or detrimental to health shall be allowed to exist in connection with
any business or occupation, or be used in any work or labor performed in the
Village.
(1990 Code § 7-1-10.2)
   C.   Refuse Disposal:
      1.   Refuse Containers: The standard refuse container required by this
chapter shall be a receptacle of not less than twenty (20) gallons of
impervious material and sturdy construction with a tightfitting cover, and
equipped with handles properly placed to facilitate handling.
      2.   Duty To Provide Refuse Containers:
         a.   The occupant of every building, structure, or premises used or
maintained in connection with any business or occupation shall provide and
maintain in good condition and repair a sufficient number of refuse containers
for the temporary storage of all refuse accumulating between collections.
         b.   All refuse which is placed for collection service outside any
building or structure must be kept in standard refuse containers.
      3.   Refuse Removal: It shall be the duty of the occupant of every
building, structure, or premises used or maintained in connection with any
business or occupation to cause to be removed, at his own cost and expense, at
least once each week, all refuse produced therein.
      4.   Removal Of Garbage From Food Establishments: Every person owning or
controlling any hotel, restaurant, café, or retail food establishment where
more than thirty two (32) gallons of refuse is normally produced weekly shall
cause all garbage to be placed in sanitary refuse containers and shall cause
all substances deposited in such containers to be removed weekly from his
premises and to be disposed of at his own expense.
(1990 Code § 7-1-10.3)
4-1-10: WORKING CONDITIONS:
   A.   Health Requirements: No owner, lessee, manager, or superintendent of
any store, factory, workshop, or other place where persons are employed shall
cause or permit such place or any room or part thereof, to be overcrowded or
inadequate or faulty in respect to light, ventilation, heat or cleanliness.
(1990 Code § 7-1-11.1)
   B.   Sanitation: All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean
condition, free from effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable or other
nuisance; also as far as practicable, such premises shall be free from all
gases, vapors, dust, or other impurities generated by manufacturing processes
or otherwise which are injurious to health. Sufficient washroom facilities for
male and female employees shall be provided and such facilities shall be
properly ventilated.
(1990 Code § 7-1-11.2)
   C.   Heat Requirements:
      1.   It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the
heating plant which furnishes heat to any factory or workshop to maintain a
temperature within such factory or workshop of not less than sixty two degrees
Fahrenheit (62°F), without such undue restriction of ventilation as to
interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein; provided, however, that this
requirement shall not apply to any factory or workshop where the business
conducted therein is of such a nature that a higher or lower temperature than
sixty two degrees Fahrenheit (62°F) is necessary or expedient for the work or
manufacturing process of such business.
      2.   It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling the heating
plant which furnishes heat to any office, store, or other place of employment
to maintain a temperature therein of not less than sixty two degrees Fahrenheit
(62°F), without such undue restriction of ventilation as to interfere with
proper sanitary conditions therein, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. from October 1 of each year to June 1 of the
succeeding year, Sundays and legal holidays excepted.
(1990 Code § 7-1-11.3)
   D.   Inspection: The Chief of Police and the Zoning Administrator, if any,
shall visit or cause to be visited all places of employment in the Village as
often as they shall deem necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of
this section, and to have such arrangements made as may be deemed necessary for
the health and safety of the employees.
(1990 Code § 7-1-11.4)
4-1-11: INSPECTIONS AND ANALYSES:
   A.   Whenever inspections of the premises for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions
of any ordinance or regulation of the Village, or to detect violations thereof,
it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to
admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection, any officer or employee
of the Village who is duly authorized to make such inspection at any reasonable
time that such admission or entry is requested.
   B.   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or
regulation, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any duly authorized
officer or employee of the Village requesting the same, sufficient samples of
such material or commodity for such analysis upon official request.
   C.   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Mayor may
revoke the license of any owner or operator of a licensed business in the
Village who refuses to permit any duly authorized officer or employee to make
such inspection or to take adequate sample of said commodity, or who interferes
with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duties; provided,
however, that no license shall be subject to revocation for such cause unless
such officer or employee has been refused permission to enter upon the premises
in the name of the Village after first having presented a warrant authorizing
such entry.
(1990 Code § 7-1-12)
4-1-12: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
   A.   Summary Suspension: When the conduct of operation of any business or
establishment, whether or not licensed, shall constitute a nuisance in fact and
a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, the
Mayor shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the
closing of the premises and the suspension of any license or permit for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(1990 Code § 7-1-13.1)
   B.   Hearing: Within ten (10) days, but no later than thirty (30) days,
after he has so acted, the Mayor shall call a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether or not the license or permit should be revoked.
(1990 Code § 7-1-13.2)
   C.   Revocation:
      1.   Licenses and permits issued under the provisions of this Code,
unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the Mayor after notice and hearing
as provided in subsections D and E of this section for any of the following
causes:
         a.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
         b.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance
provisions relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license
or permit, or the premises occupied;
         c.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
         d.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the Village;
         e.   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference
with a duly authorized officer or employee in the performance of his duties in
making such inspections, as provided in section
4-1-11 of this chapter.
      2.   Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and
imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other
applicable provisions of this Code.
(1990 Code § 7-1-13.3)
   D.   Hearing Notice: Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by
certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee at his
last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set or the hearing.
(1990 Code § 7-1-13.4)
   E.   Counsel: At the hearing, the Village Attorney shall present the
complaint and shall represent the Village. The licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine
witnesses. The Mayor shall preside and shall render the decision.
(1990 Code § 7-1-13.5)
4-1-13: APPEAL MAYOR’S DECISION:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor or the corporate authorities
to deny the application for a business license, as provided in section
4-1-4 of this chapter, or in connection with the revocation of a license or
permit, as provided in section
4-1-12 of this chapter, shall have the right to appeal to the Village. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing with the Village Clerk, within ten (10) days
after notice of a denial of an application or a revocation of a license or
permit, a written statement under oath, setting forth specifically the grounds
for appeal. The Village shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on
such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be give to the applicant or
licensee or permittee in the same manner as provided in section
4-1-12 of this chapter. The decision of the Village on such appeal shall be
final.
(1990 Code § 7-1-14)
CHAPTER 2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: License Required; Display
4-2-3: Issuance And Application For License
4-2-4: Prohibited Licensees
4-2-5: License Term; Fee Paid In Advance
4-2-6: Classification Of Licenses; Fees; Number
4-2-7: Nature Of License
4-2-8: Dramshop Insurance
4-2-9: Hours
4-2-10: Happy Hour Restrictions
4-2-11: Location
4-2-12: Drinking On Public Ways
4-2-13: Liquor In Vehicles
4-2-14: Restricted Residential Areas
4-2-15: Election Days
4-2-16: Unlawful Acts Or Entertainments
4-2-17: Sanitation And Health Requirements
4-2-18: Sales Prohibited To Certain Persons; Misbranding
4-2-19: Restrictions Concerning Minors
4-2-20: Books And Records Of Licensee
4-2-21: Inspections
4-2-22: Violations And Penalties
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases herein defined are
used in this chapter in the sense given them in the following definitions:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified
or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by human beings. The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol
produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulation promulgated
thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent
(0.5%) or less of alcohol by volume.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
CLOSE: To shut up so as to prevent entrance or access by any person; and the
entire suspension of business.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of the State and not for pecuniary
profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors kept, used, and maintained by its members,
through the payment of annual dues and owning, hiring or leasing a building or
space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants and
employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and
their guests; provided, that such club files with the Mayor at the time of its
application for a license under this chapter, two (2) copies of a list of names
and residences of its members, and similarly files within ten (10) days of the
election of any additional member, his name and address; and provided further,
that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual
meeting, and that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid,
or directly or indirectly receives in the form of salary or other compensation,
any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or
its members or guests introduced by members, beyond the amount of such salary
as may be fixed and voted at the annual meeting by the members or by the board
of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
MAYOR: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner as provided in 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., entitled the “Liquor Control Act or the
Village Attorney as provided in 235 ILCS 5/4-2 through 4-4”.
PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE: Any public place where packaged liquors are offered for
sale in the original, unopened container for consumption away from the
premises.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any premises enclosed or unenclosed or partly enclosed and partly
unenclosed wherein any service or goods, chattels or merchandise is offered for
sale to the public or any such premises used as a clubhouse, club room or
meeting place. The terms “public place” and “public premises” shall be
interchangeable for the purposes of this chapter.
RESIDENT: One who has his residence in the Village and is a registered voter at
that place of residence.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out
to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals actually are
served and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
RETAILER: A person who sells or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means whatsoever
for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any person,
whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SELL AT RETAIL AND SALE OF RETAIL: Shall refer to any mean sales for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin or other spirituous liquors and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
TO SELL: Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits as defined in this
section.
(1990 Code § 21-1-1)
4-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; DISPLAY:
   A.   Local And State Licenses Required:
      1.   No person shall sell, keep or offer for sale at retail, or conduct
any place for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor within the limits and
territory of the Village without having a license to do so, issued by the Mayor
in the manner hereinafter provided, and a valid license for such purpose issued
by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission of the State of Illinois.
      2.   A similar valid license issued by the Mayor is hereby required for
and with respect to each building, location and premises, within the aforesaid
territory of the Village, at or upon which alcoholic liquor is to be sold or
kept or offered for sale at retail.
(1990 Code § 21-2-1)
   B.   Every licensee under this chapter shall cause his license to be framed
and hung in plain vision in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
(1990 Code § 21-2-9)
4-2-3: ISSUANCE AND APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Issuance Of License: The Mayor is authorized to grant and issue
licenses to individuals, firms and corporations to sell at retail and to keep
and offer for sale at retail alcoholic liquors within the limits and territory
of the Village upon the conditions and in the manner provided by this chapter
and by the Act of the General Assembly of Illinois, and not otherwise. Such
license shall be in writing, signed by the Mayor and attested by the Village
Clerk, with the seal of his office affixed thereto.
   B.   Application For License: Prior to issuance of a license, the applicant
must submit to the Mayor an application in triplicate, in writing and under
oath, stating:
      1.   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the person entitled to share in the
profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation for profit or a club, the
date of incorporation, the object for which it was organized, the names and
addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority in interest of the
stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominee, the address
and name of such person.
      2.   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
      3.   The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
      4.   The length of time that the applicant has been engaged in the
business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which
its charter was issued.
      5.   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license.
      6.   Whether the applicant has made similar application for a similar
other license on premises other than described in the application and the
disposition of such application.
      7.   That the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not
disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in
the aforesaid Act of the General Assembly or in this chapter, or resolution and
amendments hereto.
      8.   Whether a previous license issued to the applicant by any state or
subdivision thereof or by the Federal government has been revoked and the
reasons therefor.
      9.   That he will not violate any of the laws of Illinois or of business.
   C.   Partnership Or Corporation
      1.   In the case of a partnership or corporation, the information and
statements required by this section shall be furnished as to each partner, and
as to the president and secretary of the corporation with the location of the
principal office of the corporation.
      2.   If the application is made in behalf of a partnership, firm,
association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed and sworn to by
at least two (2) members of such partnership, firm, association or club, or by
the president and secretary of such corporation.
   D.   Consideration Of Application By Police Chief: One copy of the
application shall be retained by the Mayor and one copy given to the Chief of
Police. The Chief of Police shall endorse on the copies his approval or
disapproval of the application and may make further comments regarding that
application. The copies shall be returned to the Mayor and the endorsement and
comment of the Chief of Police shall be considered by him as an aid in deciding
whether the license should be issued or refused.
   E.   Examination Of Applicant By Mayor: The Mayor shall have the right to
examine or cause to be examined under oath, any applicant for a local license
or for renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or
suspension has been served and to examine or cause to be examined the books and
records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for
his information in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue
subpoena which shall be effective in any part of the State. For the purpose of
obtaining any of the information desired by the Mayor under this section, he
may authorize his agent to act on his behalf.
(1990 Code § 21-2-2)
   F.   Application Filed With Clerk: The application for a license shall be
filed with the Village Clerk.
(1990 Code § 21-2-4)
4-2-4: PROHIBITED LICENSEES:
No license of any kind issued by the State Commission or any local commission
shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not a resident of the Village or County in which the
premises covered by the license are located; except in case of railroad or boat
licenses;
   B.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides;
   C.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State
law, unless the Commission determines that such person will not be impaired by
the conviction in engaging in the licensed practice after considering matters
set forth in such person’s application in accordance with 235 ILCS section 6-
2.5 and the Commission’s investigation;
   D.   A person who has been convicted of keeping a place of prostitution or
keeping a place of juvenile prostitution, promoting prostitution that involves
keeping a place of prostitution, or promoting juvenile prostitution that
involves keeping a place of juvenile prostitution;
   E.   A person who has been convicted of pandering;
   F.   A person whose license issued under 235 ILCS has been revoked for
cause;
   G.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
   H.   A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited
partnership thereof, owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate
limited partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive
a license hereunder for any reason other than residence within the political
subdivision, unless residency is required by local ordinance;
   I.   A corporation or limited liability company, if any member, officer,
manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the
aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would
not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than
residence within the political subdivision;
   J.   A corporation or limited liability company unless it is incorporated or
organized in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation or foreign limited
liability company which is qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983
or the Limited Liability Company Act to transact business in Illinois. The
Commission shall permit and accept from an applicant for a license under this
Act proof prepared from the Secretary of State’s website that the corporation
or limited liability company is in good standing and is qualified under the
Business Corporation Act of 1983 or the Limited Liability Company Act to
transact business in Illinois;
   K.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee;
   L.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of 235 ILCS or has forfeited his bond to appear in
court to answer charges for any such violation, unless the Commission
determines, in accordance with 235 ILCS section 6-2.5, that the person will not
be impaired by the conviction in engaging in the licensed practice;
   M.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license
is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued;
   N.   Any law enforcing public official, including members of the local
liquor control commissions, any mayor, alderman, or member of the city council
or commission, any president of the village board of trustees, any member of a
village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county board; and no
such official shall have a direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or
distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a license may be granted to such
official in relation to premises that are not located within the territory
subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is
approved by the State Liquor Control Commission and except that a license may
be granted, in a city or village with a population of fifty five thousand
(55,000) or less, to any alderman, member of a city council, or member of a
village board of trustees in relation to premises that are located within the
territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if (i) the sale of
alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license is incidental to the selling of food,
(ii) the issuance of the license is approved by the State Commission, (iii) the
issuance of the license is in accordance with all applicable local ordinances
in effect where the premises are located, and (iv) the official granted a
license does not vote on alcoholic liquor issues pending before the board or
council to which the license holder is elected. Notwithstanding any provision
of this paragraph (14) to the contrary, an alderman or member of a city council
or commission, a member of a village board of trustees other than the president
of the village board of trustees, or a member of a county board other than the
president of a county board may have a direct interest in the manufacture,
sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor as long as he or she is not a law
enforcing public official, a mayor, a village board president, or president of
a county board. To prevent any conflict of interest, the elected official with
the direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic
liquor shall not participate in any meetings, hearings, or decisions on matters
impacting the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
Furthermore, the mayor of a city with a population of fifty five thousand
(55,000) or less or the president of a village with a population of fifty five
thousand (55,000) or less may have an interest in the manufacture, sale, or
distribution of alcoholic liquor as long as the council or board over which he
or she presides has made a local liquor control commissioner appointment that
complies with the requirements of 235 ILCS section 4-2;
   O.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee;
   P.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of Section 28-1 of, or as proscribed
by Section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of
2012, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory
provisions;
   Q.   A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued a
license under the Raffles and Poker Runs Act or the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar
Games Act;
   R.   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption
on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability
insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the
maximum liability amounts set out in 235 ILCS Section 6-21(a);
   S.   A person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a manufacturer
of beer, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust
or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business
enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer, having any legal, equitable, or
beneficial interest, directly or indirectly, in a person licensed in this State
as a distributor or importing distributor. For purposes of this subsection, a
person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a “manufacturer of beer”
shall also mean a brewer and a non-resident dealer who is also a manufacturer
of beer, including a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or
trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of
business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer;
   T.   A person who is licensed in this State as a distributor or importing
distributor, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or
trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of
business enterprise licensed in this State as a distributor or importing
distributor having any legal, equitable, or beneficial interest, directly or
indirectly, in a person licensed as a manufacturer of beer by any licensing
authority, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust
or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business
enterprise, except for a person who owns, on or after the effective date of
this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly, no more than five percent
(5%) of the outstanding shares of a manufacturer of beer whose shares are
publicly traded on an exchange within the meaning of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934. For the purposes of this subsection, a person who is licensed by
any licensing authority as a “manufacturer of beer” shall also mean a brewer
and a non-resident dealer who is also a manufacturer of beer, including a
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust or any
subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business
enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer.
(1990 Code § 21-2-3)
4-2-5: LICENSE TERM; FEE PAID IN ADVANCE:
   A.   Retail liquor licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid for
twelve (12) month periods upon the payment of the license fee as hereinafter
set forth, unless sooner revoked or suspended. The six (6) month period shall
be from May 1 of each year to April 30 of the ensuing year. The license fee
shall be payable in advance by the applicant for a license at the time the
application for a license is submitted to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
as hereinbefore provided. In the event the license is denied, the license fee
shall be returned to the applicant. The fees shall be deposited with the
Village Treasurer who shall deposit the fees in the Village General Fund.
   B.   Licenses shall state thereon the names of the licensees and the address
and description of the premises for which they are granted and the dates of
their issuance and expiration.
(1990 Code § 21-2-4)
4-2-6: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEES; NUMBER:
   A.   Classes; Fees: Every person, firm or corporation, or other entity
engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic liquors shall pay an annual license
fee. Such license shall be divided into the following classes:
      1.   Class A: A Class A license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors for consumption, as well as the retail sale of such liquor
not for consumption on the premises specified. The fee shall be six hundred
dollars ($600.00) per year.
      2.   Class B: A Class B license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor, but not for consumption on the premises where sold. The fee
for such license shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00) per year.
(Ord. 2018-3-3, 3-5-2018)
   B.   Number Of Licenses Issued: There shall be issued no more than four (4)
Class A licenses to be in effect at any one time in the Village; and no more
than one Class B license shall be issued and in effect at any one time in the
Village.
(1990 Code § 21-2-6)
4-2-7: NATURE OF LICENSE:
   A.   A license issued under this chapter shall be purely a personal
privilege, good for not to exceed one (1) year after issued, unless sooner
revoked as in this chapter authorized and provided and shall not constitute
property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor
shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily, or involuntarily or subject
to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws
of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the
licensee; provided, that executors and administrators of any estate of the
deceased licensee and the trustees of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when
such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of
the sale of alcoholic liquor under the order of the court having jurisdiction
of such estate and may exercise the privileges of such deceased, insolvent or
bankrupt licensee, after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or
bankruptcy, until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six (6)
months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.
(1990 Code § 21-2-7)
   B.   Except in the case of a non-beverage user’s license, a refund shall be
made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the
licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance
with the provisions of this subsection.
(235 ILCS 5/6-1)
4-2-8: DRAMSHOP INSURANCE:
No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant shall file with the
application a certificate by an insurance company authorized to do business in
the State of Illinois, certifying that the applicant has the following minimum
coverage:
   A.   Bodily Injury Liability:
      1.   For each person: Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
      2.   For each occurrence: One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
   B.   Property Damage: Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for each
occurrence.
   C.   Loss of Support Coverage: Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for each
occurrence.
(1990 Code § 21-2-8)
4-2-9: HOURS:
   A.   Limitation On Hours:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for Class A licensees to sell, or offer for
sale at retail, any alcoholic liquor in the Village between the hours of one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on Monday through Friday. No
Class A licensee shall be open or sell, or offer for sale at retail, any
alcoholic liquor on Saturday or Sunday from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. until seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for Class B licensees to sell, or offer for
sale at retail, any alcoholic liquor in the Village between the hours of one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on all days of the week.
   B.   Regulations:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to admit the
public to any premises in or on which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during
the hours within which the sale of alcoholic liquor is prohibited.
      2.   The times referred to in subsection A of this section shall mean
Daylight Savings Time when the same is in effect in the Village and upon
cessation of Daylight Savings Time, shall mean Central Standard Time.
      3.   All customers of a licensee selling alcoholic liquor shall leave the
premises at the specified closing time and shall not remain on the premises
thereafter.
      4.   Any holder of a retail liquor license or its agent or employee who
violates the provisions of this chapter in regulating the legal hours of
operation shall, upon conviction, be fined according to the provisions of
section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 2018-3-2, 3-5-2018)
4-2-10: HAPPY HOUR RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Schedule Of Drink Prices: All retail licensees shall maintain a
schedule of the prices charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served
and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever
a hotel or multi-use establishment which holds a valid retailer's license
operates on its premises more than one establishment at which drinks of
alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the hotel or multi-use establishment shall
maintain at each such establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged
for such drinks at the establishment.
   B.   Serving Of Drinks Restricted: No retail licensee or employee or agent
of such licensee shall:
      1.   Serve two (2) or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one
person for consumption by that one person, except selling or delivering wine by
the bottle or carafe.
      2.   Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of
drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the general public.
      3.   Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any
person on any one date at a reduced price other than that charged other
purchasers of drinks on that day where such reduced price is a promotion to
encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, except as authorized in subsection
C7 of this section.
      4.   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink or the
size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionally the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day.
      5.   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises.
      6.   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsections B1 through B5 of
this section.
   C.   Certain Sales Or Activities Allowed: Nothing in subsection B of this
section shall be construed to prohibit a licensee from:
      1.   Offering free food or entertainment at any time.
      2.   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package.
      3.   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package.
      4.   Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between
a hotel or multi-use establishment and another group for the holding of any
function, meeting, convention or trade show.
      5.   Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel.
      6.   Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited to,
buckets), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in
such manner and delivered to two (2) or more persons at one time.
      7.   Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in whole
or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment not
regularly scheduled.
   D.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section shall be grounds for
suspension or revocation of the retailer's license as provided in section
4-2-22 of this chapter.
(1990 Code § 21-3-2)
4-2-11: LOCATION:
   A.   Prohibited Locations:
      1.   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within one hundred (100) feet of any church, school other than an
institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or
for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station,
provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant
service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other
places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on
if the place of business so exempted is not located in a municipality of more
than five hundred thousand (500,000) persons, unless required by local
ordinance; nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic
liquor on premises within one hundred (100) feet of any church or school where
the church or school has been established within such one hundred (100) feet
since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the
distance of one hundred (100) feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any
building used for worship services or educational programs and not to property
boundaries.
      2.   Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner may grant an exemption to the prohibition in
subsection A1 if a local rule or ordinance authorizes the local liquor control
commissioner to grant that exemption.
(1990 Code § 21-3-3)
   B.   Change Of Location: A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the
sale of alcoholic liquor only on the premises described in the application and
license. Such location may be changed only upon the written permit to make such
change issued by the Mayor. No change of location shall be permitted unless the
proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
under the laws of the State and this Code.
(1990 Code § 21-3-4)
4-2-12: DRINKING ON PUBLIC WAYS:
It shall be unlawful to drink any alcoholic liquor on any public streets,
alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the Village unless authorized at a
regular or special meeting of the Corporate Authorities.
(1990 Code § 21-3-6)
4-2-13: LIQUOR IN VEHICLES:
   A.   Transporting In Motor Vehicles:
      1.   No person shall, within the Village, transport, carry, possess, or
have any alcoholic liquor in, upon, or about any motor vehicle in or on any
public street, alley or place, except in the original package and with the seal
unbroken.
      2.   The licensee shall not knowingly permit any person to leave his
premises with liquor in a “cup-to-go”.
(1990 Code § 21-3-7)
   B.   Liquor In Vehicles; Minors: The presence in a vehicle other than a
public vehicle of any alcoholic liquor shall be prima facie evidence that it is
in the possession of and is being carried by all persons occupying such vehicle
at the time of which such alcoholic liquor is found, except under the following
circumstances:
      1.   If such liquor is found on the person of one of the occupants
therein; or
      2.   If such vehicle contains at least one occupant over twenty one (21)
years of age.
(1990 Code § 21-3-8)
4-2-14: RESTRICTED RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
It shall be unlawful to establish a retail liquor business within the Village
in violation of the restrictions of the zoning regulations of this Code, if
any.
(1990 Code § 21-3-9)
4-2-15: ELECTION DAYS:
All licensees may sell alcoholic liquor at retail, by the drink or in the
original package for consumption either on or off the premises licensed, on the
day of any national, State, County or Municipal election, including primary
elections during the hours the polls are open within the political area in
which such election is being held and on Sundays; subject to all the remaining
terms, conditions and opening hours and closing hours as set forth in this
chapter.
(1990 Code § 21-3-10)
4-2-16: UNLAWFUL ACTS OR ENTERTAINMENTS:
   A.   Drinking In Certain Places; Intoxication: It shall be unlawful for any
person to do or commit any of the following acts within the Village:
      1.   Drink any alcoholic liquors on any public street, alley, sidewalk,
or other public way without special permission granted by the Mayor.
      2.   Drink any alcoholic liquors in any public park, except with the
permission of the Mayor.
      3.   Drink any alcoholic liquors on any private property without
permission of an owner thereof.
      4.   Appear on or in any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public
place, including parks and recreation areas, in an intoxicated condition where
such person may be a danger to himself or others.
(1990 Code § 21-3-11)
   B.   Peddling: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the
Village.
(1990 Code § 21-3-17)
   C.   Gambling: It is unlawful to keep, place, maintain, or operate any
gambling device or instrument in and upon the premises used or occupied as a
place where alcoholic liquor is sold or given away.
(1990 Code § 21-3-18)
   D.   Disorderly House: Any person licensed under this chapter shall not
suffer or permit any disorder, drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, unlawful
games, or riotous or disorderly conduct in any house or premises kept or
occupied by him for the sale of liquor.
(1990 Code § 21-3-19)
   E.   Unlawful Entertainment:
      1.   No licensee, his agent, servant or employee shall permit or allow
any lewd or lascivious act or any topless and/or bottomless employee and/or
employees ("topless" being defined as naked and substantially without clothing
or covering of the body from the waist to the neckline and "bottomless" being
defined as naked and substantially without clothing or covering of the body
from the waist downward), or entertainment to be performed within the licensed
premises by an entertainer employed therein, or by any employee or guest.
      2.   Nor shall any licensee, his agent, servant or employee permit or
allow any employee or guest or any other person whomever to solicit or
encourage the purchasing of any alcoholic liquor or beverage of any
description, or the giving of any gratuity or gift by any patron or guest to or
for the benefit of such employee or guest.
      3.   The following kinds of conduct on premises in the Village licensed
to sell alcoholic liquor are prohibited:
         a.   The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
acts.
         b.   The actual or simulated exhibition, touching, caressing, or
fondling of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals.
         c.   The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, buttocks,
pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals.
         d.   The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon
the licensed premises who exposes to view any portion of his or her breasts,
buttocks, genitals, vulva, or anus.
         e.   The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a live
performance of which are prohibited by the regulations quoted in this
subsection E3.
(1990 Code § 21-3-12)
4-2-17: SANITATION AND HEALTH REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Sanitary Conditions: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor or for the storage of such liquor for such sale shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the codes
regulating the condition of the premises used for the storage or sale of food
for human consumption.
(1990 Code § 21-3-14)
   B.   Diseased Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used
for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, any person who is afflicted with or
who is a carrier of any contagious disease, infectious or venereal disease; and
it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any
such disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the
handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor.
(1990 Code § 21-3-15)
   C.   Health Permit: Every licensee shall have, at all times, a valid
operating permit from the County Health Department which regulates health
standards.
(1990 Code § 21-3-16)
4-2-18: SALES PROHIBITED TO CERTAIN PERSONS; MISBRANDING:
   A.   Certain Persons: No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver
alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to
any intoxicated person except as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
6-16.1. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor
shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the
age of twenty one (21) years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony
or service.
(1990 Code § 21-3-20)
   B.   Misbranding: Any person who shall knowingly possess, sell or in any way
dispose of any alcoholic liquor under any other than the proper name or brand
known to the trade as designating the kind and quality of the contents of the
package or other containers of the alcoholic liquor, or who shall cause any
such act to be done, shall forfeit the alcoholic liquor and the packages and
containers to the State and shall be subject to the punishment and penalties
provided for violations of this Code.
(1990 Code § 21-4-5)
4-2-19: RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING MINORS:
   A.   Stores Selling School Supplies, Food Or Drink To Minors: No license
shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at
any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors
of school age or where the principal business transacted consists of school
books, school supplies, food, lunches, or drinks for such minors.
(1990 Code § 21-3-5)
   B.   Sale To, Entry On Licensed Premises:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to enter upon premises where alcoholic liquors, spirits, beer or wine are
sold by the holder of a liquor license, unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
      2.   No holder of a liquor license, nor any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall permit any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years not accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian to enter the licensed premises. For the purpose of preventing the
violation of this subsection, any holder of a liquor license or his agent or
employee may refuse to permit entry onto the licensed premises of any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years who is unable to produce adequate
written evidence of the fact that the person accompanying such person under the
age of twenty one (21) years is that person's parent or guardian.
(1990 Code § 21-3-13)
      3.   No prohibition under this subsection, however, shall apply to any
licensed premises, such as, without limitation, a restaurant or food shop,
where the selling, giving or delivering of alcoholic liquor is not the
principal place of business of the licensee at those premises.
   C.   Employment: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years to attend any bar or to sell, draw, pour or mix any
alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises.
(1990 Code § 21-3-21)
   D.   Unlawful Purchase Or Acceptance: Any person to whom the sale, gift or
delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not
purchase or accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic
liquor in his possession.
(1990 Code § 21-3-22)
   E.   Identification Requirements:
      1.   ID Required:
         a.   If a licensee or his agents or employees believe or have reason
to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of the age of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such
sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification,
containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his
official duties.
         b.   Proof that the defendant/licensee or his employees or agent
demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any
transaction forbidden by this subsection is competent evidence and may be
considered in any criminal prosecution therefor or in any proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of any license based thereon.
(1990 Code § 21-3-23)
      2.   Unlawful Use Or Obtaining Of ID Card: No person shall transfer,
alter or deface such an identification card; use the identification card of
another; carry or use a fake or forged identification card; or obtain an
identification card by means of false information. No person shall purchase,
accept delivery, or have possession of alcoholic liquor in violation of this
chapter. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years is forbidden.
(1990 Code § 21-3-24)
   F.   Posting Warning: In every licensed business where alcoholic liquor is
sold, there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place, a printed
card which shall be supplied by the Village Clerk, and which shall read as
follows:
      UNDERAGE LIQUOR WARNING
      You are subject to a fine of $500.00 for the first offense and double
each offense thereafter under the ordinances of this Municipality if you
purchase alcoholic liquor or misrepresent your age for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.
   G.   Presence In Adjoining Room: It shall be unlawful for any holder of a
retail liquor dealer's license or his agent or employee to suffer or permit any
minor to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or
situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is located;
provided, that this subsection shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied
by his parent or guardian, or any licensed premises which derives its principal
business from the sale of services or other commodities other than alcoholic
liquor.
(1990 Code § 21-3-26)
   H.   Exclusionary Provision: The possession and dispensing or consumption by
a minor of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or
ceremony, or the consumption by a minor under the direct supervision and
approval of the parent or parents of such minor in the privacy of a home is not
prohibited by this chapter.
(1990 Code § 21-3-27)
4-2-20: BOOKS AND RECORDS OF LICENSEE:
It shall be the duty of every retail licensee to make books and records
available upon reasonable notice for the purpose of investigation and control
by the Mayor having jurisdiction over the licensee. Such books and records need
not be maintained on the licensed premises, but must be maintained in the State
of Illinois.
(1990 Code § 21-3-25)
4-2-21: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to refuse to grant admittance to the premises for which a
license has been issued at any time upon the verbal request of the Chief of
Police, any police officer, the Zoning Administrator, if any, or any member of
the Corporate Authorities for the purpose of making an inspection of such
premises or any part thereof.
(1990 Code § 21-28)
4-2-22: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Owner Of Premises Permitting Violation: If the owner of the licensed
premises or any person from whom the licensee derives the right to possession
of such premises, or the agent of such owner or person, shall knowingly permit
the licensee to use said licensed premises in violation of the terms of this
chapter, said owner, agent or other person shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this chapter to the same extent as said licensee and be subject to
the same punishment.
(1990 Code § 21-4-1)
   B.   Acts Of Agent Or Employee; Liability; Knowledge: Every act or omission
of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any
licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee,
and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if said
act or omission had been done or omitted by him personally.
(1990 Code § 21-4-2)
   C.   Abatement Of Place Used In Violation: Every lot, parcel or tract of
land, and every building, structure, tent, railroad car, boat, wagon, vehicle,
establishment or place whatsoever, together with all furniture, fixtures,
ornaments and machinery located thereon, wherein there shall be conducted any
unlawful sale of any alcoholic liquor, or whereon or wherein there shall be
kept, stored, concealed or allowed any alcoholic liquor intended for illegal
sale or to be sold, disposed of or in any other manner used in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and shall be abated as provided by the laws of this State for the abatement of
public nuisances.
(1990 Code § 21-4-6)
   D.   Complaint By Residents:
      1.   Any five (5) resident of the Village shall have the right to file a
complaint with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, stating that any licensee
under this chapter has been or is violating the provisions of this chapter or
any amendments hereto, or of any of the Statutes of the State of Illinois,
enacted with reference to the control of liquor. Such complaint shall be made
in writing and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining.
      2.   The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule or
regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which
such belief is based. If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner is satisfied
that the complaint substantially charges a violation, and that from the facts
alleged, there is reasonable cause for such belief, he shall set the matter for
hearing, and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such
hearing and of the particular charges in the complaint.
(1990 Code § 21-4-7)
   E.   Suspension Or Revocation Of License:
      1.   After Conviction Of Licensee: Whenever any licensee shall be
convicted of any violation of this chapter, the license of said licensee may,
in the discretion of the Mayor, be revoked and forfeited and all fees paid
thereon shall be forfeited, and it shall thereafter be unlawful and shall
constitute a further violation of this chapter for said licensee to continue to
operate under such license.
(1990 Code § 21-4-3)
      2.   When Employee Convicted: Whenever any officer, director, manager, or
other employee in a position of authority of any licensee under this chapter
shall be convicted of any violation of this chapter while engaged in the course
of his employment or while upon the premises described by the license, the
license shall be revoked and the fees paid thereon forfeited, both as to the
holder of the license and as to the premises, as if said licensee had himself
been convicted.
(1990 Code § 21-4-4)
      3.   Powers Of Local Liquor Control Commissioner: The Local Liquor
Control Commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and duties with
respect to licenses granted under this chapter:
         a.   In addition to, and not limited by the specific penalties set out
for violations of specific provisions of this chapter, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner may suspend for thirty (30) days or revoke any liquor license
issued under this chapter for any State law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic
liquors by any licensee, his agent, servant or employee.
         b.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend or revoke any
liquor license if the licensee makes any false statement or misrepresentation
in the application for a license.
         c.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may enter or authorize any
law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed to
determine whether any of the provisions of this chapter or the laws of the
State of Illinois pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor have been or are
being violated at such time to examine the premises of the licensee in
connection therewith.
(1990 Code § 21-4-7)
      4.   Notice And Hearing Requirements:
         a.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend any
license issued by him if he determines that the licensee has violated any of
the provisions of the Illinois Liquor Act or any valid ordinance or resolution
enacted by the County Board or any applicable rule or regulation established by
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or the State Commission which is not
inconsistent with law. However, no such license shall be so revoked or
suspended, except after a public hearing by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner with a three (3) day written notice to the licensee, affording the
licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
         b.   The service of such notice may be made by leaving a copy of such
notice at the place of business of such licensee with some person over the age
of fifteen (15) years, and informing such person of the contents of such
notice. The return of the County Sheriff as to the manner of service shall be
sufficient. On the day set for hearing, if such licensee does not appear at the
time and place designated in such notice, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
may proceed to hear said case the same as if said licensees were present and to
render a decision on the merits of the case.
         c.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall, within five (5) days
after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should
be revoked or suspended, state the reason or reasons for such determination in
a written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such
order within the five (5) days upon the licensee. The findings of the
Commissioner shall be predicted upon competent evidence.
(1990 Code § 21-4-8)
CHAPTER 3: SOLICITORS
Section
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Certificate Of Registration Requirements; Fees
4-3-3: Issuance And Revocation Of Certificate
4-3-4: Policy On Soliciting
4-3-5: Notice Regulating Soliciting
4-3-6: Duty Of Solicitors
4-3-7: Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited
4-3-8: Time Limit On Soliciting
4-3-9: Solicitations On Public Highways
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, as used herein, shall be
construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Shall mean and include any person who has obtained a
valid certificate of registration as hereinafter provided, and which
certificate is in the possession of the solicitor on his or her person while
engaged in soliciting.
RESIDENCE: Shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied for
residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of
building or structure.
SOLICITING: Shall mean and include any one or more of the following activities:
   A.   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise,
foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description whatever, for any
kind of consideration whatever; or
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of
insurance of any type, kind, or character; or
   C.   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication.
(1990 Code § 7-2-1)
4-3-2: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.   Required: Every person desiring to engage in SOLICITING, as herein
defined, from persons within the Village is hereby required to make written
application for a certificate of registration as hereinafter provided.
(1990 Code § 7-2-2)
   B.   Information: Application for a certificate of registration shall be
made upon a form provided by the Chief of Police and filed with such Chief. The
applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the
application, as follows:
      1.   Name and address of present place of residence and length of
residence at such address; also business address if other than residence
address; also social security number.
      2.   Address of place of residence during the past three (3) years if
other than present address.
      3.   Age of applicant and marital status; and if married, the name of the
spouse.
      4.   Physical description of the applicant.
      5.   Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association
with whom the applicant is employed or represents; and the length of time of
such employment or representation.
      6.   Name and address of employer during the past three (3) years if
other than the present employer.
      7.   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of
the soliciting in which the applicant will engage.
      8.   Period of time for which the certificate is applied.
      9.   The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application
for a certificate under this chapter, if any.
      10.   Whether a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under
this chapter has ever been revoked.
      11.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter of the code or any other Illinois
municipality regulating soliciting.
      12.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the commission of
a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or Federal
law of the United States.
      13.   The last three (3) municipalities where the applicant carried on
business immediately preceding the date of application and the address from
which such business was conducted in those municipalities.
      14.   Such additional information as the Chief of Police may deem
necessary to process the application.
   C.   Statements Made Under Oath: All statements made by the applicant upon
the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath.
   D.   Record Of Applications: The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept in
his office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon,
together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all
certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this chapter, and
of the denial of applications. Applications for certificates issued shall be
numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every certificate issued, including
any renewal thereof, shall be identified with the duplicate number of the
application upon which it was issued. The Chief of Police shall have three (3)
days to review and process the application.
   E.   Issuance Restrictions: No certificate of registration shall be issued
to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the
laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or Federal law of the United
States, within five (5) years of the date of the application; nor to any person
who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
nor to any person whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has
previously been revoked as herein provided.
(1990 Code § 7-2-3)
   F.   Fees: Upon making an application for a certificate of registration, the
applicant shall pay a permit fee, which shall be as follows:
      1.   Per day: Ten dollars ($10.00) per person.
      2.   Per year: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per person.
(1990 Code § 7-2-11)
4-3-3: ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
   A.   The Chief of Police, after consideration of the application and all
information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the
applicant does not possess the qualifications for such certificate as herein
required, and that the issuance of a certificate of registration to the
applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
Endorsement shall be made by the Chief of Police upon the application of the
denial of the application. When the applicant is found to be fully qualified,
the certificate of registration shall be issued forthwith.
   B.   Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by
the Chief of Police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a
violation of any provision of this chapter, or has made a false material
statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance
of a certificate of registration under the terms of this chapter. Immediately
upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the Chief of
Police to the holder of the certificate in person, or by certified U.S. mail,
addressed to his or her residence address set forth in the application.
   C.   Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of
registration shall become null and void.
   D.   The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date
thereof.
(1990 Code § 7-2-4)
4-3-4: POLICY ON SOLICITING:
It is declared to be the policy of the Village that the occupant or occupants
of the residences in the Village shall make the determination of whether
solicitors shall be or shall not be invited to their respective residences.
(1990 Code § 7-2-5)
4-3-5: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the
regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter shall comply
with the following directions:
   A.   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to
solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any residence shall
be given in the following manner:
   B.   A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches (3" x
4") in size shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the
applicable words, as follows:
      ONLY REGISTERED SOLICITORS INVITED
      OR
      NO SOLICITORS INVITED
   C.   The letters shall be at least one-third inch (1/3") in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to
persons requesting same, at the cost thereof.
   D.   Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
(1990 Code § 7-2-6)
4-3-6: DUTY OF SOLICITORS:
   A.   It is the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the
Village upon which a "residence", as herein defined, is located, to first
examine the notice provided in section
4-3-5 of this chapter, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement
contained on the notice. If the notice states “ONLY REGISTERED SOLICITORS
INVITED”, then the solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of registration
as herein provided shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises;
and if the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”, then the solicitor, whether
registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
   B.   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited
or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
(1990 Code § 7-2-7)
4-3-7: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
It is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to
go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any
sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant
of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant
thereof and engage in "soliciting", as herein defined, in defiance of the
notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of section
4-3-5 of this chapter.
(1990 Code § 7-2-8)
4-3-8: TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person, whether registered under this chapter or not, to go upon any premises
and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or
rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated
to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of
securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in "soliciting", as
herein defined, prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. of any weekday or at any time on a Sunday or on a State or national
holiday.
(1990 Code § 7-2-9)
4-3-9: SOLICITATIONS ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS:
Charitable organizations shall be allowed to solicit upon public highways under
the following terms and conditions:
   A.   The charitable organization must be one that is registered with the
Attorney General for the State of Illinois as a charitable organization as
provided by the “Solicitation for Charity Act", 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes
460/0.01 et seq., as amended.
   B.   Solicit only at intersections where all traffic from all directions is
required to come to a full stop.
   C.   Be engaged in a Statewide fundraising activity.
   D.   Be liable for any injury to any person or property during the
solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent.
   E.   Any person so engaged in such solicitation shall be at least sixteen
(16) years of age and shall wear a high-visibility vest.
(1990 Code § 7-2-10)
CHAPTER 4: AUCTIONS AND YARD SALES
Section
4-4-1: Restrictions
4-4-1: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No person, firm or corporation shall sponsor or conduct an auction,
yard sale or garage sale at a property zoned residential more than four (4)
times per calendar year.
   B.   The duration of any residential auction, yard sale or garage sale shall
not be more than seventy two (72) continuous hours.
(1990 Code § 7-3-1)
CHAPTER 5: MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
Section
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Permit Required
4-5-3: Application For Permit; Fees
4-5-4: Requirements
4-5-5: Investigation Of Applicant
4-5-6: Issuance Or Denial Of Permit
4-5-7: Expiration Of Permit; Renewal
4-5-8: Revocation Of Permit
4-5-9: Appeals
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms are hereby defined:
FIXED POINT: The location of a mobile food vending operation that is the
primary place from which the business will operate within the Village.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: A food vending operation that prepares or serves food from
permitted vehicle, trailer, or cart.
SEASONAL VENDOR: A vending operation that vends agricultural produce, eggs,
meat, or crafts from April 1 through November 30 each year within the village.
SPECIAL EVENT: A temporary operation and location, as part of an event or
gathering such as fundraiser, company or community picnic, block party,
wedding, and the like.
VENDORS: “Vendor” or “Vendors” or “Mobile Food Vendor(s)” shall include fixed
point vendors, special event vendors, and seasonal vendors.
(Ord. 2020-3-2, 3-9-2020; Ord. 2021-6-2, 6-14-2021)
4-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to engage in such business within
the Village without first obtaining a permit in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter. A violation of this section shall be subject to penalty as
provided in this code.
(Ord. 2020-3-2, 3-9-2020)
4-5-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEES:
   A.   Application: Every mobile food vendor shall, prior to engaging in such
activity, make an application to the Village for a mobile food vendor permit
with the following information and documentation:
      1.   Name, address and Federal employer identification number for the
business;
      2.   A brief description of the nature of the business;
      3.   Name and address of the applicant (or the person supplying the
information);
      4.   The length of time and the hours of operation the applicant wishes
to be engaged in such activity (such as, a special event permit or a fixed
point mobile food vendor permit);
      5.   A description of the vehicle, trailer, or cart, including any
license plate number or other means of identification; and
      6.   A drawing depicting the location of the vehicle, trailer, or cart
and identifying any additional requirements as required by this chapter.
   B.   Fee: At the same time of filing the application, a fee equal to the
cost of the investigation or the current fee charged by the investigation
service provider shall be delivered to the Village payable to the Village or
the investigation service provider, as the case may be, at the time the license
application is submitted to cover the cost of investigation. Further, at the
same time of filing the application, the following fees shall be paid to the
Village by the applicant:
      1.   Special event permit: twenty five dollars ($25.00) per permit; and
      2.   Fixed point mobile food vendor permit: three hundred dollars
($300.00) per month.
      3.   Seasonal Vendor: seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per year and per
location (from April 1 through November 30).
   C.   False Information: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage as a
mobile food vendor within the Village if any of the information furnished by
the applicant, as required by this chapter, which is material to his or her
character and responsibility or to the activity he or she proposed to engage
in, has been falsely stated or is converse to his or her character.
(Ord. 2020-3-2, 3-9-2020; Ord. 2021-6-2, 6-14-2021)
4-5-4: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Mobile Food Vendors For Special Events: Permits for the operation of
special event mobile food vending will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis with
an emphasis on public safety. Zoning, location, hours of operation, parking
requirements, and the like, will be reviewed as a special event following the
same process used for permit applications set forth in chapter 9-6 (parks) of
this code. All mobile food vendors for special events shall possess a permit
and remain in good standing with the Village.
   B.   Fixed Point Mobile Food Vendors: Fixed point mobile food vendors are
permitted in B-2, B-3, and I-1 zoning districts, provided the location meets
the following requirements:
      1.   Each vendor must receive written authorization from the property
owner on a form provided by the Village;
      2.   The location cannot be within two hundred fifty feet (250') from the
property line of any other permanent prepared food service vendor. This
provision may be waived in writing by the impacted business(es);
      3.   The entire vehicle, trailer, or cart must comply with all setback
requirements for the zoning district in which the mobile food vending operation
will occur. A minimum twenty-five foot (25') setback is required for any zoning
classification if the required setbacks are less. The location of mobile food
vending operations and equipment shall be entirely at or behind the front plane
of any building or structure related to the primary use of the property. An
exception will be made to allow mobile food vendors to operate beyond the front
plane of the building when a business or property has more than fifty (50)
parking stalls (subject to staff review);
      4.   A minimum of five (5) dedicated parking spaces beyond those required
for the primary business are required;
      5.   Fixed point mobile food vendors shall not operate before ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. No vehicle, trailer or equipment
related to mobile food vending operations shall be on the property from eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.;
      6.   Fixed point mobile food vendors shall only be permitted to operate
from March 1st through November 30th; and
      7.   A drawing to scale depicting the location of any vehicles or
equipment used in the mobile food vending operation, including compliance with
setbacks and dedicated parking spaces is required to be submitted with the
application for a fixed point mobile food vendor permit.
   C.   Seasonal Vendors: Seasonal vendors are permitted on village property
(including parks and the village hall property), as well as in B-2, B-3, and I-
1 zoning districts, provided the location meets the following requirements:
      1.   Each vendor must receive written authorization from the property
owner on a form provided or approved by the Village;
      2.   The entire vehicle, trailer, or cart must comply with all setback
requirements for the zoning district in which the mobile food vending operation
will occur. A minimum twenty-five foot (25') setback is required for any zoning
classification if the required setbacks are less. The location of mobile food
vending operations and equipment shall be entirely at or behind the front plane
of any building or structure related to the primary use of the property. An
exception will be made to allow mobile food vendors to operate beyond the front
plane of the building when a business or property has more than fifty (50)
parking stalls (subject to staff review);
      3.   A minimum of three (3) dedicated parking spaces for the Seasonal
Vendor are required;
      4.   Seasonal vendors shall not operate before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00
p.m.;
      5.   Seasonal vendors shall only be permitted to operate from April 1
through November 30;
      6.   A drawing to scale depicting the location of any vehicles or
equipment used in the vending operation, including compliance with setbacks and
dedicated parking spaces is required to be submitted with the application for a
seasonal vendor permit;
      7.   Seasonal Vendors shall obtain a permit for each year and each
location in which it intends to operate;
      8.   No overnight storage is permitted; and
      9.   The vendor stand shall be portable and removed by 9:00 p.m. each
day.
   D.   General Requirements:
      1.   Signs: No free-standing signage, flags, banners and the like shall
be allowed.
      2.   Public Health And Safety: All mobile food vendors shall meet public
safety requirements, including health, sanitation, and fire and life safety
requirements. Food may only be dispensed from a properly sanitized conveyance
licensed by the Sangamon County Public Health Department. Applicants shall
demonstrate proof of valid food safety permit from the Sangamon County Health
Department and comply with all required regulations during the duration of the
Village’s permit. Failure to maintain a food safety permit from the Sangamon
County Health Department will result in an immediate termination of the
Village’s mobile food vendor permit.
      3.   Fire And Life Safety: Requirements for fire and life safety shall
generally be the same as those applied to other restaurants within the Village.
Additionally, mobile food vendors preparing food on-site shall conform with
NFPA standards for “Mobile and Temporary Cooking Operations” (NFPA 1: Fire
Code, ch. 50.7 and annex “B”) and standards for “Ventilation Control and Fire
Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations” (NFPA 96) and ensure gas or fuels
are separated from the cooking/serving area ad smoke and carbon monoxide
detectors are installed and functioning property.
      4.   Safety Inspections: Any vehicle over eight thousand (8,000) pounds
and trailers with a gross weight over five thousand (5,000) pounds shall obtain
an Illinois Department of Transportation Certificate of Safety. Safety
inspections are required every six (6) months. Garages or service stations
licensed by the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) may conduct safety
inspections.
      5.   Sight-Triangle: Vehicles and equipment shall be arranged so as not
to limit sight of vehicles and drivers on Village streets.
      6.   Advertisement By Loud Noises Or Bright Lights: No mobile food vendor
shall carry on its trade by means of loud outcries or other noises that
unreasonably alarm residents of the Village. No mobile food vendor shall employ
lights that create a nuisance across lot lines. Determination of nuisance or
unreasonable alarm shall be made by the Village Administrator or his or her
duly appointed agent or the Chief of Police or his or her duly appointed agent.
      7.   Sanitization: Mobile food vendors shall have access to a toilet with
hand sanitization, within three hundred feet (300') of the portable vending
operation, at all hours that the facility is open for business.
      8.   Waste: Mobile food vendors shall provide a stable waste receptacle
that is emptied and maintained on a regular basis.
      9.   Electricity: If any power is required, it shall be protected with
ground fault circuit interrupters and be provided through a properly sized, UL-
approved card that is safely installed.
      10.   Inspection: Staff will conduct inspections to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter as necessary. A re-inspection fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) may be charged for failed inspections.
(Ord. 2020-3-2, 3-9-2020; Ord. 2021-6-2, 6-14-2021)
4-5-5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of an application, the Village Clerk shall promptly submit the
completed application to the Police Department for verification. The Police
Department shall complete a verification and investigation in no more than
thirty (30) days from its receipt of the completed application.
(Ord. 2020-3-2, 3-9-2020)
4-5-6: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   Submission To The Village:
      1.   All such applications, upon being processed by the Police
Department, shall be submitted to the Village Administrator with a
determination as to whether or not all requirements of this chapter have been
met.
      2.   If the applicant does not satisfactorily meet any of the above
requirements or background verification, no permit should be issued. If the
above requirements are satisfactorily met, then a permit shall be issued.
   B.   Contents Of Permit; Transferability:
      1.   The permit herein required shall express the time the mobile food
vendor is permitted to operate and continue, the name of the person and the
article, identification of a vehicle, if any, and whether said permittee will
pass from place to place or remain at a fixed point or place within the
Village.
      2.   Permits shall not be assignable or transferable and shall be
identified as a “mobile food vendor permit”, specifying “special event” or
“fixed point” with an identifying number and date of purchase.
      3.   Each applicant shall affix his/her signature to the “mobile food
vendor permit” as required by this section.
(Ord. 2020-3-2, 3-9-2020)
4-5-7: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT; RENEWAL:
Seasonal vendor permits shall be granted for each location and for one (1) year
from April 1 through November 30. Seasonal vendor permits must be renewed on an
annual basis.
(Ord. 2020-3-2, 3-9-2020; Ord. 2021-6-2, 6-14-2021)
4-5-8: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Cause For Revocation: The permits issued pursuant to this chapter may
be revoked, after notice, for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for permit; or
      2.   Any violation of this chapter.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation: Notice of revocation of a permit shall be given
in writing and shall set forth the specific grounds for revocation.
(Ord. 2020-3-2, 3-9-2020)
4-5-9: APPEALS: 
   A.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Village Administrator
regarding the denial of application for a permit as provided in this chapter or
in connection with the revocation of a permit as provided for in this chapter,
shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board of Trustees.
   B.   Such appeal shall be taken by filing a written statement setting forth
the grounds for the appeal, with the Village Manager within fourteen (14) days
after notice of the decision by the Village Manager has been mailed to the
applicant’s last known address.
   C.   The Village Board of Trustees shall schedule a hearing on such appeal
at the next regular Board meeting. Notice of hearing shall be given to such
person in the same manner as provided for notice on the revocation.
(Ord. 2020-3-2, 3-9-2020)
TITLE 5: HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
Chapter
NUISANCES GENERALLY   1
WEEDS   2
GARBAGE AND DEBRIS   3
WASTE MATERIAL DISPOSAL   4
NATURAL VEGETATION DISPOSAL   5
NOISE   6
DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE PROPERTIES   7
PENALTIES AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENT   8
VACANT BUILDINGS   9
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM CODE   10
CHAPTER 1: NUISANCES GENERALLY
Section
5-1-1: Specific Nuisances Enumerated
5-1-2: Nuisances Detrimental To Health Generally
5-1-3: Notice To Abate
5-1-4: Hearing
5-1-5: Appeal
5-1-6: Abatement By Village
5-1-7: Failure To Comply With Notice
5-1-1: SPECIFIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
   A.   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and to be against the health,
peace and comfort of the Village, for any person, firm or corporation within
the limits of the Village to permit the following; but the enumeration of the
following nuisances shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
      1.   Filth: To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal,
filth or noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any
place, to the prejudice of others.
      2.   Deposit Of Offensive Materials: To throw or deposit any offal or
other offensive matter, or the carcass of any dead animal in any water course,
lake, pond, spring, well or common sewer, street or public highway.
      3.   Corruption Of Water: To corrupt or render unwholesome, or impure,
the water of any spring, river, stream, pond or lake, well, public or private,
to the injury or prejudice of others.
      4.   Highway Encroachment: To obstruct or encroach upon public highways,
private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places, and ways to burying
places.
      5.   Manufacturing Gunpowder: To carry on the business of manufacturing
gunpowder, nitroglycerine, or other highly explosive substances, or mixing or
grinding the materials therefore, in any building within three hundred (300)
feet of any valuable building erected at the time such business may be
commenced.
      6.   Powder Magazines: To establish powder magazines near incorporated
towns, at a point different from that appointed according to law by the
corporate authorities of the Village, or within eight hundred (800) feet of any
occupied dwelling house.
      7.   Noxious Odors: To erect, continue or use any building or other place
for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous
to the health of individuals, or of the public.
      8.   Unlawful Advertising: To advertise wares or occupations by painting
notices of the same on, or affixing them to fences or other private property,
or on rocks or other natural objects without the consent of the owner, or if in
the highway or other public place, without permission of the proper
authorities.
      9.   Wells Unplugged: To permit any well drilled for oil, gas, salt water
disposal or any other purpose in connection with the production of oil and gas,
to remain unplugged after such well is no longer used for the purpose for which
it was drilled.
      10.   Burn-Out Pits: To construct or operate any salt water pit or oil
field refuse pit, commonly called a “burn-out pit” so that salt water, brine or
oil field refuse or other waste liquids may escape therefrom in any manner
except by the evaporation of such salt water or brine or by the burning of such
oil field waste or refuse.
      11.   Discarded Materials: To permit concrete bases, discarded machinery
and materials to remain around any oil or gas well or to fail to fill any
holes, cellars, slush pits and other excavations made in connection with any
such well or to restore the surface of the lands surrounding any such well to
its condition before the drilling of any such well, upon abandonment of any
such oil or gas well.
      12.   Underground Wells: To permit any salt water, oil, gas or other
wastes from any well drilled for oil, gas or exploratory purposes to escape to
the surface, or into a mine or coal seam, or into any underground fresh water
supply or from one underground stratum to another.
      13.   Harassment: To harass, intimidate or threaten any person who is
about to sell or lease or has sold or leased a residence or other real
property, or is about to buy or lease, or has bought or leased a residence or
other real property, when the harassment, intimidation, or threat relates to a
person’s attempt to sell, buy or lease a residence, or other real property, or
refers to a person’s sale, purchase or lease of a residence or other real
property.
      14.   Business: To establish, maintain, and carry on any offensive or
unwholesome business or establishment within the limits of the Village or
within one and one-half (1-1/2) miles of the Village limits.
      15.   Filthy Premise Conditions: To keep or suffer to be kept any chicken
coop, cow barn, stable, cellar, vault, drain, privy, sewer or sink upon any
premises belonging to or occupied by any person, or any railroad car, building,
yard, grounds, and premises belonging to or occupied by any person.
      16.   Expectorate: To expectorate on any public sidewalk or street, or
other public building or floor or walk of any public vehicle or hall.
      17.   Litter On Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit
or allow trash, paper, cardboard, wire, dirt, rock, stone, glass, brick,
lumber, wood or litter of material objects of any size or description to fall
upon the streets of the Village from any moving vehicle, or to be thrown from a
moving vehicle, or to throw from a moving vehicle and to remain thereon.
      18.   Accumulation Of Junk And Trash. To deposit or pile up any rags, old
rope, paper, iron, brass, copper, tin, aluminum, used lumber, appliances,
construction materials, demolition debris, ashes, garbage, refuse, plastic,
brush, litter, weeds, slush, lead, glass bottles or broken glass upon any lot,
piece or parcel of land or upon any public or private alley, street or public
way within the Village.
      19.   Rodents: To cause or permit any condition or situation to exist
that shall attract, harbor, or encourage the infestation of rodents.
      20.   Bringing Nuisances Into The Village: To bring into the Village or
keep therein for sale or otherwise, either for food or for any other purpose,
any dead or live animal or any matter, substance, or thing which shall be a
nuisance or which shall occasion a nuisance in the Village, or which may or
shall be dangerous or detrimental to health.
      21.   Offensive Liquids: To keep nauseous, foul or putrid liquid or
substance or any liquid or substance likely to become nauseous, foul,
offensive, or putrid, nor permit any such liquid to be discharged, placed,
thrown, or to flow from or out of any premise into or upon any adjacent
premises or any public street or alley, nor permit the same to be done by any
person connected with the premises.
      22.   Dense Or Offensive Smoke: To cause or permit the emission of dense
smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or any other agency in the
Village so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof.
      23.   Scrap Tires, Both Mounted And Dismounted: To keep any scrap tires,
either mounted or dismounted, in open view, or so as to allow such tires to
accumulate stagnant water so as to provide a breeding ground for mosquitoes and
other pests.
      24.   Motor Transport Engines: To operate motor vehicle transport engines
in the nighttime between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M., in any place in which a majority of the buildings, within a radius
of four hundred (400) feet are used exclusively for residence purposes,
excluding state and federal highways.
      25.   Accumulation of Debris: To store, dump or permit the accumulation
of debris, refuse, garbage, trash, tires, buckets, cans, wheelbarrows, garbage
cans or other containers in a manner that may harbor mosquitoes, flies,
insects, rodents, nuisance birds or other animal pests that are offensive,
injurious or dangerous to the health of individuals or the public.
      26.   Generally: To commit any act which is a nuisance according to the
common law of the land or made such by statute of the State (see 740 ILCS 55/
221-55/222).
   B.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the corporate
authorities of this Village from declaring what shall be nuisances, and abating
them within the Village limits.
(1990 Code § 25-1-1)
5-1-2: NUISANCES DETRIMENTAL TO HEALTH GENERALLY:
No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot, premise, or part
thereof shall be made, used, kept, maintained or operated in the Village if
such use, keeping or maintaining shall be dangerous or detrimental to health.
(1990 Code § 25-1-2)
5-1-3: NOTICE TO ABATE:
Whenever the Zoning Administrator, Village Administrator or the President finds
that a nuisance exists, he shall direct the Public Health and Safety Trustee to
mail (certified) to the party responsible for the nuisance and to the party on
whose property the nuisance exists a written notice ordering that the nuisance
be abated within a reasonable time. The notice to abate shall contain:
   A.   A description of what constitutes the nuisance;
   B.   The location of the nuisance;
   C.   A statement of what condition or state of affairs must be achieved in
order for the nuisance to be deemed abated;
   D.   The date by which abatement must be completed;
   E.   The date by which a request for a hearing must be filed and a statement
of the procedure for so filing;
   F.   A statement that the responsible party has a right to appeal the
abatement order to the Village Board of Trustees; and
   G.   A statement indicating that if the nuisance is not abated by the date
prescribed and/or if no request for hearing is made within the time prescribed,
this Village will abate the nuisance and assess the costs against the property
and/or impose a fine.
(1990 Code § 25-1-3)
5-1-4: HEARING:
Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the Mayor or his
designated representative ordering the abatement A request for a hearing must
be made in writing and delivered to the Village Clerk within the time stated in
the notice; otherwise, it will be presumed that a nuisance exists, and that
such nuisance must be abated as ordered. The hearing shall not be a formal
trial-type proceeding, but appropriate procedural safeguards shall be observed
to ensure fairness. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Mayor or his
designated representative shall render his decision and the reasons therefor in
writing. If he finds that a nuisance exists, he shall order it abated within an
additional time which must be reasonable under the circumstances.
(1990 Code § 25-1-4)
5-1-5: APPEAL:
   A.   Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor may appeal to the
Board of Trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Village Clerk
within five (5) days of such decision a written statement indicating the basis
for the appeal.
   B.   The appeal shall be heard by the Board of Trustees at the next regular
or special meeting after such filing. Their findings shall be conclusive and if
a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a time
reasonable under the circumstances.
(1990 Code § 25-1-5)
5-1-6: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE:
If the person ordered to abate a nuisance fails to do so, or if the nuisance
poses an emergency, this Village may perform the required action to abate. Any
Village official who is authorized to abate any nuisance as defined in this
chapter shall have authority to engage the necessary assistance and to incur
the necessary expenses therefor. The official who abates a nuisance shall keep
an accurate account of the expenses incurred. The itemized expense shall be
filed with the Village Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of this
Village.
(1990 Code § 25-1-6)
Statutory reference:
   See 65 ILCS 6/11-60-2
5-1-7: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE:
If the person notified to abate a nuisance shall neglect or refuse to comply
with the requirements of such notice by abating such nuisance within the time
specified, such person shall be guilty of a violation of this code. The Village
shall not be required to issue another notice where the condition or violation
is at first abated, but later resumed and/or repeated.
(1990 Code § 25-1-7)
Statutory reference:
   See 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2 and 720 ILCS 5/47-5, 5/47-10 and 5/47-15
CHAPTER 2: WEEDS
Section
5-2-1: Definition
5-2-2: Height
5-2-3: Notice
5-2-4: Service Of Notice
5-2-5: Abatement; Cost
5-2-6: Lien
5-2-1: DEFINITION:
“Weeds” as used in this code shall include, but not be limited to the
following: Burdock, Rag Weed (giant), Rag Weed (Common), Thistle, Cocklebur,
Jimson, Blue Vervain, Common Milk Weed, Wild Carrot, Poison Ivy, Wild Mustard,
Rough Pigweed, Lambsquarter, Wild Lettuce, Curled Dock, Smartweeds (all
varieties), Poison Hemlock, Wild Hemp, Johnson Grass, grass and all other
noxious weeds as defined by the statutes of the State of Illinois.
(1990 Code § 25-2-1)
5-2-2: HEIGHT:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass, or plants, other
than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, to grow to a height
exceeding eight (8) inches anywhere in the Village. Any such plants, weeds, or
grass exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1990 Code § 25-2-2)
5-2-3: NOTICE:
The Police Department or any other person so designated by the Mayor may issue
a written notice for removal of weeds or grass. Such weeds or grass shall be
cut by the owner or occupant within five (5) days after such notice has been
duly served.
(1990 Code § 25-2-3)
5-2-4: SERVICE OF NOTICE:
Service of the notice provided for herein may be effected by handing the same
to the owner, occupant or lessee of the premises, or to any member of his
household of the age of fifteen (15) years or older found on the premises or by
mailing such notice to the last known residence address of the owner; provided,
that if the premises are unoccupied and the owner’s address cannot be obtained,
then the notice may be served by posting the same upon the premises.
(1990 Code § 25-2-4)
5-2-5: ABATEMENT; COST:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five (5) days, the
Mayor or a designated representative may proceed to abate such nuisance,
keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be
charged and paid by such owner or occupant. The charge for the first instance
of abatement by mowing said overgrown grass and weeds shall be seventy five
dollars ($75.00) per hour for each hour spent mowing said grass and weeds plus
fifty dollars ($50.00) administrative fee. The charge for each instance of
abatement thereafter shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour for each
hour of mowing plus fifty dollars ($50.00) administrative fee.
(1990 Code § 25-2-5)
5-2-6: LIEN:
   A.   1.   The charges for such weed or grass removal shall be a lien upon
the premises. A bill representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for
the service shall be presented to the owner. If this bill is not paid within
thirty (30) days of submission of the bill, a notice of lien of the cost and
expenses thereof incurred by the Village shall be recorded and a priority lien
established. To perfect such a lien, the Village must, within one (1) year
after the removal cost is incurred, file notice of lien in the office of the
recorder in the County in which the underlying parcel is located or, if the
underlying parcel is registered under the Torrens system, in the office of the
Registrar of Titles of that county. The notice must consist of a sworn
statement setting out:
      a.   A description of the underlying parcel that sufficiently identifies
the parcel;
      b.   The amount of the removal cost; and
      c.   The date or dates when the removal cost was incurred by the Village.
      2.   If, for any one parcel, the Village engaged in any removal activity
on more than one occasion during the course of one (1) year, then the Village
may combine any or all of the costs of each of those activities into a single
notice of lien.
   B.   The removal cost is not a lien on the underlying parcel unless a notice
is personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the taxable year
immediately preceding the removal activities. The notice must be delivered or
sent after the removal activities have been performed, and it must:
      1.   State the substance of section
11-20-15 of the Illinois Municipal Code authorizing the lien and the substance
of any ordinance of the Village implementing section
11-20-15;
      2.   Identify the underlying parcel, by common description; and
      3.   Describe the removal activity.
   C.   Upon payment of the lien cost by the owner of the underlying parcel
after notice of lien has been filed, the Village (or its agent) shall release
the lien, and the release may be filed of recorded by the owner at his or her
sole expense as in the case of filing notice of lien.
   D.   The provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, specifically section
11-20-15, shall be followed and shall apply to all liens filed hereunder.
   E.   A lien under this section may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose
as in the case of mortgages or mechanics’ liens, An action to foreclose a lien
under this section must be commenced within two (2) years after the date of
filing notice of lien unless a longer period is provided by law. The lien set
forth herein shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax
liens.
(1990 Code § 25-2-6) (Ord. 11-12, 9-12-2011)
CHAPTER 3: GARBAGE AND DEBRIS
Section
5-3-1: Accumulation Prohibited
5-3-2: Notice to Person
5-3-3: Service of Notice
5-3-4: Abatement
5-3-5: Lien
5-3-6: Disposal of Refuse, Rubbish and Garbage
5-3-1: ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED:
No person shall permit any garbage or trash to accumulate on their premises or
private property. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be
unlawful for the owner or occupant of real estate to refuse or neglect to
remove the garbage or debris.
(1990 Code § 25-3-1)
5-3-2: NOTICE TO PERSON:
The Chief of Police or a designated representative may issue a written notice
for removal of garbage or debris. Such garbage or debris shall be removed by
the owner or occupant within five (5) days after such notice has been duly
served.
(1990 Code § 25-3-2)
5-3-3: SERVICE OF NOTICE:
Service of notice provided for herein may be effected by handing of the same to
the owner, occupant, or lessee of the premises, or to any member of his
household of the age of fifteen (15) years or older found on the premises or by
mailing such notice to the last known residence address of the owner; provided
that if the premises are unoccupied and the owner’s address cannot be obtained,
then the notice may be served by posting the same upon the premises.
(1990 Code § 25-3-3)
5-3-4: ABATEMENT:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five (5) days, the
Police Chief or a designated representative may proceed to abate such nuisance,
keeping an account of the expense of the abatement and such expense shall be
charged and paid by such owner or occupant.
(1990 Code § 25-3-4)
5-3-5: LIEN:
   A.   1.   The charges for such removal shall be a lien upon the premises. A
bill representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service
shall be presented to the owner. If this bill is not paid within thirty (30)
days of submission of the bill, a notice of lien of the cost and expenses
thereof incurred by the Village shall be recorded and a priority lien
established. To perfect such a lien, the Village must, within one (1) year
after the removal cost is incurred, file notice of lien in the office of the
recorder in the County in which the underlying parcel is located or, if the
underlying parcel is registered under the Torrens system, in the office of the
Registrar of Titles of that county. The notice must consist of a sworn
statement setting out:
      a.   A description of the underlying parcel that sufficiently identifies
the parcel;
      b.   The amount of the removal cost; and
      c.   The date or dates when the removal cost was incurred by the Village.
      2.   If, for any one parcel, the Village engaged in any removal activity
on more than one occasion during the course of one (1) year, then the Village
may combine any or all of the costs of each of those activities into a single
notice of lien.
   B.   The removal cost is not a lien on the underlying parcel unless a notice
is personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the taxable year
immediately preceding the removal activities. The notice must be delivered or
sent after the removal activities have been performed, and it must:
      1.   State the substance of section
11-20-15 of the Illinois Municipal Code authorizing the lien and the substance
of any ordinance of the Village implementing section
11-20-15;
      2.   Identify the underlying parcel, by common description; and
      3.   Describe the removal activity.
   C.   Upon payment of the lien cost by the owner of the underlying parcel
after notice of lien has been filed, the Village (or its agent) shall release
the lien, and the release may be filed of recorded by the owner at his or her
sole expense as in the case of filing notice of lien.
   D.   The provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, specifically section
11-20-15, shall be followed and shall apply to all liens filed hereunder.
   E.   A lien under this section may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose
as in the case of mortgages or mechanics’ liens. An action to foreclose a lien
under this Section must be commenced within two (2) years after the date of
filing notice of lien unless a longer period is provided by law. The lien set
forth herein shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax
liens.
(1990 Code § 25-3-5) (Ord. 11-12, 9-12-2011)
5-3-6: DISPOSAL OF REFUSE, RUBBISH AND GARBAGE:
All refuse, rubbish, garbage, junk and other offensive matters shall be
disposed of at a location and in a method that conforms to requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Act. No person shall store, deposit or permit
to remain upon the ground or in any waterway, drainage ditch, or confined
waters within the Village any refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk or other offensive
matter that may attract or harbor flies, rodents, vermin and/or mosquitoes,
that may create unsightliness or offensive odors, or that may create a health
hazard or nuisance. No person shall burn any such refuse, rubbish, garbage,
junk or other offensive matter if such burning would be in violation of the
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, or would create a
visibility hazard on any street, alley, public walkway, or on private property
other than the property on which the burning is performed, or would become a
nuisance, annoyance or discomfort to any other person by the reason of the
emission of smoke, fumes, fly ash, dust, soot, noxious odor, or other
atmospheric pollution or discharge.
(1990 Code § 25-3-6)
Statutory reference:
   See 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13 and 720 ILCS 5/47-10
CHAPTER 4: WASTE MATERIAL DISPOSAL
Section
5-4-1: Diffusion Of Waste Material
5-4-2: Deposit Of Offensive Matter Prohibited
5-4-3: Disposal Of Tree Limbs And Shrub Clippings
5-4-4: Costs
5-4-1: DIFFUSION OF WASTE MATERIAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere
within the corporate limits of the Village any garbage, rubbish, refuse or
waste material in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the
action of natural elements, such as sun, wind, rain or snow, into or upon any
street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, ditch, drainage way, stream or other
public place, or into or upon any occupied premises.
(1990 Code § 25-4-1) (Ord. 97-10, 11-10-1997)
5-4-2: DEPOSIT OF OFFENSIVE MATTER PROHIBITED:
No pile or deposit of garbage, rubbish, refuse or waste material of any kind
whatsoever, nor accumulation of any offensive or nauseous substance, shall be
made within the corporate limits of the Village, nor shall any person unload,
discharge or put upon or along the line of any railroad, or any street,
highway, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, ditch, drainage way or other public
place within the Village, any manure, garbage, rubbish, refuse or waste
material of any kind whatsoever, or other offensive or nauseous substance, nor
shall any cars or trucks loaded with or having in or upon them any such
material or substances, be allowed to remain or stand on or along any railroad,
street or highway within the corporate limits of the Village.
(1990 Code § 25-4-2) (Ord. 97-10, 11-10-1997)
5-4-3: DISPOSAL OF TREE LIMBS AND SHRUB CLIPPINGS:
No provision of this chapter shall limit or restrict the disposal of tree limbs
and shrub clippings as such may be provided in this chapter, as amended from
time to time.
(1990 Code § 25-4-3) (Ord. 96-14, 12-9-1996)
5-4-4: COSTS:
At the direction of the Village Administrator, the costs of removing any
materials not in compliance with this chapter shall be assessed to the person
who is responsible for such materials. Any charge by the Village for employees
of the Village used to remove any materials in violation of this chapter shall
be a charge of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per hour with a two (2) hour
minimum.
(1990 Code § 25-4-4) (Ord. 96-14, 12-9-1996)
CHAPTER 5: NATURAL VEGETATION DISPOSAL
Section
5-5-1: Disposal
5-5-2: Restrictions
5-5-3: Costs
5-5-4: Penalty
5-5-1: DISPOSAL:
Residents within the Village corporate limits shall be allowed to dispose of
only natural vegetation in the form of tree limbs and shrubbery trimmings in
the area designated by the Village, and no other materials, including grass
clippings or leaves, may be disposed of in the manner provided for herein.
Disposal of materials pursuant to this section is permitted only for those
persons to dispose of materials only for residential and non-commercial
purposes, and no person shall be allowed to dispose of any materials pursuant
to this section if such materials are generated by such person by or for any
commercial purpose. The term COMMERCIAL PURPOSE shall mean any time when a
person or business is compensated for the purpose of maintaining, trimming or
disposing of any materials including those eligible for disposal in accordance
with this section.
(1990 Code § 25-5-1)
5-5-2: RESTRICTIONS:
The area designated by the Village is located north of the West Sewer Pond, or
at such locations as may be designated by the Board of Trustees or the Trustee
of Public Health and Safety. Disposal may only be made during the hours of ten
o' clock (10:00) A.M. to two o'clock (2:00) P.M. on each Saturday during the
months of April through October. The Village will allow disposal at other times
only by permit obtained by a resident from the Village office. Dumping or
disposal of any other material, including leaves or grass clippings, or bagging
disposable material in any manner, shall be a violation of this chapter.
(1990 Code § 25-5-2)
5-5-3: COSTS:
At the direction of the Trustee of Public Health and Safety, the costs of
removing any materials not in compliance with this Article shall be assessed to
the person who is responsible for such materials. Any charge by the Village for
employees of the Village used to remove any materials in violation of this
chapter shall be a charge of seventy five dollars ($75.00) per hour with a two
(2) hour minimum.
(1990 Code § 25-5-3)
5-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person who refuses to comply with the regulations regarding disposal
contained in this chapter shall be fined as provided by section
1-4-1 of the Village Code, and the fine shall be in addition to any costs
provided in section
25-5-3 of this chapter.
(1990 Code § 25-5-4) (Ord. 05-01, 3-14-2005)
CHAPTER 6: NOISE
Section
5-6-1: Prohibited Noise
5-6-2: Enforcement; Powers Of Arrest Or Citation
5-6-1: PROHIBITED NOISE:
It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for a person to play, use, operate or
permit to be played, used or operated, any radio, tape recorder, cassette
player or other machine or device for reproducing sound, if it is located in or
on any of the following:
   A.   Any public property, including any public street, highway, building,
sidewalk, park or thoroughfare;
   B.   Any motor vehicle on a public street, highway or public space; and if
the sound generated is audible at a distance of thirty (30) feet from the
device producing the sound; or
   C.   Possession by a person or persons of any of the machines or devices
enumerated in subsection A shall be prima facie evidence that such person
operates, or those persons operate, the machine or device.
(1990 Code § 25-6-1)
5-6-2: ENFORCEMENT; POWERS OF ARREST OR CITATION:
Any authorized police officer shall issue a citation for any violation under
this section, except they may arrest for instances when:
   A.   The alleged violator refuses to provide the officer with such person’s
name and address and any proof thereof as may be reasonably available to the
alleged violator.
   B.   When the alleged violator refuses to cease such person’s illegal
activity after being issued a citation,
   C.   See section
1-4-1 for penalty.
(1990 Code § 25-6-2)
CHAPTER 7: DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE PROPERTIES
Section
5-7-1: Adoption By Reference
5-7-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The Village may demolish, repair, or enclose or cause the demolition, repair,
or enclosure of dangerous and unsafe buildings or uncompleted and abandoned
buildings within the Village and may remove or cause the removal of garbage,
debris, and other hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or materials from
those building. Therefor, the Village does hereby adopt by reference the
applicable provisions of Chapter 65 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, sections
5/11-31-1 and 5/11-31-1.1 governing dangerous and unsafe buildings.
(1990 Code § 25-7-1)
CHAPTER 8: PENALTIES AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
Section
5-8-1: Special Assessment
5-8-1: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT:
In addition to any other method authorized by law, if (i) a property owner is
cited with a code violation under this chapter, requiring the cutting of grass
and weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the removal of inoperable motor
vehicles, or rodent and vermin abatement, (ii) noncompliance is found upon
reinspection of the property after the due date for compliance with an order to
correct the code violation or with an order for abatement; (iii) costs for
services rendered by the municipality to correct the code violation remain
unpaid at the point in time that they would become a debt due and owing the
municipality, as provided in Chapter 65 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes,
section 5/11-31-1.1 et seq., and (iv) a lien has been filed of record by the
municipality in the office of the recording in the county in which the property
is located, then those costs may be collected as a special assessment on the
property pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/9-2-4.5. Upon payment of the costs by the owner
of record or persons interested in the property, the lien shall be released by
the municipality and the release shall be filed of record in the same manner as
the filing of notice of the lien.
(1990 Code § 25-8-1)
CHAPTER 9: VACANT BUILDINGS
Section
5-9-1: Definition
5-9-2: Nuisance Declared
5-9-3: Nuisance Abatement
5-9-4: Charges for Nuisance Abatement
5-9-1: DEFINITION:
   A.   A vacancy building is a building or portion of a building which is:
      1.   Unoccupied or unsecured;
      2.   Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means;
      3.   Unoccupied and a dangerous structure;
      4.   Unoccupied and condemned by the Village pursuant to applicable
provisions of this code;
      5.   Unoccupied and has multiple code violations;
      6.   Unoccupied and the building or its premises has been the site of
unlawful activity within the previous six (6) months;
      7.   Condemned by the Village and unlawfully occupied;
      8.   Unoccupied for over one hundred eighty (180) days and during which
time the Village Administrator has issued an order to correct public nuisance
conditions and same have not been corrected in a code compliant manner;
      9.   Unoccupied for over two (2) years;
      10.   Defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1 as an “abandoned residential
property,” being a residential dwelling unit that has been unoccupied by any
lawful occupant or occupants for at least ninety (90) days, and for which after
such ninety (90) day period the Village has made good faith efforts to contact
the legal owner or owners of the property or, if known, the agent of the owner,
and no contact has been made.
   B.   But not including, unoccupied buildings which are undergoing
construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and which are in compliance with
all applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations, and for which
construction, renovation or rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to
completion.
(1990 Code § 25-9-1)
5-9-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Vacancy buildings that are indefinitely vacant and in a state of disrepair or
boarded are public nuisances in that they contribute to the decrease in value
of surrounding properties, precipitate disinvestment by neighboring owners,
provide a location for criminal activity, undermine the aesthetic character of
the neighborhood and Village, and have other undesirable effects.
(1990 Code § 25-9-2)
5-9-3: NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
The Village is authorized to perform or provide for property maintenance
activities to abate the nuisance caused by a vacant building, including the
following:
   A.   Cutting and removal of neglected weeds, grass, trees, and bushes as
authorized by Article IX of Chapter 96 of the Village Code and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-
7;
   B.   Pest control activities, as authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-8;
   C.   Removal of infected trees as authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12;
   D.   Removal of garbage, debris, and graffiti as authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-
20-13, and
   E.   Removal, securing, and enclosing abandoned residential properties as
authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01.
(1990 Code § 25-9-3)
5-9-4: CHARGES FOR NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
   A.   Collection Of Costs: The Village shall have the authority to collect
from the property owner the costs incurred in performing the property
maintenance activities to abate the nuisances described in section
5-9-3. The Village shall send a bill for the cost to the property owner, his
agent, legal representative, or occupant in legal possession or control of the
premises.
   B.   Traditional Lien Procedure For Vacant Buildings: If a bill sent
pursuant to subsection A is not paid in full within thirty (30) days of the
date of the bill, the Village shall have the authority to file and record a
lien against the property, pursuant to section
11-20-15 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15, and by completing
the following steps:
      1.   Notice Of Lien.
         a.   The Village or the person performing the service by authority of
the Village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice of lien in the
office of the recorder of deeds in the county in which the real estate is
located. The notice of lien shall be filed within one (1) year after the cost
and expense is incurred. If, for any one property, the Village engaged in any
nuisance abatement activity described in section
5-9-3 on more than one occasion during the course of one (1) year, then the
Village may combine any or all of the costs of those activities into a single
notice of lien.
         b.   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
forth:
            (1)   A description of the real estate that sufficiently describes
the parcel;
            (2)   The amount of the cost and expense incurred or payable for
the activities; and   
            (3)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by
the Village or someone working on behalf of the Village.
         c.   After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified
mail to the property owner, his agent or legal representative or occupant in
legal possession or control of the premises and, if different, to the person
who received the tax bill for the preceding year.
      2.   Release Of Lien: Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien
has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the Village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded
of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien. The release may
be filed of recorded by the owner at his or her sole expense as in the case of
filing notice of lien.
      3.   Foreclosure Of Lien. Subsequent to the filing of the above-described
lien, the Village may cause to be filed a complaint for foreclosure of such
lien, or upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit affecting the premises
or real estate, by answer to the complaint or in the nature of an intervening
petition or cross-complaint the Village may proceed in its corporate name to
foreclose such lien. An action to foreclose a lien under this Section must be
commenced within two (2) years after the date of filing notice of lien unless
otherwise allowed by law. The property subject to a lien arising under this
chapter shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale
shall be applied to pay the monies owing the Village.
   C.   Priority Lien Procedures For Abandoned Residential Property. The
priority lien procedure described in this subsection C shall apply to costs
incurred for activities performed on abandoned residential properties, as
defined in section 5-9-lJ. If a bill sent pursuant to Subsection (A) is not
paid in full within thirty (30) days of the date of the bill, the Village shall
have the authority to file and record a priority lien against the property,
pursuant to section
11-20-15.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1, in the
following manner:
      1.   Notice Of Lien.
         a.   The Village or the person performing the service by authority of
the Village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice of a priority lien
in the office of the recorder of deeds in the county in which the real estate
is located. The notice of lien shall be filed within one (1) year after the
cost and expense is incurred. If, for any one property, the Village engaged in
any nuisance abatement activity described in section
5-9-3 on more than one occasion during the course of one (1) year, then the
Village may combine any or all of the costs of those activities into a single
notice of lien.
         b.   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
forth:
            (1)   A description of the abandoned residential property real
estate that sufficiently describes the parcel;
            (2)   The amount of the cost incurred or payable for the
activities;
            (3)   The date or dates when such cost was incurred by the Village
or someone working on behalf of the Village; and
            (4)   A statement that the lien has been filed pursuant to one or
more of the property maintenance activities and authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7
(d), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-8(d), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12(d), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13(e), 65
ILCS 5/11-31-1.01, as applicable.
         c.   After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified
mail to the property owner, his agent or legal representative or occupant in
legal possession or control of the premises and, if different, to the person
who received the tax bill for the preceding year. The Village may not file a
lien if the lender has provided notice to the Village that the lender has
performed, or will perform, remedial actions; provided, however, that the
remedial actions must be performed or initiated in good faith within thirty
(30) days of the lender’s notice to the Village.
      2.   Recordkeeping. To enforce a lien pursuant to this subsection C, the
Village must maintain contemporaneous records that include, at a minimum:
         a.   A dated statement of a finding by the Village that the property
has become abandoned residential property;
         b.   The date when the property was first observed to be unoccupied by
any lawful occupant;
         c.   A description of the actions taken by the Village to contact the
legal owner of the property, or if known, any agent of the owner;
         d.   A statement that no contacts were made with the legal owner or,
if known, any agent of the owner;
         e.   A dated certification by the Village official of the necessity
and specific nature of the work performed;
         f.   A copy of the agreement with the person or company performing the
work and the rates and estimated cost of the work, if applicable;
         g.   Detailed invoices and payment vouchers for the work;
         h.   A statement whether the work was competitively bid, and if so, a
copy of all proposals submitted by the bidders.
      3.   Release Of Lien. Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien
has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the Village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded
of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien. The release may
be filed of recorded by the owner at his or her sole expense as in the case of
filing notice of lien.
      4.   Enforcement Of Lien. A lien under this subsection C is enforceable
by the Village, or entity or person who performs work on behalf of the Village,
at the hearing for confirmation of the foreclosure sale of the abandoned
residential property and is limited to a claim of interest in the proceeds of
the sale. The priority lien is superior to all other liens and encumbrances,
except tax liens.
(1990 Code § 25-9-4) (Ord. 11-12, 9-12-2011)
CHAPTER 10: STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM CODE
Section
5-10-1: Purpose/Intent
5-10-2: Definitions
5-10-3: Applicability
5-10-4: Responsibility For Administration
5-10-5: Ultimate Responsibility
5-10-6: Discharge Prohibitions
5-10-7: Suspension Of Storm Drainage System Access
5-10-8: Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges
5-10-9: Monitoring Of Discharges
5-10-10: Use Of Best Management Practices
5-10-11: Watercourse Protection
5-10-12: Notification Of Spills
5-10-13: Enforcement; Notice Of Violation
5-10-14: Appeal Of Notice of Violation
5-10-15: Enforcement Measures After Appeal
5-10-16: Cost Of Abatement Of The Violation
5-10-17: Injunctive Relief
5-10-18: Compensatory Action
5-10-19: Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
5-10-20: Prosecution
5-10-21: Remedies Not Exclusive
5-10-1: PURPOSE/INTENT:
   A.   The purpose of this code is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the Village, through the regulation of non-
storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by Federal and State law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system, hereinafter known as the Spaulding Storm Drainage
System or the System, in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.
   B.   The objectives of this chapter are:
      1.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm drainage
system by stormwater discharges by any user;
      2.   To prohibit illicit connections and illegal discharges to the storm
drainage system; and
      3.   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
5-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
Currently these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one (1) acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance, material, waste, gas or other matter or
combination thereof which is regulated by any local governmental authority, the
State of Illinois or the United States government, including without limitation
any substance, material, waste, gas or other matter which is (i) defined as a
“hazardous waste,” “hazardous material,” “hazardous substance,” “extremely
hazardous waste” or “restricted hazardous waste” under any provision of federal
or State of Illinois law, (ii) petroleum or derivate or distillate thereof,
(iii) asbestos, (iv) polychlorinated biphenyl, (v) radioactive material, (vi)
designated as a “hazardous substance” pursuant to the Clean Water Act, 33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., (vii) defined as a “hazardous waste” pursuant to the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., (viii)
defined as a “hazardous substance” pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq., or (ix) a
cause or significant contribution to a substantial present or potential hazard
to human health, safety, property or the environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed, because of its quantity,
concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics. The term
“environmental laws” shall mean all statutes specifically described in the
foregoing sentence and all federal, state and local environmental health and
safety statutes, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, orders, and decrees
regulating, relating to or imposing liability or standards concerning or in
connection with hazardous materials.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drainage system, except as exempted in section
5-10-7 of this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
   A.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allowed an illegal discharge to enter the storm drainage system, including but
not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the system and
any connections to the system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of
whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or
approved by the Village or
   B.   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the storm drainage system, which has not been documented in construction
plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the Village.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined
in 40 C.F.R., § 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A permit issued by the Environmental Protection Agency (or by the State
of Illinois under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether
the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is
not composed entirely of storm water.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner’s agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, grease, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPAULDING STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly-owned or privately-owned facilities
by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to
any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets,
piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural
and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, drainage easements
granted to the Village and other drainage structures within the corporate
limits of the Village.
STORM WATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A document which describes the Best
Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
VILLAGE OF SPAULDING: Employees or designees of the Village of Spaulding,
designated to enforce this chapter.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water,
discharged from a facility.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: All waters which are currently used, were used in
the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce; all
interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use,
degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or
foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the
United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in
this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition;
and any waters within the federal definition of “waters of the United States”
at 40 C.F.R. § 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment
ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water
Act.
5-10-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the Storm Drainage System
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
the Village.
5-10-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The Village shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Village may be delegated
in writing by the Village President to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the Village.
5-10-5: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
5-10-6: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges.
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm
drainage system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.
      2.   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to
the storm drainage system is prohibited except as described as follows:
         a.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: potable water line flushing or discharge of other
potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream
flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning
condensation, natural springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural
riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if de-chlorinated -
typically less than one part per million (PPM) chlorine concentration), fire
fighting activities, roof drainage systems and any other water source not
containing pollutants.
         b.   Discharges specified in writing by the Village as being necessary
to protect public health and safety.
         c.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the Village prior to the time of the test.
         d.   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drainage system.
   B.   Prohibition Of Illicit Connections.
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited.
      2.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      3.   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying any pollutants or sewage to the storm drainage
system, or allows such a connection to continue.
5-10-7: SUSPENSION OF STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM ACCESS:
   A.   Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The
Village may, without prior notice, suspend storm drainage system discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge, which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
system or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the Village may take such steps as
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the system or waters of the
United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
   B.   Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge.
      1.   Any person discharging to the storm drainage system in violation of
this chapter may have their storm drainage system access terminated if such
termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Village shall
notify a violator of the proposed termination of its storm drainage system
access. The violator may petition the Village for a reconsideration and
hearing.
      2.   A person violates this chapter if the person reinstates storm
drainage system access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without
the prior approval of the Village.
5-10-8      INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Village
prior to the allowing of discharges to the storm drainage system.
5-10-9:   MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
   A.   Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have storm
water discharges associated with residential, commercial and industrial
activity, including construction activity.
   B.   Access To Facilities:
      1.   The Village shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities
subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures
in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into
its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow
access to representatives of the Village.
      2.   Facility operators shall allow the Village ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to
discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by State and Federal law.
      3.   The Village shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Village to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the facility’s storm water discharge. Parameters
to be tested shall include, but not be limited to, total suspended solids
(TSS), biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), fecal coliform and pH.
      4.   The Village has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
      5.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the Village and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      6.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Village access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this chapter.
A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge
storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the
person denies the Village reasonable access to the permitted facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.
      7.   If the Village has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and the Village representative is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the Village may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
5-10-10: USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The Village will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices for
any activity, operation, or facility, which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drainage system, or waters
of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the system or
watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be,
the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person’s expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the system. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed
compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the NPDES permit.
5-10-11: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, sediment and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or any way retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned uninhabitable structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
5-10-12: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any private property
owner or person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drainage
system, or waters of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of
such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify
the Village in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Village within three (3) business days of the phone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from private
property, a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of
such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge
and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained
for at least three (3) years by the owner or operator.
5-10-13: ENFORCEMENT; NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
   A.   Whenever the Village finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Village may order compliance
by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may
require without limitation:
      1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      3   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      4.   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
      6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   B.   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation
or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should
the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
5-10-14: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the
Village. The notice of appeal must be received within fifteen (15) days from
the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Village
or their designee shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of
receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Village or their designee
shall be final.
5-10-15: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth
in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within fifteen (15)
days of the decision of the Village then representatives of the Village shall
enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall
be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the Village or their designated contractor to enter
upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
5-10-16: COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION:
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of
the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting
to the amount of the assessment within fifteen (15) days. If the amount due is
not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the Village or
by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on
the property for the amount of the assessment.
   B.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the Village by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid
in not more than twelve (12) equal payments. Interest at the rate of nine
percent (9%) per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the
fifteenth (15th) day following discovery of the violation.
5-10-17: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized enforcement
agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the
person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
5-10-18: COMPENSATORY ACTION:
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this
chapter, the Village may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory
actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops,
creek cleanup, and the like.
5-10-19: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator’s
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
5-10-20: PROSECUTION:
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be
subject to a fine in the amount of no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per violation and no more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day
said violation continues to occur. The Village may recover all attorneys’ fees,
court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter,
including, but not limited to engineering, sampling and monitoring expenses.
5-10-21: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable Federal, State, local law, regulation or
ordinance and it is within the discretion of the Village to seek cumulative
remedies.
TITLE 6: POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapter
POLICE DEPARTMENT   1
EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT   2
   EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY   2A
   CIVIL EMERGENCIES   2B
ANIMAL CONTROL   3
   DOGS AND CATS   3A
FIREWORKS   4
CHAPTER 1: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
6-1-1: Department Established; Appointment; Duties
6-1-2: Chief Of Police
6-1-3: Compensation
6-1-4: Mutual Aid Contract
6-1-5: Legal Processes
6-1-6: Assisting Police Officer
6-1-7: Aiding Fire Department
6-1-8: Serve As Witness; Fees
6-1-9: Prohibited Acts By Police
6-1-10: Obstruction Police; Aid In Escape
6-1-11: Fees
6-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT; DUTIES:
   A.   Department Established; Supervision: There is hereby established a
department of the municipal government of the Village which shall be known as
the Police Department. The Police Department shall be under the control and
supervision of the Mayor.
(1990 Code § 30-2-1)
   B.   Appointment; Qualifications; Oath:
      1.   A sufficient number of police officers shall be appointed by the
Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the Village Board, to serve for
one year, or until his successor is appointed and qualified.
      2.   A police officer may be appointed to office by the Mayor and Village
Board if he meets the necessary qualifications, notwithstanding the fact that
the police officer is not a resident of the Village when appointed or when he
is to serve as such an official.
(1990 Code § 30-2-4)
      3.   A police officer, before entering into the performance of his/her
duties, shall take the oath or affirmation required by law.
(1990 Code § 30-2-8)
   C.   Duties:
      1.   A police officer shall devote his entire time to the performance of
the duties of his office, and is hereby charged with the preservation of the
peace, order, and safety of the Village, and with the duty of protecting the
rights to persons and property, and of enforcing all laws and orders of the
Village Board.
      2.   A police officer shall take notice of all nuisances, obstructions
and defects on the highways or other public places, and shall cause the same to
be abated or removed, or immediate notice hereof given to the proper officer
whose duty it may be to take action in relation thereto.
      3.   A police officer shall attend, when requested by the Mayor, either
in person or by deputy, all meetings of the Village Board, execute all its
orders and close the Board Chamber upon the adjournment of that body. Such
officer shall also execute all warrants or other legal processes required to be
executed by him under any ordinance of the Village or laws of the State of
Illinois.
(1990 Code § 30-2-6)
6-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby established the office of
the Chief of Police. The Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 30-2-2)
   B.   Duties:
      1.   Generally: The Chief of Police shall keep records and make reports
concerning the activities of his department as may be required. The Chief shall
be responsible for the performance of the Police Department, of all its
functions, and all persons who are members of the department shall serve
subject to the orders of the Chief of Police.
(1990 Code § 30-2-3)
      2.   Rules And Regulations: The Chief of Police may make or prescribe
such rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the
Police Department as he shall deem advisable, and such rules, when approved by
the Mayor, shall be binding on such members.
(1990 Code § 30-2-17)
      3.   Lost, Stolen Property: The Chief of Police shall be the custodian of
all lost and abandoned or stolen property in the Village.
(1990 Code § 30-2-18)
6-1-3: COMPENSATION:
Police officers shall receive such compensation as may be provided by the
ordinances of the Village or by resolution of the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 30-2-5)
6-1-4: MUTUAL AID CONTRACT:
The Police Department, with the approval of the Village Board, may enter into
an agreement to provide police protection to neighboring municipalities.
(1990 Code § 30-2-7)
6-1-5: LEGAL PROCESSES:
All police shall have power and authority to execute Village warrants or other
like legal processes without the corporate limits of the Village and within
such distance therefrom as authorized by law, in all cases when any ordinances
of the Village Board made pursuant to law shall prescribe a penalty for the
violation of any of its provisions by persons residing, acting or doing
business within the limits of the Village.
(1990 Code § 30-2-10)
6-1-6: ASSISTING POLICE OFFICER:
Every police officer of the Village may, at any time, call upon any able-bodied
person above the age of eighteen (18) years to aid him in the arresting or
retaking or holding in custody of any person guilty of having committed any
unlawful act or charged therewith, or to aid such officer in preventing the
commission of an unlawful act.
(1990 Code § 30-2-11)
6-1-7: AIDING FIRE DEPARTMENT:
Every police officer shall aid the Fire Department by giving the alarm in case
of fire, and in clearing the streets or grounds in the immediate vicinity of
any fire so that the firefighters shall not be hindered or obstructed in the
performance of their duties.
(1990 Code § 30-2-12)
6-1-8: SERVE AS WITNESS; FEES:
Any member of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever this is
necessary in a prosecution for a violation of a Village ordinance or of any
State or Federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service
as witness in any action or suit to which the Village is a party; and fees paid
for such services shall be turned over to the Chief of Police, who shall
deposit the same with the Village Treasurer.
(1990 Code § 30-2-16)
6-1-9: PROHIBITED ACTS BY POLICE:
   A.   Failure To Perform: Any member of the Police Department who shall
neglect or refuse to perform any duty required of him by this Code or the rules
and regulations of the Department, or who shall, in the discharge of his
official duties, be guilty of any fraud, favoritism, extortion, oppression or
wilful wrongdoing or injustice shall be subject to removal from office.
(1990 Code § 30-2-13)
   B.   Use Of Intoxicating Liquor: No member on an active tour of duty or
while wearing the official police officer badge of the Village shall indulge in
the use of intoxicating liquor of any kind, and intoxication at any time shall
be sufficient cause for removal.
(1990 Code § 30-2-15)
6-1-10: OBSTRUCTING POLICE; AID IN ESCAPE:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the Village to resist or obstruct any
member of the police force in the discharge of his duty or to endeavor to do
so, or in any manner, assist any person in the custody of any member of the
police force to escape or to attempt to escape from such custody or to attempt
to rescue any such person in custody (see also section
7-1-5 of this Code).
(1990 Code § 30-2-14)
6-1-11: FEES:
   A.   The cost for a copy of a Police Department accident report shall be ten
dollars ($10.00).
   B.   There shall be a fee of twenty five cent ($.25) per page for the
reproduction of all Village records.
CHAPTER 2: EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE A: EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
Section
6-2A-1: Establishment
6-2A-2: Coordinator
6-2A-3: Functions
6-2A-4: Service As Mobile Support Team
6-2A-5: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
6-2A-6: Emergency Action
6-2A-7: Compensation
6-2A-8: Reimbursement By State
6-2A-9: Purchases And Expenditures
6-2A-10: Oath
6-2A-11: Office Space
6-2A-12: Appropriation; Levy Of Taxes
6-2A-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Village Emergency Services and Disaster Agency to
prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from the
explosion in this or in neighboring states of atomic or other means from
without or by means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire,
flood, earthquake, telecommunications failure, or other natural or
technological causes, in accordance with the Illinois Emergency Management
Agency Act (20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.), and any amendments thereto. This ESDA
shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional members as may be selected
by the Coordinator.
(1990 Code § 30-3-1; amd. 2019 Code)
6-2A-2: COORDINATOR:
The Coordinator of the Village ESDA shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Village Board, and shall serve until removed by same.
The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction
and control of the Mayor, as provided by statute. In the event of the absence,
resignation, death or inability to serve as the Coordinator, the Mayor, or any
person designated by him, shall be and act as Coordinator until a new
appointment is made as provided in this chapter.
(1990 Code § 30-3-2)
6-2A-3: FUNCTIONS:
The ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the Village as shall be
prescribed in and by the State EMA Plan and Program prepared by the Governor
and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Governor,
and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may
be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered into as provided in
the State EMA Act, and any amendments thereto.
(1990 Code § 30-3-3; amd. 2019 Code)
6-2A-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the ESDA organization may be designated as members of a
mobile support team created by the Director of the State EMA, as provided by
law. The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the
Coordinator of the ESDA organization. Any member of a mobile support team who
is a Village employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor
or the State Director shall receive the compensation and have the powers,
duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such
member who is not a paid officer or employee of the Village, while so serving,
shall receive from the State, reasonable compensation as provided by law.
(1990 Code § 30-3-4; amd. 2019 Code)
6-2A-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities
or political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the Mayor.
(1990 Code § 30-3-5)
6-2A-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of the
explosion in this or in neighboring states of atomic or other means from
without or by means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire,
flood, earthquake, telecommunications failure, or other natural or
technological causes, it shall be the duty of the ESDA to cooperate fully with
the State EMA and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency power as
provided by law.
(1990 Code § 30-3-6; amd. 2019 Code)
6-2A-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the ESDA who are paid Village employees or officers, if called for
training by the State Director of EMA, shall receive for the time spent in such
training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who
are not such Village employees or officers shall receive for such training such
compensation as may be established by the Mayor.
(1990 Code § 30-3-7; amd. 2019 Code)
6-2A-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The Village Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the State to the Village for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of EMA, compensation
for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving
outside the Village in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of
EMA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the State incident
to ESDA activities as provided by law.
(1990 Code § 30-3-8; amd. 2019 Code)
6-2A-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
   A.   The Mayor may, upon recommendation of the Village Coordinator of ESDA,
authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the Village in a
position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion in
this or in neighboring states of atomic or other means from without or by means
of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake,
telecommunications failure, or other natural or technological causes, and to
protect the public health and safety, protect property, and provide emergency
assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or from any manmade or
natural disaster.
   B.   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Village Coordinator
of ESDA is authorized on behalf of the Village to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or materials as may be necessary for such purposes, in view
of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities
normally prescribed by law pertaining to Village contracts or obligations, as
authorized by the State EMA Act, and amendments thereto; provided, that if the
Mayor and Village Board meet at such time, he shall act subject to the
directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
(1990 Code § 30-3-9; amd. 2019 Code)
6-2A-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following
oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:
   I,                 do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States of America, and the Constitution of the State of Illinois and the
territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private,
against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely,
without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do
further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and
that during such time as I am affiliated with the ESDA organization, I will not
advocate, nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State
by force or violence.
(1990 Code § 30-3-10)
6-2A-11: OFFICE SPACE:
The Mayor is authorized to designate space in a Village building or elsewhere
as may be provided by the Mayor for the Village ESDA as its office.
(1990 Code § 30-3-11)
6-2A-12: APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES:
The Mayor may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the manner provided by
law, and may levy in addition for ESDA purposes only, a tax not to exceed five
cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value of all
taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the State EMA
Act, and amendments thereto; however, that amount collectible under such levy
shall in no event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita.
(1990 Code § 30-3-12; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE B: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
6-2B-1: Definitions
6-2B-2: Declaration Of Emergency
6-2B-3: Curfew
6-2B-4: Authority Of Mayor To Issue Orders
6-2B-5: Effectiveness
6-2B-6: Notification Of Proclamation
6-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
CIVIL EMERGENCY:
   A.   A “riot or unlawful assembly” characterized by the use of actual force
or violence or any power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting
together without authority of law; or
   B.   Any “natural disaster” or “manmade calamity” including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, or explosion within the corporate
limits of the Village, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the Village,
excepting officials of any governmental unit and person officially designated
to duty with reference to the civil emergency.
(1990 Code § 30-1-1)
6-2B-2: DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY:
Whenever an emergency, as defined in section
6-2B-1 of this article, exists, the Mayor shall declare the existence by means
of a written declaration, setting forth the facts which constitute the
emergency.
(1990 Code § 30-1-2)
6-2B-3: CURFEW:
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he may order a general
curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the Village or to the Village
as a whole, as he deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day
or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and
welfare.
(1990 Code § 30-1-3)
6-2B-4: AUTHORITY OF MAYOR TO ISSUE ORDERS:
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor of the Village may also,
in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following
orders:
   A.   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and
private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted.
   B.   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer.
   C.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, or giving away of
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
   D.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving
away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
   E.   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection
of life and property.
(1990 Code § 30-1-4)
6-2B-5: EFFECTIVENESS:
The proclamation herein authorized shall expire not later than the adjournment
of the first regular meeting of the corporate authorities after the state of
emergency is declared.
(1990 Code § 30-1-5)
6-2B-6: NOTIFICATION OF PROCLAMATION:
Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Mayor shall notify the
news media situated within the Village and shall cause three (3) copies of the
proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the
following places within the Village:
   A.   The Village Hall.
   B.   The post office.
   C.   The County Courthouse.
   D.   The community schools.
(1990 Code § 30-1-6)
CHAPTER 3: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
6-3-1: Enclosures And Fences
6-3-2: Cruelty To Animals
6-3-3: Wild Or Vicious Animals
6-3-4: Livestock And Fowl
6-3-5: Powers Of Mayor Concerning Health Hazards
6-3-6: Chickens
6-3-1: ENCLOSURES AND FENCES:
   A.   Pens, Yards Or Runs: All pens, yards or runs or other structures
wherein any animal is kept shall be of such construction so as to be easily
cleaned and kept in good repair.
   B.   Fences: Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall be
securely constructed, shall be adequate for the purpose, shall be kept in good
repair and shall not be allowed to become unsightly.
(1990 Code § 3-2-2)
6-3-2: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   Cruelty Prohibited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously
inflict unnecessary or needless cruelty, torture, abuse or cruelly beat, strike
or abuse any animal, or by an act, omission or neglect cause or inflict any
unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering, injury or death to any animal
whether such animal belongs to such person or to another; except, that
reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious or trespassing animals.
      2.   Any unwanted animals should be delivered to the County Animal
Control Facility for proper disposal.
   B.   Food And Shelter: It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any
animal to fail, refuse, or neglect to provide such animal with food, potable
water, shade or shelter, or to cruelly or unnecessarily expose any such animal
in hot, stormy, cold or inclement weather, or to carry any such animal in or
upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner. As used in this subsection, the
following terms shall have the following meanings:
   SHADE: Protection from the direct rays of the sun during the months of June
through September.
   SHELTER: As it applies to dogs, shall mean a moisture-proof structure of
suitable size to accommodate the dog and allow retention of body heat, made of
durable material with a solid floor raised at least two inches (2") from the
ground and with the entrance covered by a flexible, windproof material. Such
structure shall be provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding to
provide insulation and protection against cold and dampness.
(1990 Code § 3-2-5)
6-3-3: WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which has previously attacked or bitten any
person or which has behaved in such a manner that the person who harbors said
animal knows or should reasonably know that the animal is possessed of
tendencies to attack or bite persons.
   WILD ANIMAL: Any live monkey or ape, raccoon, skunk, fox, snake, or other
reptile, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other animal or any bird of
prey which can normally be found in the wild state.
(1990 Code § 3-2-6)
   B.   Keeping Restricted; Temporary Permit:
      1.   Restrictions:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept
on his premises any wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition
purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This subsection shall not be
construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, or
circuses.
         b.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept
any wild animal as a pet, unless a permit is granted by the Department of
Natural Resources of the State of Illinois.
         c.   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious
animal within the Village. Any animal which is found off the premises of its
owner may be seized by any police officer or humane officer, and upon
establishment to the satisfaction of any court of competent jurisdiction of the
vicious character of said animal, it may be killed by a police officer or
humane officer; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to
animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency nor to
animals which are kept for the protection of property; provided, that such
animals are restrained by a leash or chain, cage, fence, or other adequate
means from contact with the general public or with persons who enter the
premises with the actual or implied permission of the owner or occupant.
      2.   Temporary Permit: The licensing authority may issue a temporary
permit for the keeping, care, and protection of any infant animal native to
this area which has been deemed to be homeless.
(1990 Code § 3-2-7)
6-3-4: LIVESTOCK AND FOWL:
   A.   Certain Prohibitions: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no
person shall keep within the Village, any cattle, cows, horses, sheep, swine,
goats, chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese or other livestock or fowl.
   B.   Exceptions: This chapter shall not apply to areas of the Village that
are zoned agricultural, nor shall this chapter apply to livestock brought into
the Village for the purpose of being shipped out of the Village.
(1990 Code § 3-2-8)
6-3-5: POWERS Of MAYOR CONCERNING HEALTH HAZARDS:
The Mayor shall have the power to issue an order prohibiting the keeping of any
animal, fowl, or bird which is deemed to pose a health hazard to the general
public.
(1990 Code § 3-2-8)
6-3-6: CHICKENS:
The purpose of this section is to create appropriate regulations for the
keeping of chickens as pets. The purpose of this section is not to create
regulations for the commercial sale or distribution of chickens or eggs. For
the purposes of this section, the term “chicken” includes only hens.
   A.   Conditions Of Keeping Chickens: The keeping of chickens within the
Village is prohibited without a permit and unless compliance with all of the
conditions required by this section are maintained. A permit shall allow a
maximum of five (5) chickens with no roosters.
      1.   A chicken coop and chicken run shall be required on all properties
where chickens are kept.
      2.   The chicken coop shall accommodate all chickens permitted on the
property, must be located in the rear yard, and must be a minimum distance of
ten feet (10') from the nearest property line.
      3.   All chicken runs shall be located in the rear yard, be appropriately
fenced to prevent the chickens from leaving the run, and be located at least
ten feet (10') from the nearest property line.
      4.   The property must possess single-family residential zoning
classification.
      5.    Free range chickens are not permitted. “Free range chickens”, for
the purpose of this section, are defined as chickens that are not restrained by
a chicken coop or chicken run as permitted and approved pursuant to this
section.
      6.   A metal sealable food container is required. Chicken feed shall be
kept in a predatorproof/rodentproof container.
      7.   Waste material must be disposed of in a manner that will not cause
odor, or attract flies or vermin.
      8.   All areas where chickens are kept shall be maintained to be neat and
clean and free of undue accumulation of waste such as to prevent odors
detectable on adjacent property.
      9.   No person shall allow chickens to produce noise loud enough to
disturb the peace of persons in surrounding properties.
      10.   The owner of chickens shall ensure that their birds are cared for
properly when ill and disposed of in a manner that does not endanger the public
health and safety when their birds die.
      11.   The slaughtering of chickens kept in residential areas as
authorized by these regulations is hereby prohibited.
      12.   No chickens may be kept or maintained to be used for the purpose of
fighting.
      13.   Village officials, or their designees, may inspect the conditions
where the chickens are kept at any time.
   B.   Procedures For Acquiring Chickens:
      1.   The person desiring chickens shall construct or have delivered a
chicken coop of appropriate size and strength for the number of chickens they
wish to own.
      2.   Agents of the Village, or their designees, shall inspect the chicken
coop and chicken run before an initial permit may be issued. If they are found
to be satisfactory, a document will be given to the resident stating that they
are entitled to maintain chickens. If the chicken coop and run are found to be
unsatisfactory, the resident will be informed of defects and given an
opportunity to rectify defects.
      3.   The resident will take the document issued by the animal control
officer and pay the appropriate chicken coop and run permit fee at the Village
Hall. The fee shall be an annual fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and may
be renewed unless it is determined that the conditions of keeping chickens
required by this section have not been maintained.
      4.   After the inspection approval and payment required herein, the
resident may maintain up to five (5) chickens at one time.
   C.   Fines And Penalties: If a person keeping chickens fails to maintain the
conditions of keeping chickens as required by this section, he or she shall be
subject to prosecution for a violation of this section, with each day that the
required conditions were not maintained being a separate offense. Upon
conviction in the Circuit Court of a violation of this section, in addition to
the fine or penalty that may be imposed by the court, the Village shall revoke
the permit previously granted to the person convicted.
   D.   Permit Term; Late Fee: A permit, if not revoked, shall be valid until
the next permitted period, June 1 of the next ensuing year. A new permit shall
be obtained by each June 1 by every owner and a new fee paid. Anyone who fails
to obtain the permit required by this chapter within the time as required by
this section, shall be required to pay a late fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) per permit for failure to timely obtain said permit in addition to the
permit fee set forth in this section.
ARTICLE A: DOGS AND CATS
Section
6-3A-1: Definitions
6-3A-2: Inoculation And Tag Requirements
6-3A-3: Restraint Of Dogs
6-3A-4: Pound Designated; Impoundment Procedures
6-3A-5: Offensive Acts By Persons
6-3A-6: Disposition Of Dogs Deemed Nuisances
6-3A-7: Prohibited Acts By Dogs And Cats
6-3A-8: Keeping Numerous Dogs And Cats; Kennels
6-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
AT LARGE: Any dog shall be deemed to be at large when it is off the property of
his owner and not under the control of a responsible person.
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE: The Department of Agriculture of the State of
Illinois.
DOG: Shall include a female as well as a male dog.
INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES: The injection subcutaneously or otherwise as
approved by the Department of Agriculture of the State of Illinois of canine
anti-rabic vaccine, approved by the Department of Agriculture.
OWNER: A person having a right of property in a dog or who keeps or harbors a
dog, or who has a dog in his care or who acts as its custodian, or who
knowingly permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
RESTRAINT: A dog is under RESTRAINT within the meaning of this article if he is
controlled by a leash; at “heel” beside a responsible person or obedient to
that person’s commands; within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets;
or within the property limits of his owner or keeper.
(1990 Code § 3-1-1)
6-3A-2: INOCULATION AND TAG REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Inoculation Required; Name Tag Affixed To Collar:
      1.   Each calendar year or at such interval as may hereafter be
promulgated by the Department of Agriculture, every owner or keeper of a dog
four (4) months or more of age shall cause such dog to be inoculated against
rabies. Such owner or keeper of such dog shall cause a serially numbered tag
evidencing such inoculation to be attached to a collar or harness worn by the
dog.
      2.   Every owner or keeper of a dog, regardless of age, shall cause the
dog to wear a collar or harness and shall affix thereto a metallic or other
suitable tag inscribed with the name, address and phone number, if any, of the
owner or keeper of the dog.
(1990 Code § 3-1-2)
   B.   Inoculation By Licensed Veterinarian; Issuance Of Certificate: The
inoculation of dogs required by subsection A of this section shall be performed
by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice his profession in this State. Upon
performing such inoculation, such veterinarian shall issue to the owner or
keeper a certificate showing such fact and shall also deliver to the owner or
keeper a metallic or other suitable tag to be attached to the collar or harness
of the dog, which tag shall also certify to the fact of the inoculation against
rabies.
(1990 Code § 3-1-3)
   C.   Duration Of Inoculation: The inoculation performed under the provisions
of subsection B of this section shall be effective until the expiration of the
calendar year in which the vaccination was performed or the expiration of such
period of time as may be promulgated by the Department of Agriculture.
(1990 Code § 3-1-4)
   D.   Specifications For Tag: The tag issued under the provisions of
subsection B of this section shall be in such form as shall be determined by
the Department of Agriculture.
(1990 Code § 3-1-5)
   E.   Exhibition Of Certificate Upon Request: At any reasonable time upon
request of any member of the Police Department or any Village employee, the
owner or keeper of any unmuzzled dog shall exhibit his certificate issued under
the provisions of subsection B of this section, showing the inoculation against
rabies of any dog owned or controlled by him.
(1990 Code § 3-1-6)
6-3A-3: RESTRAINT OF DOGS:
The owner or keeper of a dog shall keep the dog under restraint at all times
and shall not permit such dog to be at large, off the premises of the property
of the owner or keeper, unless the dog is under “restraint”, as defined in
section
6-3A-1 of this article.
(1990 Code § 3-1-7)
6-3A-4: POUND DESIGNATED; IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Village Pound Designated: The County Animal Control Center is hereby
designated as the Village Pound.
(1990 Code § 3-1-13)
   B.   Method Of Impoundment: Those persons charged with the duty of enforcing
this article may employ any method found practical and humane in capturing and
impounding any dog found running at large.
(1990 Code § 3-1-12)
   C.   Impoundment Of Dogs At Large Or Unlicensed Dogs:
      1.   It shall be the duty of such employees and officers of the Police
Department as shall be designated for that purpose by the Mayor to take up and
impound in such place as may be designated and set apart for that purpose, any
dog found running at large or unlicensed in the Village, contrary to any of the
provisions of this article or other provisions of this Code.
      2.   When dogs are found running at large or unlicensed and their
ownership is known to the designated employee(s), such dogs may be impounded at
the discretion of such employee(s), but the employee(s) may cite the owner of
such dog to answer charges of violation of this article.
      3.   Any dog permitted to run at large within the Village is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
(1990 Code § 3-1-8)
   D.   Notice And Citation To Owner Or Keeper: In case of impounding and where
the owner or keeper of such dog is disclosed by any tax or license tag worn
thereby, or is otherwise known to the officers impounding the same, the
designated official shall make reasonable attempts to contact the owner,
informing him of the impounding of his dog and shall cite the owner or keeper
of such dog to answer charges of violation of this article.
(1990 Code § 3-1-9)
   E.   Impoundment Of Dogs Which Have Bitten Or Injured Persons:
      1.   Any dog which shall have bitten or otherwise injured any person so
as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall be immediately taken, impounded and
kept separated from other dogs for fourteen (14) days. If, during that period,
such dog develops symptoms of illness, a veterinarian shall be called to
diagnose its condition. If the symptoms disclosed are such as to indicate the
presence of rabies, such dog shall be destroyed in such a manner, however, as
to preserve intact the head, which shall thereupon be detached and immediately
sent to the diagnostic laboratory of the Illinois Department of Agriculture. In
case such dog cannot be safely taken up and impounded, it may be humanely
destroyed, care being taken to preserve the head intact which shall thereupon
be immediately detached and be delivered to the diagnostic laboratory of the
Department of Agriculture.
      2.   If, at the expiration of the fourteen (14) days, no symptoms of
rabies have developed in such dog so impounded, the same may be redeemed by the
owner upon payment of the appropriate redemption fees and charges; provided,
however, that in case any dog so impounded for biting a person shall have
previously bitten any person, such dog shall be humanely destroyed by the
poundkeeper. After having been notified that his dog has bitten or otherwise
injured any person, the owner or keeper thereof shall not, under any
circumstances, permit such animal to be at large unless securely muzzled.
(1990 Code § 3-1-11)
6-3A-5: OFFENSIVE ACTS BY PERSONS:
Any person(s) who shall bring any dog into the Village for the purpose of
causing the same to be impounded or any person who shall resist, hinder or
molest the poundmaster or dog catcher or police officer while engaged upon the
duties imposed upon him/her by this article, or any person who shall break into
the dog pound and release or deliver any dog therefrom without having first
paid the appropriate fees, or any owner or keeper of any dog who shall permit
any dog to run at large within the corporate limits of the Village, upon
conviction of any part of this section, shall be fined according to section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1990 Code § 3-1-10)
6-3A-6: DISPOSITION OF DOGS DEEMED NUISANCES:
Any dog which may, in any manner, continually disturb the quiet of any person
or neighborhood or shall destroy or in any manner injure any animal, plant,
shrub or other property not on the premises of its owner or keeper is hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and such dog shall be taken up and impounded and may
be redeemed or disposed of in the manner provided under this article.
(1990 Code § 3-1-14)
6-3A-7: PROHIBITED ACTS BY DOGS OF CATS:
   A.   Dangerous Dogs And Female Dogs: It shall be unlawful for the owner or
keeper of any fierce or dangerous dog or of any female dog, while in heat, to
run at large within the limits of the Village.
(1990 Code § 3-1-15)
   B.   Injury To Property: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or
possessing a dog or cat to permit such dog or cat to go upon any sidewalk,
parkway, or private lands or premises without the permission of the owner of
such premises and break, bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, flowerbed,
plant, shrub, tree or garden in any manner whatsoever, or to defecate thereon.
(1990 Code § 3-2-1)
   C.   In Cemetery, Other Public Places: No dog or cat shall be permitted in
any cemetery. No dog or cat shall be allowed in any parks, beaches or any
swimming areas open to the public in the Village.
(1990 Code § 3-2-3)
   D.   Barking Dogs And Noisy Cats:
      1.   Harboring: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly keep or
harbor any dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which
habitually cries or howls to the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood, or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in
the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
      2.   Complaints: Whenever any person shall complain to the Police
Department that a dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps or a cat which
habitually cries or howls is being kept by any person in the Village, the
Police Department shall notify the owner of said dog or cat that a complaint
has been received and that the person should take whatever steps are necessary
to alleviate the howling, yelping or crying.
(1990 Code § 3-2-4)
6-3A-8: KEEPING NUMEROUS DOGS AND CATS; KENNELS:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats
in the Village for a considerable period of time detracts from and, in many
instances, is detrimental to the healthful and comfortable life for which such
areas were created. The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats is,
therefore, declared to be a public nuisance.
      1.   “Dog” shall mean any canine, regardless of age or sex.
      2.   “Cat” shall mean any feline, regardless of age or sex.
   B.   Number Of Dogs And/Or Cats Limited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than three (3) dogs
and/or cats within the Village, with the exception that a litter of pups, or a
litter of kittens, or a portion of a litter may be kept for a period of time
not exceeding five (5) months from birth.
      2.   The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any
establishment wherein dogs or cats are kept for breeding, sale, sporting
purposes or boarding.
   C.   Kennels (see also section
12-12-11 of this Code): In the areas where kennels are permitted, no kennel
shall be located closer than two hundred feet (200') to the boundary of the
nearest adjacent residential lot.
(1990 Code § 3-2-9)
CHAPTER 4: FIREWORKS
Section
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: Manufacture Restricted
6-4-3: Sales Prohibited
6-4-4: Display Requirements
6-4-5: Exceptions To Provisions
6-4-6: Violation; Penalty
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, phrases, and terms, whenever they occur in this chapter,
shall be interpreted as follows:
CHIEF: The Chief of the Village Fire Protection District.
CONSUMER DISTRIBUTOR: Any person who distributes, offers for sale, sells, or
exchanges for consideration consumer fireworks in Illinois to another
distributor or directly to any retailer or person for resale.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS: Those fireworks that must comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. consumer products
safety commission as set forth in 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 and 1507, and classified
as fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the United States department of transportation
under 49 C.F.R. 172.101. CONSUMER FIREWORKS shall not include snake or glowworm
pellets; smoke devices, trick noisemakers known as “party poppers”, “booby
traps”, “snappers”, “trick matches”, “cigarette loads”, and “auto burglar
alarms”; sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which
paper or plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths (0.25) grain or less of
explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy
pistol paper or plastic caps that contain less than twenty hundredths (0.20)
grain of explosive mixture, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all
times.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS DISPLAY OR CONSUMER DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition, or
deflagration of consumer fireworks to produce a visual or audible effect.
CONSUMER OPERATOR: An adult individual who is responsible for the safety,
setup, and discharge of the consumer fireworks display and who has completed
the training required in 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/2.2.
CONSUMER RETAILER: Any person who offers for sale, sells, or exchanges for
consideration consumer fireworks in Illinois directly to any person with a
consumer display permit.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS: 1.3G or special effects fireworks or as further defined in
the Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing Act.
FLAME EFFECT: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of flammable gases,
liquids, or special materials to produce a thermal, physical, visual or audible
effect before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of whether
admission is charged, in accordance with National Fire Protection Association
160 guidelines, and as may be further defined in the Pyrotechnic Operator
Licensing Act.
LEAD PYROTECHNIC OPERATOR: An individual who is responsible for the safety,
setup and discharge of the pyrotechnic display and who is licensed pursuant to
the Pyrotechnic Operator Licensing Act.
OSFM: The Illinois Office of the State Fire Marshal.
1.3G FIREWORKS: Those fireworks used for professional outdoor displays and
classified as fireworks UN0333, UN0334, or UN0335 by the United States
department of transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101.
PERMITTEE: Any person, firm or corporation, and/or agent of such person, firm
or corporation, who has been issued a permit for supervised displays of
fireworks in the Village.
PERSON: An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, company,
consortium, joint venture, or commercial entity.
PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of display
fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of
whether admission is charged, and as may be further defined in the Pyrotechnic
Operator Licensing Act.
SPECIAL EFFECTS FIREWORKS: Pyrotechnic devices used for special effects by
professionals in the performing arts in conjunction with theatrical, musical,
or other productions that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical
compositions and construction, but are not intended for consumer use and are
not labeled as such or identified as “intended for indoor use”. SPECIAL EFFECTS
FIREWORKS are classified as fireworks UN0431 or UN0432 by the United States
department of transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101.
6-4-2: MANUFACTURE RESTRICTED:
The manufacture of fireworks within the Village limits is prohibited except as
authorized under the laws of the State.
6-4-3: SALES PROHIBITED:
No person shall offer for sale, distribute, or sell at retail any type of
fireworks within the Village limits. The sale of sparklers on public property
is prohibited within the Village limits. All violations of this section should
be reported to the Police Department or to the OSFM.
6-4-4: DISPLAY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit For Displays:
      1.   Rules And Regulations Adopted: The Board of Trustees may adopt
reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for fireworks
displays pursuant to the provisions and rules of the Illinois Pyrotechnic Use
Act, 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/0.01 et seq.
      2.   Permit Required; Restrictions: No person shall possess, store, use
or explode any pyrotechnic or consumer fireworks within the Village
jurisdiction without a valid fireworks display permit. No person under the age
of twenty one (21) years shall be eligible to be issued such a display permit.
The Board of Trustees will grant permits only for pyrotechnic fireworks
displays.
      3.   Application For Permit: Written application for a pyrotechnic
fireworks display permit shall be filed on the form jointly approved by the
Chief and the Village and shall be available in the office of the Village Clerk
during regular Village business hours.
      4.   Insurance Required: Each applicant must show proof of liability
insurance in a sum not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with an
insurer authorized to do business in Illinois. The permittee shall be
responsible for all damages or injuries occurring as a result of any
pyrotechnic display permitted, the amount not limited to the insurance
provided.
      5.   Proof Of Licensure: All individuals applying for a pyrotechnic
fireworks display permit must include a copy of his or her lead pyrotechnic
operator license issued by the OSFM and a copy of his or her pyrotechnic
distributor license issued by the OSFM. Alternatively, the applicant must
provide proof that the pyrotechnic display services shall be provided by a
licensed pyrotechnic distributor and that the display shall be conducted by a
licensed lead operator and that both licenses have been issued by the OSFM.
      6.   Investigation And Inspection:
         a.   The Village Clerk shall forward all completed application forms
to the Chief within five (5) working days of receipt. The Chief shall
investigate or cause to be investigated each application to determine whether
the display is of the character and so located so as not to constitute an
unreasonable hazard to any person or property and complies with all
requirements for pyrotechnic fireworks displays as contained in the Illinois
Pyrotechnic Use Act, 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/0.01 et seq.
         b.   The Chief shall inspect each display site and investigate or
cause to be investigated each application to determine whether the display is
of a character and so located so as to comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
      7.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
         a.   Following the investigation and inspection of the display site,
if the Chief determines that all requirements of this chapter are satisfied,
then the Chief or his designee shall approve and issue the pyrotechnic
fireworks display permit. A copy of each permit shall be forwarded by the
Office of the Village Clerk to the Chief of Police not less than forty eight
(48) hours before the display.
         b.   In the event that the Chief or his designee does not approve the
display permit, the applicant shall be informed by the Chief or his designee in
writing of the reasons thereof.
         c.   The Village has the authority to refuse to issue display permits
at any time and for any reason, and reserves the authority to choose that only
certain persons may apply for and receive pyrotechnic display permits.
      8.   Compliance With Permit: The possession and use of pyrotechnic
fireworks by the permittee shall be lawful only for the purpose and display as
contained in the pyrotechnic display permit.
      9.   Nontransferability Of Permit: No permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable. Only the permittee, pyrotechnic operator and pyrotechnic
distributor named on the permit shall be authorized to possess and display the
pyrotechnic fireworks.
   B.   Pyrotechnic Distributors And Operators:
      1.   Licenses Required: Any person who puts on a pyrotechnic display must
use or otherwise employ a licensed pyrotechnic distributor who must employ a
licensed lead operator who is present during any pyrotechnic display and acts
as a supervisor to all display assistants. A copy of the application for a
pyrotechnic distributor’s license and the lead operator’s license must be
obtained from the OSFM, and both licenses must be obtained prior to the display
site inspection, issuance of permit and purchase of pyrotechnic display
fireworks.
      2.   Assistants: All assistants to the lead operator must be eighteen
(18) years of age and must be registered with the OSFM.
   C.   Hours Of Display: No fireworks display shall be conducted before ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., except where prior
approval is granted by the Chief and the Village for special programs.
   D.   Indoor Displays: All indoor pyrotechnic displays shall be conducted in
buildings protected by automatic sprinkler systems. All display sites for
indoor pyrotechnic displays must be inspected prior to the issuance of a permit
for such display.
6-4-5: EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use of fireworks by
railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination,
or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for use by
military forces of the state of Illinois, the United States, or authorized
emergency service agencies such as rescue squads or fire and police departments
of the Village or other municipalities.
6-4-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class
A misdemeanor and, upon a finding of guilty, shall be punishable by a fine not
to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
TITLE 7: OFFENSES
Chapter
CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED; GENERAL PROVISIONS   1
OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY   2
OFFENSES RELATED TO PERSONS, HEALTH AND SAFETY   3
OFFENSES INVOLVING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES   4
OFFENSES INVOLVING WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES   5
OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC AUTHORITY   6
OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS   7
CHAPTER 1: CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED; GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
7-1-1: State Criminal Code Adopted
7-1-2: Definitions
7-1-3: Aid To An Offense
7-1-4: Escape
7-1-5: Aid In Escape
7-1-1: STATE CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED:
The Illinois Criminal Code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes, as passed,
approved, and amended by the Illinois General Assembly, is hereby adopted by
the Village. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate
limits of the Village; provided, however, the penalties as provided by this
Code shall apply (see section
1-4-1 of this Code).
(1990 Code § 27-1-2)
7-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the words and phrases of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/2.0-5 et seq., as passed, approved and amended, are hereby adopted
by the Village, as fully as if set out herein.
(1990 Code § 27-1-1)
7-1-3: AID TO AN OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet,
counsel, advise, or encourage any other person in the commission of any of the
acts mentioned in this title or in any manner encourage the commission of any
offense hereby defined.
(1990 Code § 27-2-14)
7-1-4: ESCAPE:
It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful
custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody.
(1990 Code § 27-2-11)
7-1-5: AID IN ESCAPE:
It shall be unlawful to rescue or attempt to rescue, or abet or encourage the
rescue or escape of any person from the custody of any officer or other person
legally having him in charge, or molest or interfere with any officer or other
person so legally having him in charge, or in any manner aid, abet, or
encourage the rescue or the attempt to escape from any person legally committed
thereto, or supply or attempt to supply any such person with any weapon or with
any implement or means whereby an escape might be effected, or with any
intoxicating liquors, drugs or other article(s) without the consent of the
officer in charge.
(1990 Code § 27-2-10)
Cross-reference:
   See also section
6-1-12 of this Code
CHAPTER 2: OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY
Section
7-2-1: Theft And Related Offenses
7-2-2: Damage To Property Generally
7-2-3: Trespass
7-2-4: Throwing Missiles
7-2-5: Posting Bills
7-2-1: THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES:
   A.   Fraudulently Avoiding Payment Of Admission Fees: It shall be unlawful
for any person to fraudulently enter, without payment of the proper admission
fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other place where admission
fees are charged; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be
deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of police officers engaged in
the performance of police duties to any place of public entertainment or
amusement.
(1990 Code § 27-2-6)
   B.   False Pretenses: It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any
food, drink, goods, wares, or merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter
any public place and call for refreshments or other articles and receive and
refuse to pay for same, or depart without paying for or satisfying the person
from whom he received the food, goods, wares, and merchandise.
(1990 Code § 27-2-12)
7-2-2: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY GENERALLY:
No person in the Village shall deface, destroy, or in any way injure any public
property or any other apparatus of the Village.
(1990 Code § 27-2-25)
7-2-3: TRESPASS:
   A.   Trespasses Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to commit a trespass within the Village upon either public or
private property.
(1990 Code § 27-5-1)
   B.   Specifically Enumerated Trespasses: Without constituting any limitation
upon the provisions of this Code, any of the following acts by any person,
firm, or corporation shall be deemed included among those that constitute
trespasses in violation of the provisions of this Code, and appropriate action
may be taken hereunder at any time, or from time to time, to prevent or
suppress any violation or violations of this section, the aforesaid enumerated
acts so included, being as follows:
      1.   An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another,
including any public property, in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at
the main entrance to the premises or at any point of approach or entry or in
violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any
owner or occupant thereof; or
      2.   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the
making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to the premises or at any point of approach or
entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing by any owner or occupant thereof; or
      3.   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case
of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or
occupant thereof; or
      4.   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made
without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control
thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right.
(1990 Code § 27-5-2)
7-2-4: THROWING MISSILES:
No person in the Village shall throw or cast any stone or any other missile
upon or at any building, tree, or other public or private property, or at any
person in any street, avenue, alley, or public place.
(1990 Code § 27-2-23)
7-2-5: POSTING BILLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, paint, print, or nail any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement, or notice of any kind on any curbstone,
flagstone, or any other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any tree,
lamppost, utility pole, or hydrant, or upon any private wall, door, or gate,
without the consent in writing of the owner of the wall, door, or gate;
provided, however, that this section shall not prevent posting by proper
Village and County officials of election signs, polling place signs and other
signs or placards necessary under the law to the conduct of elections; except
they may not be attached to a tree.
(1990 Code § 27-2-15)
Cross-reference:
   See also section
9-1-6 of this Code
CHAPTER 3: OFFENSES RELATED TO PERSONS, HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
7-3-1: Mob Action
7-3-2: Disorderly Conduct
7-3-3: Disturbing The Peace
7-3-4: Disturbing Places Of Worship
7-3-5: Assemblies
7-3-6: Disorderly Houses
7-3-7: Games In Streets
7-3-8: Abandoned Containers
7-3-9: Fortune Telling
7-3-1: MOB ACTION:
   A.   Action Described: A person commits the offense of mob action when he or
she engages in any of the following:
      1.   The knowing or reckless use of force or violence disturbing the
public peace by two (2) or more persons acting together and without authority
of law; or
      2.   The knowing assembly of two (2) or more persons with the intent to
commit or facilitate the commission of a misdemeanor; or
      3.   The knowing assembly of two (2) or more persons without authority of
law, for the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of anyone
supposed to have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of
exercising correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by
violence.
   B.   Misdemeanor Violation: Any participant in a mob action who does not
withdraw on being commanded to do so by any peace officer commits a
misdemeanor.
(1990 Code § 27-3-1)
7-3-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
   A.   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another
and to provoke a breach of the peace;
   B.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the Fire
Department of any city, town, village or fire protection district a false alarm
of fire, knowing at the time of the transmission that there is no reasonable
ground for believing that the fire exists;
   C.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to another a false
alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature or a container
holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive
substance is concealed in a place where its explosion or release would endanger
human life, knowing at the time of the transmission that there is no reasonable
ground for believing that the bomb, explosive or a container holding poison
gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive substance is
concealed in the place;
   D.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a threat of
destruction of a school building or school property, or a threat of violence,
death, or bodily harm directed against persons at a school, school function, or
school event, whether or not school is in session;
   E.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to any peace
officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an
offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed, knowing
at the time of the transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that the offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been
committed;
   F.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report to
any public safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe
that transmitting the report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the
public;
   G.   Calls the number “911" or transmits or causes to be transmitted in any
manner to a public safety agency for the purpose of making or transmitting a
false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call
or transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for
making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or transmission
could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency;
   H.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report to
the Department of Children and Family Services under section 4 of the Abused
and Neglected Child Reporting Act;
   I.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report to
the Department of Public Health under the Nursing Home Care Act, the
Specialized Mental Health Rehabilitation Act of 2013, the ID/DD Community Care
Act, or the MC/DD Act;
   J.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the police
department or fire department of any municipality or fire protection district,
or any privately owned and operated ambulance service, a false request for an
ambulance, emergency medical technician-ambulance or emergency medical
technician-paramedic knowing at the time there is no reasonable ground for
believing that the assistance is required;
   K.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
under Article II of Public Act 83-1432;
   L.   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose
deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it; or
   M.   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the Collection Agency
Act or as an employee of the collection agency, and while attempting to collect
an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which is designed
to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor.
7-3-3: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
No person shall disturb the good order of society, or the peace of any private
family, or of any congregation within the Village by any noise or amusement or
by vulgar or profane language or by any disorderly or immoral conduct.
(1990 Code § 27-2-4)
7-3-4: DISTURBING PLACES OF WORSHIP:
No person shall, in the Village, disturb or disquiet any congregation or
assembly met for religious worship by making any noise, or by rude and indecent
behavior, or by profane or obscene discourse, or in any other manner within or
near their place of worship.
(1990 Code § 27-2-2)
7-3-5: ASSEMBLIES:
   A.   Assembling At Public Places:
      1.   For the purpose of preserving public peace, health and safety, the
entire premises occupied by a local business, together with means of ingress
and egress, are hereby declared to be a public place.
      2.   No person on the premises of a local business shall race the motor
of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring any motor vehicle to a sudden start or
stop, blow any horn of any motor vehicle, or cause to be made any loud or
unseemly noise, nuisance, or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of
the premises or the neighborhood are disturbed.
      3.   a.   The following acts or conduct of any person entering a local
business or premises are hereby declared to be unlawful, and any person found
guilty of any such acts shall be guilty of a violation of this Code:
            (1)   Entering the premises of any local business with any motor
vehicle of any description and parking such vehicle and leaving the premises
(thereby leaving such vehicle parked and unoccupied) without express consent of
the owner or operator of such local business, in which event, the motor vehicle
shall be subject to a parking citation or may be impounded subject to the usual
impounding charges.
            (2)   Entering the premises in or upon a motor vehicle and using
the premises for cruising, racing, as a shortcut to another street or to annoy
or endanger any person or persons or other vehicle or vehicles lawfully on the
premises.
            (3)   For three (3) or more persons to congregate or loiter at any
location on the premises of any local business other than in the building or in
a legally parked motor vehicle.
            (4)   For any person who, while on the premises of any local
business, in the presence or hearing of another, to curse or abuse such person
or use any violently abusive language under circumstances reasonably calculated
to provoke a breach of the peace.
         b.   It shall be the duty of the local business to post on the
premises in a conspicuous location, one or more signs bearing the following
legend in letters at least two inches (2") or more in height and readable:
CRUISING IN OR CONGREGATING AND LOITERING OUTSIDE A MOTOR VEHICLE IS UNLAWFUL.
NO UNOCCUPIED VEHICLES MAY BE LEFT ON THE LOCAL BUSINESS PREMISES WITHOUT THE
CONSENT OF THE OWNER.
         c.   “Cruising”, as used in this subsection A3, shall mean to go about
a parking lot at random. (1990 Code § 27-3-7)
   B.   Disturbing Assemblies: No person shall, in the Village, disturb any
school or any other lawful assembly of people or any funeral assembly or
procession by rude or indecent behavior or otherwise.
(1990 Code § 27-2-3)
   C.   Disorderly Assembly: A person is guilty of disorderly assembly when he
knowingly fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him to
be a peace officer under circumstances where three (3) or more persons are
committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are
likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm.
(1990 Code § 27-2-7)
7-3-6: DISORDERLY HOUSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use, or allow to be used, any
building or property owned by him for any purpose whereby riotous or disorderly
persons are gathered.
(1990 Code § 27-2-13)
7-3-7: GAMES IN STREETS:
No person shall, on any Village street, fly any kite or play any game of ball
or engage in any amusement or practice having a tendency to injure or annoy any
person passing in the streets or on the sidewalks.
(1990 Code § 27-2-19)
7-3-8: ABANDONED CONTAINERS:
Whoever abandons or discards in any place accessible to children any
refrigerator, icebox or ice chest, of a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet
or more, which has an attached lid or door which may be opened or fastened shut
by means of an attached latch, or who, being the owner, lessee, or manager of
such place, knowingly permits such abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox
or ice chest to remain there in such condition, shall be guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor.
(1990 Code § 27-2-27)
7-3-9: FORTUNE TELLING:
No person in the Village shall pursue the calling of a fortune teller or
practice fortune telling, soothsaying or the like, and receive payment in any
manner therefor.
(1990 Code § 27-2-26)
CHAPTER 4: OFFENSES INVOLVING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Section
7-4-1: Public Intoxication
7-4-2: Cannabis And Drug Paraphernalia
7-4-2-1: Definitions
7-4-2-2: Offenses
7-4-2-3: Forfeiture Of Property
7-4-2-4: Possession Of Weapons, Liquor, Drugs And Drug Paraphernalia In Village
Hall
7-4-2-5: Limitations On The Possession And Use Of Cannabis
7-4-1: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
No person shall, in the Village, be found in a state of intoxication, or drunk
in any street or other public place, or shall be found drunk, lying or roving
about the streets, alleys, or sidewalks of the Village, or the private grounds
of any of the inhabitants thereof, or being drunk as aforesaid, shall disturb
the peace, order and quiet of the Village, or the peace and quiet of the
citizens thereof by loud and unusual noises, disorderly conduct, indecent
language or behavior, or in any other manner.
(1990 Code § 27-2-16)
7-4-2: CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
7-4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this section
7-4-2, the following terms shall include and have the following meanings:
CANNABIS: Means and includes any substance defined as CANNABIS in section 3 of
the Illinois Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/3), as now and hereafter
amended or renumbered. "Cannabis" also includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
   A.   Marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as
including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the
seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, and all other cannabinol derivatives,
including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients,
whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by
means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical
synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber
produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any
other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or
the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination; and
   B.   The synthetic form of cannabis, 1-pentyl-3-(1-napthoyl) indole,
commonly known as “K2”.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: Any object or device used, designed for use or intended for
use in unlawfully ingesting, smoking, administering, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, packaging, storing, or otherwise introducing into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act (720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.) DRUG PARAPHERNALIA also includes, but
is not limited to, the following:
   A.   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in the planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
   B.   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances.
   C.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance
or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
   D.   Testing equipment, used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances.
   E.   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
   F.   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances.
   G.   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use
in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana.
   H.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended
for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
   I.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for
use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances.
   J.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for
use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
   K.   Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used, intended for use,
or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the
human body.
   L.   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish,
hashish oil, methamphetamine, or other controlled substances into the human
body, such as:
      1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes, with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls;
      2.   Water pipes;
      3.   Carburetion pipes, tubes and devices;
      4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
      5.   Roach clips or other objects used to hold burning materials;
      6.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
      7.   Chamber pipes, electric pipes, air-driven pipes, and ice pipes or
chillers;
      8.   Chillums;
      9.   Bongs; and
      10.   One-hitters.
(Ord. 2018-6-1, 6-4-2018)
7-4-2-2: OFFENSES:
   A.   Possession Of Cannabis:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to possess the synthetic form of
cannabis, 1-pentyl-3-(1-napthoyl) indole, commonly known as “K2”.
      2.   Effective January 1, 2020, the possession and usage of cannabis
shall be permitted in accordance with the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410
ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.) and the provisions of the revised code of ordinances of
the Village.
   B.   Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia: It is unlawful for any person to use,
or possess with the intent to use, drug paraphernalia for the purpose of
unlawfully ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis or a
controlled substance into the human body.
   C.   Manufacture Or Delivery Of Drug Paraphernalia: It is unlawful for any
person to deliver, to sell, to possess with the intent to deliver or sell, or
to manufacture with the intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia, knowing,
or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used
to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act
(720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.)
   D.   Penalty: Any person who commits an offense as set forth in this section
7-4-2-5 shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(Ord. 2018-6-1, 6-4-2018; Ord. 2020-1-1, 1-13-2020)
7-4-2-3: FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY:
   A.   All articles defined in section
7-4-2-1 of this section
7-4-2, definition of “drug paraphernalia” shall be subject to forfeiture.
   B.   Property subject to forfeiture under this section
7-4-2 may be seized by any peace officer upon process issued by any court
having jurisdiction over the property. Seizure by any police officer without
process may be made:
      1.   If the property subject to seizure has been the subject of a prior
judgment in favor of the Village in an ordinance violation proceeding; or
      2.   If there is probable cause to believe that the property is either
directly or indirectly dangerous to health or safety.
   C.   In the event of seizure pursuant to subsection B of this section,
proceedings under subsection D of this section shall be promptly instituted.
   D.   Property taken or detained under this section
7-4-2 shall not be subject to replevin, but is deemed to be in the custody of
the Chief of Police, subject only to the orders of the court having
jurisdiction over the forfeiture proceedings. When property is seized under
this section
7-4-2, the Chief of Police may:
      1.   Place the property under seal; or
      2.   Remove the property to a place designated by him; or
      3.   Take custody of the property and remove it to an appropriate
location for destruction.
(Ord. 2018-6-1, 6-4-2018)
7-4-2-4: POSSESSION OF WEAPONS, LIQUOR, DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA IN VILLAGE
HALL:
Except for evidence purposes, it shall be unlawful for any person other than
police officers to possess within the Village Hall:
   A.   A “dangerous weapon”, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
33A-1, as now and hereafter amended or renumbered.
   B.   “Alcoholic liquor”, as defined in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
   C.   A “controlled substance”, as defined in the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act (720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.), as now and hereafter amended or
renumbered.
   D.   “Cannabis”, as defined in the Illinois Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS
550/3), as now and hereafter amended or renumbered.
(Ord. 2018-6-1, 6-4-2018)
7-4-2-5: LIMITATIONS ON THE POSSESSION AND USE OF CANNABIS.
   A.   Definitions:
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place where a person could reasonably be expected to be
observed by others. PUBLIC PLACE includes all parts of buildings owned in whole
or in part or leased, by the State or a unit of local government. PUBLIC PLACE
does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to
provide licensed child care, foster care, or other similar social service care
on the premises.
   B.   Pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et
seq.), effective January 1, 2020, the possession of cannabis is prohibited:
      1.   By a person under the age of twenty one (21) years of age, except
where authorized by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act
(410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.) or by the Community College Cannabis Vocational Pilot
Program;
      2.   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program
Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.);
      3.   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et
seq.);
      4.   In any correctional facility;
      5.   In a vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in a
reasonably secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the
vehicle is moving; or
      6.   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
child care or similar social service care on the premises.
   C.   Pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et
seq.) and the revised code of ordinances of the Village, effective January 1,
2020, the usage of cannabis is prohibited:
      1.   By a person under the age of twenty one (21) years of age, except
where authorized by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act
(410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.) or by the Community College Cannabis Vocational Pilot
Program;
      2.   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program
Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.);
      3.   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et
seq.);
      4.   In any correctional facility;
      5.   In any motor vehicle;
      6.   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
child care or similar social service care on the premises;
      7.   In any public place; or
      8.   Knowingly in close proximity to anyone under twenty one (21) years
of age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
   D.   The smoking of cannabis is prohibited in any place where smoking is
prohibited under the Smoke Free Illinois Act (410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.) and/or the
revised code of ordinances of the Village.
   E.   Whoever commits an offense of this section shall be subject to a fine
of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(Ord. 2020-1-1, 1-13-2020)
CHAPTER 5: OFFENSES INVOLVING WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
7-5-1: Concealed Weapons
7-5-2: Discharging Firearms And Air Guns
7-5-3: Blasting
7-5-4: Storage Of Explosives
7-5-1: CONCEALED WEAPONS:
   A.   No person shall, within the Village, carry or wear under his clothes or
concealed about his person any pistol, slingshot, cross knuckles, or knuckles
of lead, brass or other metal, or any switchblade knife or razor, bowie knife,
or dirk knife, or dirk, or dagger, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon.
   B.   This section does not apply to the officers or members of the Police
Department, nor to any sheriff or deputy sheriff or constable of this State,
nor to any United States Marshal.
(1990 Code § 27-2-18)
7-5-2: DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND AIR GUNS:
   A.   No person shall, within the Village, fire or discharge any firearms or
air guns without written permission from the Mayor first obtained, which
permission shall prescribe the limits within which such firing may be done, and
may be revoked at any time after it has been granted.
   B.   A registered gun club shall be excluded from the provisions of this
section, but limited to the club grounds.
(1990 Code § 27-2-20)
7-5-3: BLASTING:
No person shall, by himself or his agent or employees, fire off any blast,
unless the blast is properly guarded so as to prevent accident to persons or
property, or open any stone quarry within the Village without permission of the
Village Board.
(1990 Code § 27-2-21)
7-5-4: STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   Nitroglycerine; Dynamite: No person shall have, keep, possess, or
store, at or in any place within the Village, any nitroglycerine, dynamite or
giant powder, or any form or combination of any of them.
   B.   Blasting Powder: No person shall keep, possess, or store any gun or
blasting powder, or any gun or explosive cotton at or in any one place in the
Village in any quantity exceeding five (5) pounds, except a dealer thereof, or
quarryman of rock, or miner, who may keep twenty five (25) pounds at any one
time.
(1990 Code § 27-2-22)
CHAPTER 6: OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Section
7-6-1: Resisting Or Obstructing A Peace Officer
7-6-2: Refusing To Aid A Peace Officer
7-6-3: Disorderly Conduct Near A Police Officer
7-6-4: Impersonating An Officer
7-6-5: Criminal Damage To Firefighting Apparatus
7-6-6: Damaging Street Signs
7-6-1: RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER:
A person who knowingly resists or obstructs the performance of one known to the
person to be a peace officer of any authorized act within his official capacity
commits an offense.
(1990 Code § 27-3-5)
7-6-2: REFUSING TO AID A PEACE OFFICER:
Whoever, upon command, refuses or knowingly fails to reasonably aid a person
known by him to be a peace officer in the following commits a violation of this
Code:
   A.   Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
   B.   Preventing the commission by another of any offense.
(1990 Code § 27-3-6)
7-6-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT NEAR A POLICE OFFICER:
No person shall, in the Village, by violent or tumultuous conduct or by loud
and unusual noises, disturb any police officer in the discharge of his duties,
and no person shall use profane, obscene or offensive language in the presence
of a police officer; nor shall any person assault, strike or fight with any
police officer in the discharge of his duties or permit such conduct in or upon
any house or premises in the Village owned or possessed by him or under his
management and control.
(1990 Code § 27-2-1)
7-6-4: IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER:
No person in the Village shall falsely represent himself to be an officer of
the Village or shall, without being duly authorized by the Village, exercise or
attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions, or powers of a Village
officer, or impersonate any of the members of the police force of the Village,
or maliciously or with the intention of deceiving any person, wear the uniform
of the Village Police Department or any other duly constituted law enforcement
agency or department, or a uniform similar to that worn by the members of the
Village Police Department or any other duly constituted law enforcement agency
or department, or use any of the signs, signals, or devices adopted and used by
the Police Department.
(1990 Code § 27-2-24)
7-6-5: CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO FIREFIGHTING APPARATUS:
No person shall wilfully and maliciously cut, injure, damage, tamper with, or
destroy or deface any fire hydrant, or any fire hose, or any fire engine, or
other public or private firefighting equipment, or any apparatus appertaining
to such equipment, or intentionally open any fire hydrant without proper
authorization.
(1990 Code § 27-3-3)
7-6-6: DAMAGING STREET SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, in any manner or form, to
deface, disfigure, damage or disturb any of the street signs or parts thereof
located in the Village.
(1990 Code § 27-3-4)
CHAPTER 7: OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
Section
7-7-1: Curfew Regulations
7-7-2: Halloween
7-7-3: Sale Of Tobacco To Minors
7-7-4: Encouraging Delinquency
7-7-5: Parental Responsibility
7-7-1: CURFEW REGULATIONS:
   A.   Curfew Offenses:
      (1)   A minor commits a curfew offense when he or she remains in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.
      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in custody or
control of a minor commits a curfew offense when he or she knowingly permits
the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
during curfew hours.
   B.   Curfew Defenses: It is a defense to prosecution under subsection A that
the minor was:
      1.   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian or other person in
custody or control of the minor;
      2.   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      3.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      4.   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      5.   Involved in an emergency;
      6.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      7.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental
agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental agency, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;
      8.   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      9.   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Minors Act.
   C.   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for
being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
no defense in subsection B is present.
   D.   Definitions: In this section:
      CURFEW HOURS:
         a.   Between twelve o'clock one (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. on Saturday;
         b.   Between twelve o'clock one (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. on Sunday; and
         c.   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
      EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
      GUARDIAN:
         a.   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of
a minor; or
         b.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
      MINOR: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
      PARENT: A person who is:
         a.   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another
person; or
         b.   At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
      REMAIN: To:
         a.   Linger or stay; or
         b.   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   E.   Sentence: A violation of this section is a petty offense with a fine of
not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), except that neither a person who has been made a ward of the court
under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, nor that person’s legal guardian, shall
be subject to any fine. In addition to or instead of the fine imposed by this
section, the court may order a parent, legal guardian, or other person
convicted of a violation of subsection A of this section to perform community
service as determined by the court, except that the legal guardian of a person
who has been made a ward of the court under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 may
not be ordered to perform community service. The dates and times established
for the performance of community service by the parent, legal guardian, or
other person convicted of a violation of subsection A of this section shall not
conflict with the dates and times that the person is employed in his or her
regular occupation.
   F.   Legislative Or Regulatory Authority: County, municipal and other local
boards and bodies authorized to adopt local police laws and regulations under
the constitution and laws of this State may exercise legislative or regulatory
authority over this subject matter by ordinance or resolution incorporating the
substance of this section or increasing the requirements thereof or otherwise
not in conflict with this section.
   G.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this
section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first conviction, not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second
conviction, and not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent conviction. In addition, the
court may order a parent, guardian or any minor violating this chapter to
perform community service.
7-7-2: HALLOWEEN:
It shall be illegal for any person to engage in Halloween practice, commonly
called "Trick or Treat", by calling at the homes or dwelling places within the
Village, either masked or unmasked, except upon the designated day established
by the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 27-2-30)
7-7-3: SALE OF TOBACCO TO MINORS:
No person, either as principal, clerk or agent, shall sell, buy for or give
away, either directly or indirectly, any cigarette, electronic cigarette, cigar
or tobacco (including smokeless tobacco), in any form, to any minor person
under the age of twenty one (21) years, within the Village. Additionally, it
shall be unlawful for any minor person under the age of twenty one (21) years,
within the Village limits, to possess any cigarettes, electronic cigarette,
cigar or tobacco (including smokeless tobacco) or tobacco any of its forms.
(1990 Code § 27-2-8)
7-7-4: ENCOURAGING DELINQUENCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, by an act of neglect, to encourage, aid,
or cause delinquency in a minor. A “delinquent minor” means any minor who prior
to his or her seventeenth (17th) birthday has violated or attempted to violate,
regardless of where the act occurred, any Federal or State law or County or
municipal ordinance and any minor who prior to his or her eighteenth (18th)
birthday has violated or attempted to violate, regardless of where the act
occurred, ay federal or State law or county or municipal ordinance classified
as a misdemeanor offense.
(1990 Code § 27-2-9)
7-7-5: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
A parent or legal guardian is liable for any and all fines assessed against an
unemancipated minor who resides with such parent or legal guardian.
TITLE 8: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS   1
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS   2
DRIVING RULES   3
PARKING REGULATIONS   4
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES   5
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION   6
ABANDONED VEHICLES   7
GOLF CARTS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES   8
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
Section
8-1-1: State Definitions Adopted
8-1-2: Application To Animals And Bicycles
8-1-3: Duty To Report Accident
8-1-4: Obedience To Police; Unlawful Direction Of Traffic
8-1-5: Scene Of Fire
8-1-1: STATE DEFINITIONS ADOPTED:
That part of The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, chapter
1, entitled “Title and Definitions”, as passed, approved and amended by the
Illinois General Assembly, is hereby adopted by the Village. The provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the Village.
(1990 Code § 24-1-1)
8-1-2:    APPLICATION TO ANIMALS AND BICYCLES:
Any person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a
vehicle upon any street shall be subject to the provisions of this title
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which can have
no application to one riding a bicycle or driving or riding an animal.
(1990 Code § 24-2-7)
8-1-3: DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENT:
The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident within
the Village shall, without unnecessary delay, notify the Police Department and
shall make a report of such action. Failure to report an accident within the
Village within twenty four (24) hours shall result in arrests of the person or
persons involved.
(1990 Code § 24-4-3)
8-1-4: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE; UNLAWFUL DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC:
   A.   Members of the Police Department, Special Police, Auxiliary Police and
Marshals assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to direct all traffic
in accordance with the provisions of this title, or in emergencies as public
safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police
officer.
   B.   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of any police officer, firefighter, or person authorized by
a local authority to direct traffic or school crossing guard invested by law
with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
   C.   Except in cases of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person not
authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic.
(1990 Code § 24-2-1)
8-1-5: SCENE OF FIRE:
The Fire Department officer in command or any firefighter designated by him may
exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in directing traffic at
the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has responded to an
emergency call for so long as the Fire Department equipment is on the scene in
the absence of or in assisting the Police Department.
(1990 Code § 24-2-2)
CHAPTER 2: TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
Section
8-2-1: Compliance With Signs And Signals
8-2-2: Unauthorized Signs; Obstructions
8-2-3: Damage To, Interference With Signs Or Signals
8-2-4: Advertising, Flashing Signs
8-2-5: Unlawful Possession Of Signs Or Markers
8-2-1: COMPLIANCE WITH SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the
instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the
Corporate Authorities or in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois,
excepting on direction of a police officer.
   B.   All signs and signals established by direction of the Governing Body
shall conform to the Illinois State Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways.
(1990 Code § 24-2-3)
8-2-2: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS; OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
street, any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, light, reflector or device
which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-
control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic; nor shall any person place, maintain or display upon or in
view of any street, any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the
movement of traffic or effectiveness of any traffic- control device or any
railroad sign or signal; and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit upon any highway, any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising.
   B.   No tree, bush or foliage of any kind shall be so placed, maintained,
allowed to remain, or be displayed upon either public or private property in
such a manner as to hide from view or interfere with the movement of traffic or
the effectiveness of any traffic-control device, sign or signal.
(1990 Code § 24-2-4)
8-2-3: DAMAGE TO, INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS OR SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move or interfere with
any official traffic sign or signal.
(1990 Code § 24-2-5)
8-2-4: ADVERTISING, FLASHING SIGNS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to maintain anywhere in the Village any sign,
signal, marking or device, other than a traffic sign or signal authorized by
the Village Board or the Illinois State Department of Transportation, which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control
device or railroad sign or signal, in view of any street or highway, and it
shall be unlawful to place or maintain any sign which hides from view any
lawful traffic-control device.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate in view of any street or
highway any flashing or rotating beacon of light.
(1990 Code § 24-2-6)
8-2-5: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF SIGN OR MARKER:
The Public Works Department, with reference to traffic-control signals, signs
or markers owned by the Public Works Department, is authorized to indicate the
ownership of such signs, signals or markers on the back of such devices in
letters not less than three-eighths inch (3/8") nor more than three-fourths
inch (3/4") in height, by use of a metal stamp, etching or other permanent
means and, except for employees of the Public Works Department, police
officers, contractors and their employees engaged in highway construction
contract or work on the highway approved by the Public Works Department, it is
a violation of this title for any person to possess such sign, signal or marker
so identified.
(1990 Code § 24-4-2)
CHAPTER 3: DRIVING RULES
Section
8-3-1: State Rules Of The Road Adopted; Amendments
8-3-2: Through, Stop And Yield Streets; One-Way Streets And Alleys
8-3-3: Speed Regulations
8-3-4: Traffic Lane Usage
8-3-5: Reckless, Careless Or Negligent Driving
8-3-6: Drag Racing
8-3-7: Fleeing Or Attempting To Elude Police
8-3-1: STATE RULES OF THE ROAD ADOPTED; AMENDMENTS:
That part of The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, chapter
5/11, entitled, "Rules of the Road", as passed, approved and amended by the
Illinois General Assembly, is hereby adopted by the Village, and the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the Village, except
for the following changes, deletions and omissions:
   A.   Omissions: Omit sections 11-202; 11-204; 11-207; 11-208; 11-208.1; 11-
208.2; 11-209; 11-209.1; 11-211; 11-302; 11-303; 11-310(f); 11-313; 11-401 to
and including 11-417; 11-500(i); 11-501(c); 11-501.1, the last paragraph
beginning with “notwithstanding” and ending with “appropriate”; 11-502, the
last sentence beginning with “a” and ending with “offense”; 11-503; 11-504,
first paragraph beginning with “any” and ending with “amended”; 11-602; 11-603;
11-604; 11-606(b); 11-608 and 11-1422.
   B.   Changes And Additions:
      1.   Change section 11-904(a) to read: “Preferential right-of-way at an
intersection may be indicated by stop or yield signs as authorized by this
Code”.
      2.   Change subsection 11-1204(a) to read: “Preferential right-of-way at
an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs as authorized by
this Code”.
      3.   Change subsection 11-1416 to read: “Any person who shall willfully
and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any other person in
lawfully driving and traveling upon or along any highway within this State or
who shall offer for barter or sale, merchandise on said highway so as to
interfere with the effective movement of traffic shall upon conviction, be
guilty of a violation of this Code”.
(1990 Code § 24-4-1)
8-3-2: THROUGH, STOP AND YIELD STREETS; ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   Through Streets: The streets and parts of streets of the Village
designated by ordinance as “through streets” are hereby declared to be through
streets. The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street
and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersection or which are approaching so close on a though street as to
constitute an immediate hazard unless directed otherwise by the traffic
officer.
(1990 Code § 24-3-1)
   B.   Stop Streets: The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop
sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected pursuant to ordinance at
one or more entrances thereto and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the
vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or
approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at
such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event,
there shall be compliance with the directions of the police officer.
(1990 Code § 24-3-3)
   C.   Yield Right-Of-Way Streets: The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield
sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the
existing conditions and if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as
to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across
or within the intersection.
(1990 Code § 24-3-4)
   D.   One-Way Streets And Alleys: It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle
on any streets or alleys designated as one-way streets or alleys by ordinance
in any direction other than that so designated.
(1990 Code § 24-3-2)
   E.   Signs Posted: Appropriate signs shall be posted to show all through,
stop, and yield right-of-way streets; all one-way streets and alleys; and all
stop intersections.
(1990 Code § 24-3-5)
8-3-3: SPEED REGULATIONS:
   A.   General Speed Restrictions: The speed limits on various streets shall
be approved by the Village Board, but shall not exceed twenty (20) miles per
hour in a school zone and not exceed twenty five (25) miles per hour in a
residential street; otherwise, thirty (30) miles per hour on an arterial
street, unless otherwise posted.
   B.   Passing Schools:
      1.   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty
(20) miles per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any
public thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to and from school
during school days when school children are present.
      2.   This subsection shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are
posted upon streets and maintained by the Village or State wherein the school
zone is located.
   C.   Elevated Structures:
      1.   No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater than the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure
when such structure is signposted.
      2.   Upon the trial of any person charged with the violation of this
subsection, proof of the determination of the maximum speed by the Village and
the existence of such signs is conclusive evidence of the maximum speed which
can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   D.   Failure To Reduce Speed: A vehicle shall be driven upon the streets and
alleys of the Village at a speed which is reasonable and proper with regard to
traffic conditions and the use of the street or alley. The fact that the
vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the
driver of the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an
intersection or when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrian or other
traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. Speed must be decreased
as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or
entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all
persons to use due care.
(1990 Code § 24-4-2)
8-3-4: TRAFFIC LANE USAGE:
Whenever any roadway within the Village has been divided into two (2) or more
clearly marked lanes for traffic, a vehicle shall be driven as nearly as
practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not to moved from such lane
until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with
safety.
(1990 Code § 24-4-2)
8-3-5: RECKLESS, CARELESS OR NEGLIGENT DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the Village with a willful or
wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. It shall also be
unlawful to knowingly operate any vehicle in the Village by using an incline in
a roadway, such as a railroad crossing, bridge approach, or hill, to cause the
vehicle to become airborne.
8-3-6: DRAG RACING:
   A.   No person shall engage in street racing on any street or highway of
this State.
   B.   No owner of any vehicle shall acquiesce in or permit his or her vehicle
to be used by another for the purpose of street racing.
   C.   For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the
meanings ascribed to them:
      ACQUIESCE OR PERMIT: Actual knowledge that the motor vehicle was to be
used for the purpose of street racing.
      STREET RACING:
         a.   The operation of two (2) or more vehicles from a point side by
side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to outdistance each other;
         b.   The operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected
course, each starting at the same point, for the purpose of comparing the
relative speeds or power of acceleration of such vehicle or vehicles within a
certain distance or time limit;
         c.   The use of one or more vehicles in an attempt to outgain or
outdistance another vehicle;
         d.   The use of one or more vehicles to prevent another vehicle from
passing;
         e.   The use of one or more vehicles to arrive at a given destination
ahead of another vehicle or vehicles; or
         f.   The use of one or more vehicles to test the physical stamina or
endurance of drivers over long-distance driving routes.
 8-3-7: FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE POLICE:
Any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who, having been given a visual or
audible signal by a police officer, directing such driver or operator to bring
his vehicle to a stop, wilfully fails to or refuses to obey such direction,
increases his speed, extinguishes his lights or otherwise flees or attempts to
elude the officer is guilty of a violation of this title. The signal given by
the police officer may be by hand, voice, siren, or red or blue light.
Provided, the officer giving such signal shall be in police uniform and if
driving a vehicle, such vehicle shall be marked showing it to be an official
police vehicle.
(1990 Code § 24-4-2)
CHAPTER 4: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
8-4-1: Time Limit Parking
8-4-2: Parking Vehicle For Sale Or Repair
8-4-3: Method Of Parking
8-4-4: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
8-4-5: General Parking Restrictions
8-4-6: Truck Parking
8-4-7: Parking For Persons With Disabilities
8-4-8: Parking During Snow Removal
8-4-1: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period of time in excess of the
amount of time designated by law and so posted.
(1990 Code § 24-6-1)
8-4-2: PARKING VEHICLE FOR SALE OR REPAIR:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the purpose of:
   A.   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   B.   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except when emergency
repairs are necessary.
(1990 Code § 24-6-2)
8-4-3: METHOD OF PARKING:
   A.   Parallel Parking:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped
or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-
hand wheels parallel to and within twelve inches (12") of the right-hand curb
or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
      2.   Except when otherwise provided by ordinance, every vehicle stopped
or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the
curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement,
with its right-hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the right-hand curb or
as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with
its left-hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the left-hand curb or as
close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
   B.   Angle Parking: The Village may permit angle parking on any roadway;
except, that angle parking shall not be permitted on any Federal-aid or State
highway unless the Department of Transportation has determined that the roadway
is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the
free movement of traffic.
(2019 Code)
8-4-4: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-
control device, no person shall:
      1.   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
         a.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street.
         b.   On a sidewalk.
         c.   Within an intersection.
         d.   On a crosswalk.
         e.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings.
         f.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
         g.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
         h.   On any railroad tracks. A violation of any part of this
subsection A1h shall result in a mandatory fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) or fifty (50) hours of community service.
         i.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
         j.   On any controlled-access highway.
         k.   In the area between roadways on a divided highway, including
crossovers.
         l.   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
         m.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle reduces the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
         n.   In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a
current annual registration sticker or current temporary permit pending
registration.
      2.   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily
to pick up or discharge passengers:
         a.   In front of a public or private driveway.
         b.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
         c.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
         d.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of
the roadway.
         e.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when properly sign posted).
         f.   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      3.   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
         a.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing.
         b.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   B.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(2019 Code)
8-4-5: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No Parking Areas: No person shall park or permit to stand any vehicle
in any areas in the Village designated and marked as a “No Parking” area.
   B.   Obstructing Driveway Entrances: No person shall park or permit any
vehicle to stand in such manner as to obstruct the entrance to any public or
private driveway or any street or alley in the Village.
   C.   Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner
or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person
shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
   D.   Double Parking: No person shall park or leave any motor vehicle so that
the same shall stand outside of any authorized or plainly marked off parking
space provided on the streets or highways of the Village; nor shall any person
permit any motor vehicle to stand upon the traveled portion of any street in
the Village.
   E.   Private Property: It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any
private property without the consent of the owner of the property.
(2019 Code)
8-4-6: TRUCK PARKING:
   A.   Length Restrictions: No person shall park any vehicle, vehicles or
trailer, the length of which exceeds twenty feet (20'), or any second division
vehicle licensed for an F classification or higher:
      1.   Upon any street, alley or public way within the village except for
the purpose and time period reasonably necessary to load and unload the same.
      2.   Upon public or private property within the village with the motor
running for a continuous period in excess of thirty (30) minutes.
   B.   Weight Restrictions:
      1.   No vehicle with a gross weight of sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds
or more shall park on any street or alley within the village for a period of
more than two (2) continuous hours.
      2.   The village shall erect and maintain signs designating the
provisions of this subsection at each entrance to the village to apply to all
roads within the village limits. This subsection shall not be effective unless
such signs are erected and maintained.
8-4-7: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   Parking Areas Designated: Certain parking spaces within the confines of
the village may be designated for use by vehicles of persons with disabilities
only and will be posted with appropriate signs to that effect.
   B.   Use Of Designated Parking Areas: The use of designated parking
locations for persons with disabilities, duly posted and signed, shall, to that
effect, be open to any vehicle which bears the appropriate Illinois
registration plate for persons with disabilities issued by the Secretary of
State for the State of Illinois, or a valid parking permit for persons with
disabilities issued by another governmental agency or which bears a card for
persons with disabilities furnished in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1301.1 et seq., and furnished by the Village.
   C.   Application For Registration Plate: The issuance of an Illinois motor
vehicle registration plate for persons with disabilities shall be made with the
Secretary of State of the State of Illinois at any facility provided and
approved for that purpose by the Secretary of State.
   D.   Penalties: Any vehicle parked in violation of this section in a posted
designated space for persons with disabilities which does not bear an Illinois
registration plate for persons with disabilities or a valid parking permit for
persons with disabilities issued by another governmental agency will be
ticketed, and the vehicle will be removed in accordance with departmental
policies and in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1302. The
registered owner of the vehicle as ascertained by the registration plates of
the vehicle will be presumed to be in control of the vehicle and will be fined
one hundred dollars ($100.00). The same registered owner will be held liable
for the cost of removal of the vehicle and must pay that cost, plus storage
charges, if any, prior to the release of the vehicle.
8-4-8: PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL:
   A.   All streets within the Village shall be snow emergency routes.
   B.   A snow emergency shall exist in the Village whenever two (2) inches of
snow or more falls and for twelve (12) hours after the conclusion of each such
snowfall.
   C.   During a snow emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or
leave a motor vehicle of any type in the traveled portion of any snow emergency
route, or alongside or adjacent to any such route, or in a private driveway in
a position that interferes with the plowing or removal of snow.
   D.   Any vehicle parked in violation of this section may be towed or
removed.
   E.   Any person who violates this section may be punished by a fine of not
more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per occurrence.
   F.   Signs indicating that there shall be no parking during snow emergencies
may be erected, by order of the Trustee who chairs the standing committee on
streets. The placement and number of such signs, if any, shall be left to the
discretion of such Trustee.
CHAPTER 5: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Section
8-5-1: Traffic Schedules On File
8-5-1: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES ON FILE:
The Village passes ordinances regulating the various traffic schedules in the
Village, e.g., specific stop or yield intersections, speed limits on specific
streets, parking prohibitions and restrictions on specific streets, etc. The
traffic schedules are on file in the Office of the Chief of Police for public
use and inspection.
(2019 Code)
CHAPTER 6: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
Section
8-6-1: State Equipment Regulations Adopted; Amendments
8-6-2: Noise Control
8-6-3: Bicycle Equipment
8-6-1: STATE EQUIPMENT REGULATIONS ADOPTED; AMENDMENTS:
That part of The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, chapter
5/12, entitled, “Equipment of Vehicles”, as passed, approved, and amended by
the Illinois General Assembly, is hereby adopted by the Village, and the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the
Village.
(1990 Code § 24-5-1)
8-6-2: NOISE CONTROL:
   A.   Acceleration Of Engine Of Stopped Vehicle:
      1.   No operator of a motor vehicle shall, when the motor vehicle is
stopped, unreasonably accelerate the engine thereof with the gears of the
vehicle in neutral, thereby causing an unreasonably loud or excessive noise.
(1990 Code § 24-5-2)
      2.   No operator of a motor vehicle shall, when the motor vehicle is
stopped, accelerate the engine with the gears of such vehicle in neutral and
while so accelerating the engine, shift the gears of the vehicle into a forward
or reverse movement, thereby causing an unreasonably loud noise with the drive
wheels of the vehicle.
(1990 Code § 24-5-3)
      3.   No operator of a motor vehicle shall accelerate the engine thereof
when shifting the gears of such vehicle in such a manner as to cause the rear
wheels of such vehicle to spin violently, thereby causing an unreasonably loud
or excessive noise.
(1990 Code § 24-5-4)
   B.   Muffler:
      1.   No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless such vehicle
is provided with a muffler in efficient actual working condition; and the use
of a cutout is prohibited.
      2.   No muffler shall cause an unreasonably loud or excessive noise.
(1990 Code § 24-5-5)
   C.   Excessive Noise While Driving: No operator of a motor vehicle shall,
when operating the vehicle, accelerate the vehicle or rapidly stop the vehicle
causing an unreasonably loud noise.
(1990 Code § 24-5-7)
8-6-3: BICYCLE EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Lamps And Reflectors: Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a
distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red
reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Department of Transportation
which shall be visible from all distances from one hundred feet (100') to six
hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of
headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a steady or flashing red light
visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in
addition to the red reflector.
   B.   Brake: Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will
adequately control movement of and stop and hold the bicycle.
   C.   Sirens Prohibited: A bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any
person use any siren upon a bicycle. This subsection does not apply to a
bicycle that is a police vehicle or Fire Department vehicle.
   D.   Requirements For New Bicycle Sales:
      1.   No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle
that is not equipped with a reflex reflector or conforming to specifications
prescribed by the State on each pedal, visible from the front and rear of the
bicycle during darkness from a distance of two hundred feet (200').
      2.   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with side reflectors. Such reflectors shall be visible from each side
of the bicycle from a distance of five hundred feet (500') and shall be
essentially colorless or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and
essentially colorless or amber to the front of the center of the bicycle. The
requirements of this paragraph may be met by reflective materials which shall
be at least three-sixteenths inch (3/16") wide on each side of each tire or rim
to indicate as clearly as possible the continuous circular shape and size of
the tires or rims of such bicycle and which reflective materials may be of the
same color on both the front and rear tires or rims. Such reflectors shall
conform to specifications prescribed by the State.
      3.   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with an essentially colorless front-facing reflector.
(1990 Code § 24-2-8)
CHAPTER 7: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
8-7-1: Definitions
8-7-2: Abandonment Prohibited
8-7-3: Removal of Vehicles; Costs
8-7-4: Records Of Tows
8-7-5: Records Searches For Owner
8-7-6: Reclamation Of Vehicle
8-7-7: Sale Of Vehicle
8-7-8: Older Vehicles
8-7-9: Records Kept
8-7-10: Disposition Of Proceeds
8-7-11: Nonliability Of Village Or Towing Service
8-7-12: Penalties
8-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as follows:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or other vehicle in a state of disrepair,
rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any motor
vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7)
consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or other vehicle twenty five (25) years of
age or older.
COMPONENT PART: Any part of a vehicle, other than a tire, having a
manufacturer’s identification number or an identification number issued by the
Secretary of State.
DERELICT VEHICLE: Any inoperable, unregistered, or discarded motor vehicle,
regardless of title, having lost its characteristic as a substantial property
and left unattended without justification on the owner’s, lienholder’s or other
legally entitled person’s land contrary to the public policy expressed in this
chapter.
HIGHWAY: Any street, alley or public way within the Village.
REMOVE: To remove, deface, cover, or destroy.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street or highway, whether subject to or exempt
from registration, excepting, however, bicycles, snowmobiles and devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (625 ILCS 5/4-201)
8-7-2: ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED:
   A.   Highway: The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or part
thereof on any highway in the Village is unlawful and subject to penalties as
set forth herein.
   B.   Private Property: The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on
private or public property other than a highway in view of the general public
anywhere in the Village is unlawful.
   C.   Owner’s Property: A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private
property shall be authorized for removal by the Police Department, after a
waiting period of seven (7) days or more, or may be removed immediately if
determined to be a hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle under 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-40-3.
   D.   Penalty: A violation of this section is subject to penalties as set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (625 ILCS 5/4-201)
8-7-3: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; COSTS:
   A.   Notice To Police; Removal:
      1.   Where an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in the
Village who is not the owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person of
the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the Police Department when
the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the Village.
      2.   Upon receipt of such notification, the Police Department or
designated representative shall authorize a towing service to remove and take
possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle.
      3.   The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its
contents, maintain a record of the tow, as set forth in section
8-7-4 of this chapter, until the vehicle is claimed by the owner, lienholder,
or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof or until it is
disposed of as provided in this chapter.
(625 ILCS 5/4-202)
   B.   Removal From Public Ways:
      1.   When a vehicle is abandoned or left unattended on a highway in an
urban district for ten (10) hours or more, its removal by a towing service may
be authorized by the Police Department.
      2.   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially
dismantled vehicle, or any vehicle which is parked on a public street or in a
private driveway which has been determined by Village officials to be blocking
side vision or is determined to be a nuisance to any person, is creating a
traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the highway or its
physical appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal
from the highway or private property adjacent to the highway by a towing
service may be authorized by the Police Department.
   C.   Costs Of Removal: When vehicle removal from either public or private
property is authorized by the Police Department, the owner, lienholder or other
legally entitled person of the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing
costs.
   D.   State Regulations Adopted: The remaining provisions of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4-203 are hereby adopted by reference, and the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the village. (625
ILCS 5/4-203)
8-7-4: RECORDS OF TOWS:
When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away as provided herein, the Police
Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the
color, year of manufacture, manufacturer’s trade name, manufacturer’s series
name, body style, vehicle identification number and license plate year and
number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and
hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the
name of the officer authorizing the tow.
(625 ILCS 5/4-204)
8-7-5: RECORDS SEARCHES FOR OWNER:
   A.   Unknown Owner: When the Police Department does not know the identity of
the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person, they will
cause the motor vehicle registration records of the State of Illinois to be
searched by a directed communication to the Secretary of State for the purpose
of obtaining the required ownership information.
   B.   Search For Information: The Police Department authorizing the
impoundment shall cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the State Police to
be searched by a directed communication to the State Police for stolen or
wanted information of the vehicle. The information determined from these record
searches shall be used by the Police Department in sending notification by
certified mail to the owner, lienholder or legally entitled person advising
where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition to be made and setting
forth public sale information. (625 ILCS 5/4-205)
   C.   Identifying And Tracing Vehicle: When the registered owner, lienholder,
or other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other
vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files of this state or from
the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable, the Police Department
shall notify the State Police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle’s
owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to the possession of the
vehicle. The information obtained by the State Police shall be immediately
forwarded to the Police Department having custody of the vehicle for
notification purposes as set forth in subsection B of this section. (625 ILCS
5/4-206)
8-7-6: RECLAMATION OF VEHICLE:
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or
disposed of as provided in section
8-7-7 of this chapter, the owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled
to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the Police
Department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the
vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner, lienholder, or other
legally entitled person under this section until all towing and storage charges
have been paid. (625 ILCS 5/4-207)
8-7-7: SALE OF VEHICLE:
   A.   Owner Known:
      1.   Sale Authorized: Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed
motor vehicle or other vehicle seven (7) years of age or newer remains
unclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled
to its possession for a period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given
as provided herein, the Police Department having possession of the vehicle
shall cause it to be sold at public auction to a person licensed as an
automatic parts recycler, rebuilder or scrap processor under 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes chapter 5.
      2.   Notices:
         a.   Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a
conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the premises
where the vehicle has been impounded.
         b.   At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the police department
shall cause a notice of the time and place to be sent by certified mail to the
registered owner, lienholder, or other person known by the Police Department or
towing service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such
notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what
steps must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
         c.   In those instances where the certified notification specified
herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the Police Department due
to the addressee having moved or being unknown at the address obtained from the
registration records of this state, the sending of a second certified notice
shall not be required.
   B.   Owner Unknown: When the identity of the registered owner, lienholder,
or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost, or
unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by
any means provided in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided in this
section without notice to any person whose identity cannot be determined. (625
ILCS 5/4-209)
8-7-8: OLDER VEHICLES:
   A.   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is
impounded as specified by this chapter, it shall be kept in custody for a
minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining the identity of the
registered owner and lienholder and contacting the registered owner and
lienholder by the U.S. mail, public service or in person for a determination of
disposition; and an examination of the State Police stolen motor vehicle files
for theft and wanted information. (At the expiration of the ten (10) day period
without the benefit of disposition information being received from the
registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person, the Chief of
Police shall authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk.)
   B.   A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle may, however, be sold to a
person desiring to restore it.
(625 ILCS 5/4-209)
8-7-9: RECORDS KEPT:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the Police Department
is reclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled
person or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as
provided in this chapter, a report of the transaction shall be maintained by
the Police Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or
disposal.
8-7-10: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS:
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the village is authorized
to be towed away by the Police Department and disposed of as set forth in this
chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition, after the deduction of
towing, storage and processing charges, shall be deposited in the municipal
treasury. (625 ILCS 5/4-211)
8-7-11: NONLIABILITY OF VILLAGE OR TOWING SERVICE:
A law enforcement officer or agency or towing service owner, operator or
employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action
brought by the registered owner, former registered owner or his legal
representative, lienholder, or any other person legally entitled to the
possession of a vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of
as provided by this chapter. (625 ILCS 5/4-213)
8-7-12: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or aids and abets in the violation of this chapter,
upon conviction, shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and shall be required by the
court to make a disposition on the abandoned or unclaimed vehicle and pay all
towing and storage charges pursuant to this chapter. (625 ILCS 5/4-214)
CHAPTER 8: GOLF CARTS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
8-8-1: Definitions
8-8-2: Compliance With Village And State Regulations
8-8-3: Driver’s License And Age Requirements
8-8-4: Mandatory Insurance
8-8-5: Permit And Vehicle Requirements
8-8-6: Permitted And Prohibited Areas Of Operation
8-8-7: Method Of Riding; Seat Belt Required
8-8-8: Driving Under The Influence Prohibited
8-8-9: Transporting Alcoholic Beverages
8-8-10: Certain Nonhighway Vehicles Prohibited
8-8-11: Nonliability Of Village
8-8-12: Penalties
8-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms, as used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
VILLAGE: The Village of Spaulding, Sangamon County, Illinois.
GOLF CART: A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment
while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or
maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course
(625 ILCS 5/1-123.9). A GOLF CART is further defined as a “nonhighway vehicle”,
as set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1426.1.
RECREATIONAL OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE: Any motorized off highway device designed to
travel primarily off highway, sixty four inches (64") or less in width, having
a manufacturer’s dry weight of two thousand (2,000) pounds or less traveling on
four (4) or more nonhighway tires, designed with a nonstraddle seat and a
steering wheel for steering control, except equipment such as lawn mowers.
STREETS AND ROADWAYS UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF THE VILLAGE OF SPAULDING: All
those streets and roadways located within the corporate boundaries of the
Village of Spaulding, Illinois, and under the jurisdiction of the Village of
Spaulding, Sangamon County, Illinois.
8-8-2: COMPLIANCE WITH VILLAGE AND STATE REGULATIONS:
   A.   No person shall ride, drive, or operate any golf cart or recreational
off highway vehicle on any roadway or street located within the corporate limit
of the Village except as specifically set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Every golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle operated as
authorized in this chapter shall comply with any and all traffic regulations
found in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq.
8-8-3: DRIVER’S LICENSE AND AGE REQUIREMENTS:
A person may not operate a golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle upon
the streets and roadways unless he/she has a valid Illinois driver’s license
issued in his/her name by the Illinois Secretary of State, or a valid out of
State driver’s license issued in his/her name by the appropriate department/
agency of the State responsible for issuing drivers’ licenses and is at least
twenty one (21) years of age.
8-8-4: MANDATORY INSURANCE:
Any person who operates a golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle shall
be subject to the mandatory insurance requirements under article 6 of chapter 7
of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/7-601 et seq.), and shall provide
proof of such insurance at the time the permit is requested and at the time of
each annual renewal.
8-8-5: PERMIT AND VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
No golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle shall be operated on the
Village streets or roadways unless it is inspected and a permit is issued by
the Village. The Chief of Police, and/or his designee, shall be in charge of
the inspection. The golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle being
inspected must meet the specifications as set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1426.1(e). Those requirements are as follows:
   A.   No “nonhighway vehicle” (golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle)
may be operated on a roadway unless, at a minimum, it has the following:
steering wheel apparatus, tires, rearview mirror, red reflectorized warning
devices in the front and rear, slow moving emblem, as required of other
vehicles in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-709, on the rear of the
“nonhighway vehicle” (golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle), headlight
that emits a white light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to
the front, taillamp that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred
feet (100') from the rear, brake lights, and turn signals.
   B.   When operated on a street or roadway within the Village, the golf cart
or recreational off highway vehicle shall have its headlights and taillamps
lighted as required by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-201 entitled “when
lighted lamps are required”.
   C.   Provided the golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle passes
inspection and proof of insurance is provided, a permit shall be issued.
Permits shall be issued for a period of one year and will renew annually.
   D.   The cost of the permit will be fifty dollars ($50.00). The permit fee
shall be waived for all governmental or recognized not for profit entities.
   E.   A “nonhighway vehicle” (golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle)
must have a decal or registration approved by the Village on the rear of the
vehicle and must have a copy of the permit issued by the Village, valid
registration, and proof of valid insurance in the golf cart or recreational off
highway vehicle at all times and available for production at any time as
requested by any policing agency.
   F.   The Village may issue a temporary special event permit for use of golf
carts or recreational off highway vehicles that may not be in compliance with
the requirements of this chapter and that is valid and issued only during that
event.
8-8-6: PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED AREAS OF OPERATION:
   A.   1.   Golf carts or recreational off highway vehicles shall only be
allowed to be operated on those streets and roadways upon which the Village has
jurisdiction.
      2.   Golf carts or recreational off highway vehicles may not be operated
on Illinois State Route 54 or any other Illinois Department of Transportation
road.
      3.   Golf carts or recreational off highway vehicles shall not make a
direct crossing upon or across Illinois State Route 54 or any other Illinois
Department of Transportation road.
   B.   No person shall operate a golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle
upon any sidewalk located within the jurisdictional limits of the Village.
   C.   No person shall operate a golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle
in the Village parks other than parking areas.
   D.   The Village shall cause appropriate signs to be posted on those streets
and roadways where golf carts or recreational off highway vehicles are
authorized to be operated pursuant to this chapter and the State Statutes
referenced herein.
8-8-7: METHOD OF RIDING; SEAT BELT REQUIRED:
Any operator or passenger of a golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle
shall be in a sitting position and wearing a seat belt.
8-8-8: DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE PROHIBITED:
Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a golf cart or
recreational off highway vehicle on a roadway while under the influence is
subject to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501 through 5/11-502.
8-8-9: TRANSPORTING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
   A.   Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a golf cart
or recreational off highway vehicle on a roadway and who transports alcohol in
said golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle is subject to 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-502.
   B.   Any person who is a passenger in a golf cart or recreational off
highway vehicle on a roadway and who transports alcohol in said golf cart or
recreational off highway vehicle is subject to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-502.
8-8-10: CERTAIN NONHIGHWAY VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
This chapter shall not be deemed to authorize any other nonhighway vehicles, as
defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1426.1, to be operated on any
streets or roadways within the corporate boundaries of the Village upon which
the Village has jurisdiction (all-terrain vehicles or off highway motorcycles).
8-8-11: NONLIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
No action by the Village under this chapter or 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-1426.1 designates the operation of a golf cart or recreational off highway
vehicle as an intended or permitted use of property with respect to section 3-
102 of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act.
8-8-12: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any term or provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine, upon conviction, in an amount not less than seventy five dollars
($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each separate
offense. Any second or subsequent offense shall result in the revocation of the
permit for a period of not less than one nor more than three (3) years.
TITLE 9: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS GENERALLY   1
EXCAVATIONS   2
STREET IMPROVEMENTS   3
CULVERTS   4
DRIVEWAYS   5
VILLAGE PARKS   6
TREES AND SHRUBS   7
CHAPTER 1: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS GENERALLY
Section
9-1-1: Supervision
9-1-2: Responsibility Of Persons
9-1-3: Street Closures
9-1-4: Stormwater Drains
9-1-5: Obstructions Or Deposits On Public Ways
9-1-6: Posting Bills
9-1-7: Barbed And Electric Fences
9-1-8: Additional Prohibited Acts And Conditions
9-1-1: SUPERVISION:
The Village Board Committee on Streets shall exercise a general supervision
over the affairs of the Village streets. It shall ascertain the needs and
conditions thereof and shall, from time to time, report the same to the Mayor
and Village Board.
(1990 Code § 33-1-1)
9-1-2: RESPONSIBILITY OF PERSONS:
   A.   Open Doors Or Gratings Of Vaults: No person shall open or allow to
remain open, any door or the grating of any vault belonging to the Village.
(1990 Code § 33-2-2)
   B.   Stairway Railings: Steps or stairways leading into any building shall
not extend from the wall of such building onto any pavement or sidewalk, and in
such case, the person making or causing to be made such passage shall erect a
railing on the side of the stairs toward the street to prevent persons from
falling into the street.
(1990 Code § 33-2-4)
9-1-3: STREET CLOSURES:
Whenever public safety or the improvement or repair of any street, alley or
public place requires it, the Mayor may order any street, alley or public place
temporarily closed to traffic and the placing of signs indicating that the
street, alley or public place is closed by order of the Mayor. Whenever such
signs are so placed, no person shall ride or drive upon or cross such street,
alley or public place, or in any manner, destroy, deface or remove any such
sign.
(1990 Code § 33-2-5)
9-1-4: STORMWATER DRAINS:
   A.   Permit Requirements;
      1.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or permit the
construction of any stormwater drain or any drainage pipe in either a natural
or manmade ditch without having first obtained a permit therefor.
      2.   Application For Permit: Applications for such permits shall be made
to the Village Clerk and shall be accompanied by a statement as to the purpose
of such drainage pipe, the premises to be served and the specification of such
pipe to be installed.
      3.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit: Such application shall be referred to
the Street Superintendent, and no such permit shall be issued unless he shall
have found that there would be compliance with this Code by the installation of
such stormwater drain or drainage pipe and that the installation of such
stormwater drain or drainage pipe would not interfere with, overload, obstruct
or otherwise adversely affect the existing stormwater drainage system within
the Village.
   B.   Prohibited Places Of Discharge: It shall be unlawful to construct or
permit the construction of any stormwater drain which discharges water onto any
sidewalk in the Village, and it shall be unlawful to construct or permit the
maintenance of any such drain which discharges into any public street or alley
at a height greater than eighteen inches (18") above the ground or pavement.
(1990 Code § 33-2-10)
9-1-5: OBSTRUCTIONS OR DEPOSITS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Streets:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any material which may
be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any grass
clippings, or to cause a lawn mower to blow grass clippings onto a street or
any other articles such as glass which may cause injury to any person, animal
or property.
      2.   No person shall place or cause to be placed or erected on any public
ground, or in any public street, alley or sidewalk in the Village, any debris,
materials, or obstruction except as may be permitted by this Code.
      3.   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to exercise a vigilant
supervision over such places and to notify any person found making such deposit
or responsible for same to remove the offending matter at once.
(1990 Code § 33-2-9)
   B.   Sidewalks:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk, any material
which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any
glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals or
property.
      2.   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks
preparatory to delivery; provided, that the usable width is not thereby reduced
to less than four feet (4'); and provided, that no such article shall remain on
such walk for more than one-half (½) hour.
(1990 Code § 33-2-8)
   C.   Building Materials On Street And Sidewalks:
      1.   The Street Superintendent may move any obstruction on any street or
sidewalk of the Village, but before doing so, he shall notify the person
responsible therefor to remove such obstruction within a reasonable time after
being notified.
      2.   Any person engaged in erecting a building or fence or improving any
lot on any street may deposit materials thereon and contiguous to such length
of time as may be necessary for the work. The obstruction shall not extend to
more than one-half (½) of the width of the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent
to such improvement, and the gutter shall always be left free and unobstructed.
Such person shall, at night, keep an illuminated warning light on such
material.
(1990 Code § 33-2-11)
   D.   Merchandise, Advertisements On Public Ways And Property: It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any street, sidewalk, or
other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale;
or to write or make any signs or advertisements on any such pavements, unless
permission is granted by the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 33-2-12)
9-1-6: POSTING BILLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, paint, print or nail any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any curbstone,
flagstone, or any other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any tree,
lamppost, utility pole, or hydrant, or upon any private wall, door or gate
without the consent, in writing, of the owner of such curbstone, flagstone,
sidewalk, tree, lamppost, utility pole, hydrant, or private wall, door or gate.
(1990 Code § 33-2-14)
Cross-reference:
   See also section
7-2-6 of this Code
9-1-7: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or in
part of barbed wire, or with any similar material designed to cause injury to
persons, or any wire charged with electrical current, anywhere within fifty
feet (50') of any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public way or
place, unless such barbs or charged wire are at least six feet (6') above the
level of such public place or unless located in a zoned agricultural district.
(1990 Code § 33-2-17)
Cross-reference:
   See also subsection
12-12-3A of this Code
9-1-8: ADDITIONAL PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Undermining; Digging Vaults:
      1.   No person shall undermine in any manner, any street or any other
ground or real estate situated in the Village or belonging to any private
person.
(1990 Code § 33-2-1)
      2.   No person shall dig or cause to be dug in any street or sidewalk,
any vault without covering the opening thereof in such a manner as to prevent
persons, animals and vehicles from falling into the excavation. Such vault
shall be in conformance with other Code provisions.
(1990 Code § 33-2-3)
   B.   Signs Over Public Ways: No person shall place any sign, advertisement
or banner over any or across any street or alley in the Village unless he has
written approval of the Village Board. (1990 Code § 33-2-6)
   C.   Vehicles On Sidewalks: No person shall operate any vehicle over any
sidewalk, except in crossing the same to go into a yard or parking lot. (1990
Code § 33-2-7)
   D.   Encroachments: It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building
or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property. (1990 Code §
33-2-13)
   E.   Signs On Poles And Posts: No person shall nail, tack, paste, paint, or
fasten, or cause to be nailed, tacked, painted or fastened, any sign or any
other foreign substance or material onto any telephone, telegraph, electric
light, police, and/or fire alarm pole or post, or any street or traffic sign
located on any sidewalk, street, alley or public grounds, or injure or deface
any such pole or post. (1990 Code § 33-2-15)
   F.   Injury To New Pavements: It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any
vehicle or animal upon or destroy any newly-laid sidewalk pavement while the
same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any
soft, newly-laid pavement.
(1990 Code § 33-2-16)
   G.   Burning On Public Ways: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any
leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any of the public streets,
sidewalks, ditches or alleys of the Village.
(1990 Code § 33-2-18)
CHAPTER 2: EXCAVATIONS
Section
9-2-1: Permit Required; Application; Fees
9-2-2: Liability Insurance Or Bond
9-2-3: Deposit
9-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEES:
   A.   Permit Required; Review And Approval:
      1.   Except in cases of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to tunnel under or to make any excavation in any street,
alley or other public place in the Village without having obtained a permit.
      2.   All excavation plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Village
Engineer prior to permission being granted.
(1990 Code § 33-4-1)
      3.   Under this chapter, an “emergency” shall exist if breakage or
malfunction of a water or natural gas main or pipe, sanitary sewer or
electrical or telephone wire or conductor disrupts service and requires the
immediate opening on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public ground. In
such emergency, the utility company responsible for such service may proceed to
make necessary repairs without first obtaining a permit, but shall give verbal
and written notice of such emergency repairs, as soon as possible, to the
Village Police Department, to the Village Administrator, to the Mayor, or to
the Village Engineer. The disruption of television or internet service shall
not be considered an emergency under this chapter.
   B.   Application For Permit: Applications for such permits shall be made to
the Village Clerk and shall describe the location of the intended excavation or
tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, the person, firm or corporation
doing the actual excavating work and the name of the person, firm or
corporation for whom or for which the work is being done; and shall contain an
agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating
to the work to be done.
(1990 Code § 33-4-2)
   C.   Fees: The fee for such permits shall be as follows:
      1.   Excavation in asphalt or portland cement concrete pavement or
surface: One dollar ($1.00) per square foot.
      2.   Excavation in brick pavement or surface: One dollar ($1.00) per
square foot.
      3.   Excavation in oil treated street surface: One dollar ($1.00) per
square foot.
      4.   Excavation in untreated or unimproved street or surface: One dollar
($1.00) per square foot.
(1990 Code § 33-4-3)
9-2-2: LIABILITY INSURANCE OR BOND:
Before a permit is issued, the permit applicant shall supply a certificate of
insurance, a general liability insurance policy, or a surety bond, issued by a
company authorized to do business in Illinois. The limits for any such
insurance shall be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury
to each person, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury to all
persons in each accident, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property
damage claims. Further, such certificate or policy shall name the Village as an
additional insured and shall covenant to defend and indemnify the Village
against all claims arising from the excavation(s) or other work to be performed
by or for the permit holder. Alternately, a surety bond shall covenant that the
permit holder or surety will indemnify the Village for any defense costs and
for damages recovered from the Village arising from the excavation(s) or other
work to be performed by or for the permit holder.
9-2-3: DEPOSIT:
No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has
deposited with the Clerk a cash deposit in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00), if no pavement is involved, and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) if
the excavation is a paved area to ensure the proper restoration of the ground
and laying of the pavement, if any. From this deposit shall be deducted the
expense to the Village of relaying the surface of the ground or pavement and of
making the refill if this is done by the Village or at its expense.
(1990 Code § 33-4-5)
CHAPTER 3: STREET IMPROVEMENTS
Section
9-3-1: Sidewalks
9-3-2: Curbs And Gutters
9-3-1: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Grade: No sidewalk shall be built above or below the established grade
of the Village, and in all case where no grade is established, any person
building a sidewalk shall build the same according to the instructions of the
Village Board and the Village Engineer.
   B.   Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person to build, lay or construct
any sidewalk along any property in the Village or along any of the streets,
alleys or public highways thereon, without first obtaining permission from the
Village Board to do so.
   C.   Cost To Owner: If the funds are available and the Village Board
approves the request, the property owner shall pay the cost of the concrete and
thereafter, the sidewalk shall be constructed by the Village. The cost of
construction shall not include any engineering fees; these shall be paid by the
Village.
   D.   Subdivisions: This section is not applicable to new subdivisions.
(1990 Code § 33-5-1)
9-3-2: CURBS AND GUTTERS:
   A.   Written Request: Any person owning property within the Village who
desires to have new curbs and gutters constructed along the street adjoining
his premises shall file a written request with the Village Board, giving the
location of the property and the length of the curbs and gutters requested.
   B.   Cost To Owner: The property owner shall pay one hundred percent (100%)
of the cost of the construction and thereafter, the curb and gutter will be
maintained by the Village. The cost of construction shall not include any
Village engineering fees.
   C.   Approval By Village Board: The approval of the request for construction
of curbs and gutters by the Village Board, priority of projects and continuity
of construction for the best benefit of the Village as determined by the
Village Board and Village Engineer.
   D.   Subdivisions: This section is not applicable to new subdivisions.
(1990 Code § 33-5-2)
CHAPTER 4: CULVERTS
Section
9-4-1: Obstruction Of Drains Or Storm Sewers
9-4-2: Culvert Installation Or Replacement
9-4-1: OBSTRUCTION OF DRAINS OR STORM SEWERS:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain or storm sewer, if any, in any
public street or property.
(1990 Code § 33-6-1)
9-4-2: CULVERT INSTALLATION OR REPLACEMENT:
   A.   Permit Required:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to install any culvert or replace any culvert
without first obtaining a permit from the Village Board.
      2.   Thereafter, the Village Engineer will approve the culvert and the
Street Department shall install. The Village shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the culvert thereafter.
(1990 Code § 33-6-2)
   B.   Type Of Culvert: Culverts shall be installed where driveways or
walkways cross open ditches. The material used for the construction of the
culverts shall be reinforced concrete, corrugated steel culvert pipe with a
minimum wall thickness of 16 gauge, corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe with
a minimum wall thickness of 16 gauge, asbestos cement storm drain pipe (Class
IV), or of such other material as determined by the Village Board, depending on
the conditions existing. The culverts shall be a minimum of twelve inches (12")
in diameter, installed at the grade and constructed with couplings as
determined by the Village Engineer. The Village shall install the culvert.
(1990 Code § 33-6-3)
   C.   Replacement Cost: The expense of replacing any culvert shall be borne
by the person making application for the permit to install the culvert.
(1990 Code § 33-6-4)
CHAPTER 5: DRIVEWAYS
Section
9-5-1: Construction Permit Required
9-5-2: Grade Surface And Specifications
9-5-3: Maintenance
9-5-1: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles or animals across any
sidewalk in the Village without having first obtained permission of the Village
Board.
   B.   No permit for construction of a driveway for commercial use or for the
habitual use of other than the owner or occupant of the premises served shall
be issued except upon the order of the Village Clerk, with the approval of the
Village Board.
(1990 Code § 33-7-1)
9-5-2: GRADE SURFACE AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Grade Surface:
      1.   No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a step,
sharp depression, or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade shall be as
nearly as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to have the surface finish of any driveway
where the same crosses the sidewalk constructed of such materials as to render
it slippery and hazardous to pedestrians, or to have the grade of such portion
vary from the grade of the sidewalk or be other than level.
(1990 Code § 33-7-2)
   B.   Specifications: Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed in
compliance with the specifications required by the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 33-7-3)
9-5-3: MAINTENANCE:
It shall be the duty of the person maintaining the driveway to keep the same in
good repair where it crosses the sidewalk and to keep it free from obstruction
and openings.
(1990 Code § 33-7-4)
CHAPTER 6: VILLAGE PARKS
Section
9-6-1: Permit Requirements; Issuance Or Denial; Appeal
9-6-2: Destruction Of Park Property
9-6-3: Littering; Water Pollution
9-6-4: Fires In Parks
9-6-5: Picnics
9-6-6: Erection Of Structures
9-6-7: Signs
9-6-8: Animals
9-6-9: Motor Vehicles
9-6-10: Sales; Amusements For Gain
9-6-11: Group Activities
9-6-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL; APPEAL:
   A.   Application For Permit: Applications for all permits required by this
chapter shall be made in writing to the Mayor not less than seven (7) days
before the proposed date of the activity for which the permit is sought. Each
application shall include the following information:
      1.   Statement briefly describing the nature of the proposed activity;
      2.   Name, address, and telephone number of the person or organization
wishing to conduct such activity;
      3.   The date when such activity is to be conducted;
      4.   The hour when such activity will start and terminate;
      5.   The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired; and
      6.   An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(1990 Code § 28-1-11)
   B.   Decision On Permit Application: After due consideration of the
information contained in the permit application, but no later than seven (7)
days after the application has been filed, the Mayor shall determine whether
the application is satisfactory. An application shall be deemed satisfactory
if:
      1.   The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park;
      2.   The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the
day and hour requested in the application;
      3.   The conduct of such activity will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of traffic;
      4.   The proper policing of such activity will not require the diversion
of so great a number of police officers as to prevent normal police protection
to the remainder of the Village;
      5.   The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to cause
injury to persons or property, or to incite violence, crime or disorderly
conduct; and
      6.   Such activity is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising
any product, goods, or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit.
(1990 Code § 28-1-12)
   C.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit: By regular mail, by electronic
communication, or by telephone, the Mayor shall promptly notify every permit
applicant of the decision on his application.
      1.   If such decision is favorable, the Mayor shall issue the permit. As
a condition of the issuance of any permit, the Mayor may require that an
indemnity bond be obtained if, in his opinion, such bond is necessary to
protect the Village from liability or to protect Village property from damage.
      2.   The Mayor shall inform each applicant who has been denied a permit
regarding the reasons for the denial and the procedure for appeals.
(1990 Code § 28-1-13)
   D.   Appeal:
      1.   Any applicant who has been denied a park permit by the Mayor shall
have the right to appeal to the Park Committee.
      2.   Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Village Clerk, within
two (2) days after notice of a denial of an application for a permit, a written
statement setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The appeal shall
be heard by the Park Committee within five (5) days after such filing and their
decision shall be final.
(1990 Code § 28-1-14)
9-6-2: DESTRUCTION OF PARK PROPERTY:
Within the Village parks, no person except park personnel on official business
shall:
   A.   Cut, break, injure, destroy, take, or remove any tree, shrub, timber,
plant, or natural object.
   B.   Kill, cause to be killed, or pursue with intent to kill, any bird or
animal, except in areas where the Village has authorized hunting.
   C.   Wilfully mutilate, injure or destroy any building, bridge, table,
bench, fireplace, guidepost, notice, tablet, fence, monument, or other park
property or appurtenances.
(1990 Code § 28-1-1)
9-6-3: LITTERING; WATER POLLUTION:
   A.   No person shall deposit any trash within the Village parks except in
proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not
provided, all trash shall be carried away from the parks by the person
responsible for its presence, and be properly disposed of elsewhere.
   B.   No person shall discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in
the waters of any fountain, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent
to any park or in any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into
such waters, any substance or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result
in the pollution of said waters.
(1990 Code § 28-1-2)
9-6-4: FIRES IN PARKS:
   A.   No person shall light or use any unenclosed picnic fire within the
Village parks. Fires may be built only in fireplaces or on grills constructed
for that purpose in designated areas.
   B.   In camping areas, no person shall leave any campfire unattended by a
competent person.
   C.   Every person who has lighted or used any fire in a Village park shall
extinguish such fire before leaving the park.
(1990 Code § 28-1-3)
9-6-5: PICNICS:
No person shall picnic in the Village parks, except in areas designated for
that purpose. Park personnel are hereby authorized to regulate the activities
in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion or to secure the maximum
use, comfort, and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions
given to achieve this end.
(1990 Code § 28-1-4)
9-6-6: ERECTION OF STRUCTURES:
No person shall build or place any tent, building, booth, stand, or other
structure in or upon any Village park or other recreational facility unless he
has obtained a permit to do so from the Village.
(1990 Code § 28-1-5)
9-6-7: SIGNS:
No person shall place within any Village park or affix to any object therein
any sign or device designed to advertise any business, profession, exhibition,
event, or thing unless he has obtained a permit to do so from the Village.
(1990 Code § 28-1-6)
9-6-8: ANIMALS:
No person shall:
   A.   Bring any dangerous animal into any Village park;
   B.   Permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is on a leash; or
   C.   Ride or lead any horse in any Village park or recreational area except
upon paths or other ways expressly provided and posted for that purpose.
(1990 Code § 28-1-7)
9-6-9: MOTOR VEHICLES:
No person, other than Village personnel on official business, shall drive or
park any motor vehicle, including snowmobiles, in any Village park except on a
roadway or parking lot.
(1990 Code § 28-1-8)
9-6-10: SALES; AMUSEMENTS FOR GAIN:
Within the parks of the Village, no person shall, without first having obtained
a permit from the Village:
   A.   Sell or offer for sale any goods or services; or
   B.   Conduct any amusement for gain or for which a charge is made.
(1990 Code § 28-1-9)
9-6-11: GROUP ACTIVITIES:
Whenever any group or organization desires to use Village park facilities for a
particular purpose such as picnics, parties, exhibitions, or performances, a
representative of said group shall first obtain a permit for such activity from
the Village Mayor.
(1990 Code § 28-1-10)
CHAPTER 7: TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
9-7-1: Planting
9-7-2: Dangerous Trees
9-7-3: Poles And Wires
9-7-4: Gas Pipes
9-7-5: Prohibited Acts
9-7-1: PLANTING:
   A.   Permit Required; Village Board Approval:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in any public street
or parkway or other public place without having first secured a permit
therefor.
      2.   Applications for such permits shall be made to and approved by the
Village Board.
      3.   All trees and shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the
directions and approval of the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 33-3-1)
   B.   Location Restrictions: It shall be unlawful to plant any bushes, trees,
shrubs or other plants on the right-of-way of any public street, including in
the space on the right-of-way between the sidewalk and the adjacent street
pavement.
(1990 Code § 33-3-2)
9-7-2: DANGEROUS TREES:
   A.   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public
place in the Village at a height less than ten feet (10'), or in such a way as
to impede or interfere with traffic or travel on such public place shall be
trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises or of the premises on which such
tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease.
   B.   Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across
any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which
such tree grows or stands.
   C.   At the owner’s expense, the Village Board or designated representative
may trim or remove any tree or shrub so that the obstruction or danger to
traffic or passage shall be remedied.
(1990 Code § 33-3-6)
9-7-3: POLES AND WIRES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to attach any wires or rope to any tree or shrub
in any public street, parkway or other public place without the written
approval of the Village Board.
   B.   Any person or company given the right to maintain the poles and wires
in the streets, alleys or other public places in the Village shall, in the
absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires
and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs in such places so far as
may be possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed,
subject to the supervision of the Village Board or its designated
representative, so that no injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or
the shrubs and trees.
(1990 Code § 33-3-7)
9-7-4: GAS PIPES:
Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe in the Village shall, in the
absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such pipes
free from leaks so that no injury shall be done to any trees or shrubs.
(1990 Code § 33-3-8)
9-7-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Removal: It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub
or portion thereof in any street, parkway or other public place without the
written approval of the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 33-3-3)
   B.   Injury: It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in any
public place.
(1990 Code § 33-3-4)
   C.   Advertisements Or Notices: It shall be unlawful to attach any sign,
advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any street, parkway or other
public place.
(1990 Code § 33-3-5)
TITLE 10: BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
Chapter
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS   1
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS   2
FLOOD CONTROL   3
BUILDING CODE   4
CHAPTER 1: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Section
10-1-1: Dangerous Buildings Defined
10-1-2: Standards For Repair, Vacation Or Demolition
10-1-3: Dangerous Buildings Declared Nuisances
10-1-4: Authority Of Village Board Of Trustees
10-1-5: Disregarding Notices Or Orders; Penalty
10-1-6: Emergency Cases
10-1-7: Owner Absent From Village
10-1-8: Administrative Liability
10-1-9: Duties Of Police Department
10-1-10: Abatement Procedure
10-1-1: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS DEFINED:
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects
shall be deemed “dangerous buildings”:
   A.   Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
   B.   Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show significant damage or
deterioration of the supporting member or members, or significant damage or
deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering.
   C.   Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be
reasonably safe for the purpose used.
   D.   Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare
of the occupants or the people of the Village.
   E.   Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause
sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or
general welfare of those living therein.
   F.   Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate
to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who
live or may live therein.
   G.   Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means
of escape.
   H.   Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
and injure members of the public or property.
   I.   Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the
Village.
   J.   Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of any Building
Code of the Village, or any provision of the zoning ordinance of the Village.
   K.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which is dangerous
to the public health because of its construction, age, lack of proper repair or
any other cause or condition which causes or aids or may cause or aid in the
spread of disease, or the harboring and spread of rodents, insects or other
vermin, or garbage, debris, and other hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy
substances or materials, or which causes or may cause injury to the health of
the occupants of it or of neighboring structures.
   L.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of
faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause and
constitutes or creates a fire hazard.
   M.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of
its condition or because of lack of doors or windows is available to and is
frequented or may be frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are
not lawful occupants of such structure.
   N.   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which poses or
otherwise creates an attractive nuisance to children.
10-1-2: STANDARDS FOR REPAIR, VACATION OR DEMOLITION:
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Village Board of
Trustees in ordering repair, alteration, vacation, or demolition of buildings
or structures:
   A.   If any dangerous building or structure can reasonably be repaired so
that it will no longer exist in violation of this chapter, it shall be ordered
repaired.
   B.   If any dangerous building or structure is in such condition as to make
it dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants,
it shall be ordered to be vacated.
   C.   In any case where a dangerous building or structure is significantly
damaged, decayed, or deteriorated so as to reduce the fair market value of
building or structure by fifty percent (50%) or more, such building or
structure shall be demolished, and in all cases where a building or structure
cannot be repaired so as to no longer violate this chapter, such building or
structure shall be demolished.
   D.   In all cases where a dangerous building or structure constitutes a fire
hazard or exists in violation of any provision of this code or the statutes of
the State of Illinois, and such violations cannot be remedied or repaired, such
building or structure shall be demolished.
10-1-3: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS DECLARED NUISANCES:
Any and all dangerous buildings, uncompleted buildings, and abandoned buildings
are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Pursuant to section
10-1-4 of this chapter, the Village may repair, alter, order the vacation of,
demolish, or enclose or cause the repair, alteration, vacation, demolition, or
enclosure of any dangerous, uncompleted, or abandoned building within the
Village and may remove or cause the removal of garbage, debris, and other
hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or materials from such buildings
pursuant to section
11-31-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
10-1-4: AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
The Village Board or its appointee shall have the authority to:
   A.   Annual Inspections: Cause to be inspected annually, all public
buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial,
manufacturing or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether any
conditions exist which render such places a dangerous building within the terms
of this chapter. In order to investigate, confirm and report dangerous
buildings and structures, the Village President, the Village Trustee with
jurisdiction over building and zoning, or an otherwise appointed Village
official shall, upon proper identification, shall be permitted at any
reasonable hour and in a reasonable manner to visit and enter into or upon any
premises or property within the Village to make an examination thereof, if such
officer shall have reasonable grounds to believe that a building or structure
is dangerous.
   B.   Complaints Filed: Inspect any building, wall or structure about which
complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or
structure is or may be existing in violation of this chapter.
   C.   Fire District Reports: Inspect any building, wall or structure reported
by the fire district as potentially existing in violation of the terms of this
chapter.
   D.   Notice: Based upon an inspection of any building or structure in the
Village, the Village President, the Village Trustee with jurisdiction over
building and zoning, or an otherwise appointed Village official reasonably
determines that such building or structure is a “dangerous”, “uncompleted”, or
“abandoned” building as defined in this chapter, or is an “unsafe structure”,
structure having “unsafe equipment”, or constitutes a “structure unfit for
human occupancy” as those terms are defined in the International Property
Maintenance Code, such official may cause written notice to be served upon the
owner of such building or structure and the occupant thereof, if any, by
certified mail, registered mail, or personal service stating such
determination. If, upon diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of the
owner or owners of the building, including the lienholders of record, is not
ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or persons in whose name the real
estate was last assessed shall constitute sufficient notice. Notice by
certified or regular mail pursuant to this section shall be deemed complete
upon: 1) return receipt from the addressee, 2) return of the certified or
regular mail as “unclaimed” or “refused”, or 3) three (3) days after the date
of mailing if no return receipt or return of said notice is received by the
Village. Such notice shall state that the subject building or structure is
declared to constitute a dangerous condition, that such dangerous condition
must be removed or remedied by repairing, altering, or demolishing said
building or structure within thirty (30) days of the date of service of the
notice. Such notice may, but shall not be required to, provide that occupants
of the subject building or structure must vacate the subject building or
structure within five (5) calendar days of date of service of the notice, and
may not reoccupy the subject building or structure until repair or alteration
thereof is complete. Such notice may, but shall not be required to, be issued
in the following form:
      To (owner or occupant of the premises) of the premises known and
described as (insert physical address).
      You are hereby notified that pursuant to section
10-1-3 of this chapter, your building located at the above-described premises
has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after inspection by
(inspector name).
      The causes for this decision are (here insert the facts as to the
dangerous condition).
      You have thirty (30) days from the date of service of this notice, as
defined in section
10-1-4 of this chapter, to remedy this condition or demolish the building
immediately or the Village will proceed to take legal action to do so. (You are
required to vacate the premises within five (5) days of this notice, and may
not reoccupy the premises until completion of the repairs and alterations
necessary to remedy the dangerous conditions described above.)
      You may also be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) per day nor more than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) per
day for each day the building or structure exists in a dangerous condition. In
addition, the Village may further avail itself of all of the remedies set forth
in section
11-31-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
   E.   Description; Compliance Time Limit: The notice provided as set forth in
this chapter shall include a description of the building or structure deemed
dangerous, a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure
a dangerous building, and an order requiring the same to be put in such
condition as to comply with the terms of this chapter within thirty (30) days.
   F.   Unknown Address Of Owner: If the owner, or address of the owner, of a
dangerous building or structure is unknown, service of any notice provided for
in this chapter may be made by posting a copy thereof on the premises and by
publishing one time a copy thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within
the Village.
   G.   Notice Upon Building: A notice shall be placed upon all buildings and
structures deemed to be a dangerous building by the Village Board stating
substantially as follows:
This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the Village Board or
its appointee. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired,
altered, or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given the
owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent of this building. This building
shall not be occupied until repair or alteration is complete. It is unlawful to
remove this notice prior to completion of the ordered repair or alteration.
   H.   Failure To Comply: If any person receiving notice pursuant to this
chapter fails to comply with said notice within thirty (30) days from the date
of service, the Zoning Administrator, the Village President, the Village
Trustee with jurisdiction over building and zoning, or an otherwise appointed
Village official, may proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous
building pursuant to the process established in section
11-31-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code and seeking any or all remedies
available thereunder, including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   A judicial order authorizing the Village to demolish, alter, or
repair the building or structure or to remove garbage, debris, and other
hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or materials from the building or
structure if the owner or owners of the building or structure, including the
lienholders of record, after at least thirty (30) days' written notice by mail
to do so, have failed to put the building in a safe condition or to demolish
it.
      2.   A fine as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
      3.   A judicial order requiring the owner or owners of record demolish,
alter, or repair the building or to remove garbage, debris, and other
hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or materials from the building.
      4.   a.   A judgment against the owner or other person causing any
dangerous condition for the payment of the Village’s costs and reasonable
attorney fees in connection with the Village’s enforcement of this chapter.
         b.   It shall not be a defense in any action brought pursuant to this
chapter that the building is boarded up or otherwise enclosed, although the
court may order the defendant to have the building boarded up or otherwise
enclosed.
   I.   Fines: It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any
dangerous building or structure in the Village and it shall be unlawful for a
record owner, occupant or person in custody of any dangerous building or
structure to permit the same to remain in a dangerous condition, permit
occupancy thereof, or occupy said building or structure while it is or remains
in a dangerous condition. Any person in violation of this section shall be
subject to a fine as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a building shall exist in a dangerous condition
shall constitute a separate offense.
   J.   Additional Remedies: In addition to all other actions authorized by
this chapter, the Village Board may regulate buildings and structures pursuant
to any and all provisions of this Code and the Illinois Municipal Code,
including but not limited to: section
11-31-1, authorizing imposition of a lien when the Village is compelled to take
action; and section
11-31-2, authorizing an injunction to require compliance with building, fire,
health and safety standards.
10-1-5: DISREGARDING NOTICES OR ORDERS; PENALTY:
   A.   Any owner or owners of any dangerous building or structure, including
the lienholders of record, failing to comply with any notice provided pursuant
to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   B.   Any occupant or lessee in possession failing to comply with any notice
to vacate a dangerous building or structure in accordance with any notice
provided pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   C.   Any person removing a notice posted pursuant to this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
10-1-6: EMERGENCY CASES:
In any case where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the
life, health, or safety of any person due to the existence of a “dangerous”,
“uncompleted”, or “abandoned” building or structure as defined in this chapter,
or is an “unsafe structure”, structure having “unsafe equipment”, or “structure
unfit for human occupancy” as those terms are defined in the International
Property Maintenance Code, the Village Board shall cause the immediate repair,
alteration, vacation, or demolition of such building or structure. The cost of
such emergency repair, alteration, vacation, or demolition of such building or
structure shall be collected in the same manner as provided in this chapter.
10-1-7: OWNER ABSENT FROM VILLAGE:
In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee or
mortgagee is or is reasonably determine to be absent from the Village, all
notices or orders provided for herein shall be sent by certified mail to the
owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest in
said building as shown by the grantor or grantee indices or other records
maintained by the Sangamon County Clerk and ex officio Recorder of Deeds to the
last known address of each, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the building or structure to which it relates. Such
mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate notice.
10-1-8: ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY:
No officer, agent or employee of the Village shall render himself personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any
act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter.
Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the Village as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under
this chapter shall be defended by the Village Attorney until the final
determination of the proceedings therein.
10-1-9: DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT:
The employees of the Police Department shall make a report in writing to the
Zoning Administrator of all buildings or structures which are, may be or are
suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms of this chapter. Such
reports must be delivered to the Zoning Administrator within twenty four (24)
hours of the discovery of such buildings by any employee of the Police
Department.
10-1-10: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
Whenever it is determined by the Village that a nuisance exists, the abatement
procedure shall be followed.
CHAPTER 2: MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section
10-2-1: Definitions
10-2-2: Requirements Concerning Immobilized Mobile Homes
10-2-3: Permit To Locate Outside Mobile Home Park
10-2-4: Lot Size And Distance
10-2-5: Location Of Dependent Mobile Homes
10-2-6: Concrete Pads
10-2-7: Off-Street Parking
10-2-8: Mobile Home Parks
10-2-8-1: Administration Requirements
10-2-8-2: Design And Construction Requirements
10-2-8-3: Lot size; Miscellaneous Restrictions
10-2-8-4: License Fee
Cross-reference:
   See also title 12, chapter 7, article C of this Code
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
AFFIDAVIT: An oath in writing, sworn before and attested by an individual who
has authority to administer an oath.
APPLICANT: Any person making application for a license or permit.
IMMOBILIZED MOBILE HOME: Any structure resting on a permanent foundation with
wheels, tongue and hitch permanently removed. The Village Board establishes the
following criteria to complete the immobilization of a mobile home:
   A.   The foundation shall extend into the ground below the frost line so as
to attach and become a part of the real estate. Materials such as concrete,
mortared concrete block, or mortared brick extending into the ground below the
frost line shall satisfy the requirement for a permanent foundation.
   B.   As an alternate to subsection A of this definition, piers may be used,
extending into the ground below the frost line, and sufficient in number to
properly support the mobile home.
   C.   To complete the immobilization, wheels, tongue and hitch must be
permanently removed. Axles may be removed.
LICENSE: A license certificate issued by the Village, allowing a person to
operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this chapter
and the rules and regulations issued hereunder.
LICENSEE: Any person having a license or permit under this chapter.
MOBILE HOME: A structure designed for permanent habitation and so constructed
as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently attached to
its frame, from the place of its construction to the location or subsequent
locations at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and designed to
permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more persons;
provided, that any such structure resting on a permanent foundation with
wheels, tongue and hitch permanently removed shall not be construed as a MOBILE
HOME, but shall be an IMMOBILIZED MOBILE HOME. A mobile home should not be
confused with a camping trailer or recreational vehicle.
MOBILE HOME, DEPENDENT: A mobile home or travel trailer which does not have a
flush toilet or a bathtub or shower.
MOBILE HOME, DOUBLEWIDE: Consists of two (2) mobile units joined at the side
into a single home, but kept on their separate chassis for repeated
transportation to a site.
MOBILE HOME, INDEPENDENT: A mobile home with self-contained toilet and bath or
shower facilities.
(1990 Code § 23-1-1)
10-2-2: REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING IMMOBILIZED MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   All immobilized mobile homes located in the Village shall be classed as
real estate; therefore, it is mandatory for all persons owning, operating,
renting or leasing an existing mobile home outside a mobile home park to remove
or cause to have removed the wheels or any other transportation device from the
mobile home. The owner or lessor shall permanently fix it to the ground in a
manner that conforms to the definition of an IMMOBILIZED MOBILE HOME in section
10-2-1 of this chapter.
   B.   All existing mobile homes, when replaced, shall comply with the
immobilization provisions of this chapter.
(1990 Code § 23-2-1)
10-2-3: PERMIT TO LOCATE OUTSIDE MOBILE HOME PARK:
   A.   All persons seeking to locate or replace a mobile home or an
immobilized mobile home outside a mobile home park shall obtain a permit from
the Village Board. No utility services shall be connected to the unit until the
Village Board has issued the permit.
   B.   All units located outside a licensed mobile home park shall be on a lot
owned by the person seeking the permit.
(1990 Code § 23-2-2)
10-2-4: LOT SIZE AND DISTANCE:
   A.   The minimum lot size for the location of a mobile home or an
immobilized mobile home shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
   B.   All units shall be at least fifteen feet (15') from any lot line,
twenty five feet (25') from any building on any adjacent lot or twenty five
feet (25') from any street.
   C.   Only one unit shall be permitted per platted lot.
(1990 Code § 23-2-3)
10-2-5: LOCATION OF DEPENDENT MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   No dependent mobile home shall be permitted in the Village unless
located in a licensed travel trailer park.
   B.   At no time shall anyone use a dependent mobile home as a permanent
residence or dwelling.
(1990 Code § 23-2-4)
10-2-6: CONCRETE PADS:
All immobilized mobile homes shall be placed on either a reinforced concrete
pad at least fourteen feet wide by sixty feet in length (14' x 60'), two (2)
reinforced concrete runners four feet wide and sixty feet in length (4' x 60'),
or on concrete piers approved by the Village Board. The concrete pads shall
consist of four inches (4") of reinforced concrete or six inches (6") of
concrete. A concrete footing is optional. All piers and footings for
immobilized mobile homes shall comply with the definition of the same.
Expandable units shall be provided with approved piers or their equivalent at
each corner of the units.
(1990 Code § 23-2-5)
10-2-7: OFF-STREET PARKING:
Each owner of an immobilized mobile home shall provide for a dustless, off-
street parking area of four hundred (400) square feet.
(1990 Code § 23-2-6)
10-2-8: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
10-2-8-1: ADMINISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Compliance With Statutes; Applicability Of Section:
      1.   Every mobile home park hereafter established in the Village shall,
at a minimum, conform to the requirements of:
         a.   The “Mobile Home Park Act”, 210 Illinois Compiled Statutes 115/
1 et seq.
         b.   The “Rules and Regulations for Mobile Home Parks”, Illinois
Department of Public Health, Consumer Protection Division as now or hereafter
amended.
         c.   This Code (see title 12, chapter 7, article C of this Code).
      2.   In case of conflict between any provisions of subsections A1a, A1b
and A1c of this section, the more stringent requirement shall prevail.
      3.   Mobile home parks may be allowed by special use permit in the
Village, but are otherwise strictly prohibited.
(1990 Code § 23-3-1)
   B.   Planning: Any person seeking to establish, operate, alter or expand a
mobile home park shall obtain a permit to construct or license to operate a
mobile home park. CONSTRUCT OR OPERATE A MOBILE HOME PARK, as used in this
chapter shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, supplying or
maintaining common water, sewer or other utility supply or service, or the
collection of rents directly or indirectly from two (2) or more independent
mobile homes. (All plans shall be submitted to the Village Board for approval
prior to the granting of a permit.)
(1990 Code § 23-3-2)
   C.   Local Government Requirements: A permit does not relieve the applicant
from complying with this Code or other ordinances applicable thereto.
(1990 Code § 23-3-3)
   D.   Permits: The Village Board shall review each application and plan
documents submitted. When the application and plan documents are found to be in
compliance with the "Rules and Regulations for Mobile Home Parks", as
promulgated by the Illinois Department of Public Health, the Village Board may
issue to the applicant the proper permit to construct or alter a mobile home
park. Permits shall be valid for one year from the date of issue.
(1990 Code § 23-3-4)
   E.   Inspection Of Mobile Home Park: Upon completion of the proposed
construction of a mobile home park or the proposed alteration of a mobile home
park, the applicant shall notify the Mayor in order that an inspection of the
complete facilities can be made.
(1990 Code § 23-3-5)
   F.   Violation Proceedings:
      1.   License Revocation Or Suspension; Notice: Any license granted
hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the Mayor. However,
the Mayor shall first serve or cause to be served upon the licensee a written
notice in which shall be specified the way or ways in which such licensee has
failed to comply with the statutes, or any rules or regulations promulgated by
the Village pertaining thereto.
      2.   Abatement; Time Limit: The notice shall require the licensee to
remove or abate such nuisance, unsanitary or objectionable condition specified
in such notice within five (5) days or within a longer period of time as may be
allowed by the Mayor. If the licensee fails to comply with the terms and
conditions of the notice within the time specified or such extended period of
time, the Mayor may revoke or suspend such license.
(1990 Code § 23-3-6)
   G.   Fees: Each mobile home that locates on a lot in a mobile home park
shall secure an appropriate building permit from the Village. All future
locations on the same lot shall be exempt from the permit fee.
(1990 Code § 23-3-7)
10-2-8-2: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Plan Document: In order to obtain a permit to construct or an original
license to operate a mobile home park, the applicant shall file with the Mayor
a written application and plan documents, and such plan documents shall be
prepared by a registered engineer or architect licensed to practice in the
State of Illinois, with registration seal affixed. Two (2) copies of the plan
document shall accompany the application filed with the Village to obtain a
permit to construct or alter a mobile home park or an original license to
operate a mobile home park, not previously licensed by the Illinois Department
of Public Health. These plans shall include, but not be limited to, the design
and construction criteria set forth herein.
(1990 Code § 23-3-10)
   B.   Application: The application shall be completed by the applicant and
the engineer or architect and shall include:
      1.   The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, or names
and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a partnership, or the names
and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the
present or last occupation of the applicant at the time of the filing of the
application. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the certificate of
incorporation must be filed with the application.
      2.   The proposed method of lighting any structures and land upon which
the mobile home park is to be located.
      3.   The plot plans of the mobile home park, building plans and
specifications for existing buildings and facilities, and the plans and
specifications for new buildings and facilities or the proposed alterations in
existing facilities.
      4.   An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters
contained in the application shall be attached.
(1990 Code § 23-3-11)
      5.   Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for a permit to construct or an application fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for a permit to alter or increase the size of the park.
(1990 Code § 23-3-11; amd. 2019 Code)
   C.   Location:
      1.   Sites selected for mobile home development shall be well drained and
free from topographical or geological hindrances and from other conditions
unfavorable to a proper residential environment. The mobile home development
shall not be located near swamps, marshes, or other breeding places of insects,
rats and mice. When a good, natural drainage is not available, storm drainage
shall be provided, and such drainage shall not endanger any water supply or
surface watercourse.
      2.   The Mayor may conduct a site survey to ascertain that the proposed
location complies with the requirements of subsection A of this section.
(1990 Code § 23-3-12)
   D.   Roadways And Parking:
      1.   All streets and driveways in every park shall be constructed in
compliance with the subdivision regulations of this Code (see title 13 of this
Code).
      2.   All streets constructed in parks shall have a minimum road width of
thirty feet (30') for the purpose of this chapter. and shall be considered
local streets. If a mobile home park has more than fifty (50) units, then a
thirty two foot (32') width may be required by the Village Board.
      3.   When sidewalks and walkways are constructed abutting a street in a
mobile home park, they shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in width; provided,
however, there shall be no minimum width requirement for sidewalks for each
individual lot. No portion of a mobile home shall block, in any way, the
pedestrian traffic on the walkways.
(1990 Code § 23-3-13)
10-2-8-3: LOT SIZE AND MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size for a mobile home pad shall be six
thousand (6,000) square feet.
(1990 Code § 23-3-16)
   B.   Miscellaneous Restrictions:
      1.   No mobile home parked in a mobile home park shall be immobilized.
      2.   Not more than one mobile home shall be parked in one space.
      3.   No travel trailer shall be permitted in any mobile home park.
(1990 Code § 23-3-17)
10-2-8-4: LICENSE FEE:
   A.   The annual license fee per mobile home park shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) and shall be due and payable on or before May 1 of each year.
   B.   The funds shall be placed in the General Fund and be applied to the
administrative cost of the inspections.
(1990 Code § 23-3-20)
CHAPTER 3: FLOOD CONTROL
Section
10-3-1: Purpose
10-3-2: Definitions
10-3-3: Base Flood Elevation
10-3-4: Duties Of Mayor
10-3-5: Development Permit
10-3-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
10-3-7: Protecting Buildings
10-3-8: Subdivision Requirements
10-3-9: Public Health And Other Standards
10-3-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
10-3-11: Variances
10-3-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
10-3-13: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
10-3-14: Penalty
10-3-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the Village by
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-
8 and 5/11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   A.   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   B.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   C.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   D.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   E.   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   F.   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   G.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate floodwater and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
10-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
10-3-3 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tanks,
that is principally aboveground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the Village or can put
special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood
protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous materials storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
      1.   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
      2.   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
      3.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
      4.   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts
or similar projects;
   5.   Construction or erection of levees, dams walls or fences;
      6.   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
      7.   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of floodwaters or surface waters.
   B.   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings
and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date hereof.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within
the Village. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
(1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the Village of Spaulding,
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of Spaulding, or that may be
annexed into the Village of Spaulding, that are subject to inundation by the
base flood. The floodplains of the Village of Spaulding are generally
identified as such on panel number(s) 260 of the Countywide Flood Insurance
Rate Map of Sangamon County, Illinois, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated 8/2/2007. "Floodplain" also includes those areas of
known flooding as identified by the Village. The floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Sangamon County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Village of Spaulding or that may be annexed into the
Village of Spaulding are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map prepared for Sangamon County by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated 8/2/2007.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of The Sangamon River shall be as
delineated on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Sangamon County
prepared by FEMA and dated 8/2/2007. The floodways for each of the remaining
floodplains of the Village of Spaulding shall be according to the best data
available from the Federal, State, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   C.   Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water Resources.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
10-3-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National Flood Insurance Program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced or
after the effective date hereof and includes any subsequent improvements of
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date hereof.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Food Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement, was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The “actual start”
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, “actual
start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of any building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the effective date hereof equals
or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes “repetitive
loss buildings”.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
   A.   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure taking place subsequent to the effective date hereof in which the
cumulative percentage of improvements:
      1.   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started; or
      2.   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
   B.   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure.
   C.   The term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
   D.   The term does not include:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
required Federal, State, and/or local permits and elevation certification is
presumed to be in violation until such time as the documentation is provided.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
10-3-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   A.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Sangamon River and
others shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Countywide
Flood Insurance Study of Sangamon County, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated 8/2/2007.
   B.   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH Zone”
or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the Countywide
Flood Insurance Rate Map of Sangamon County.
   C.   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an “A Zone” on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of
Sangamon County shall be according to the best data available from Federal,
State or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must
be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   D.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Sangamon County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Village, or that may be annexed into the Village, shall be
as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of
Sangamon County, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
8/2/2007.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
10-3-4: DUTIES OF MAYOR:
The Mayor shall be responsible for the general administration of this chapter
and to ensure that all development activities within the floodplains under the
jurisdiction of the Village meet the requirements of this chapter.
Specifically, the Mayor shall:
   A.   Process development permits in accordance with section
10-3-5 of this chapter;
   B.   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
10-3-6 of this chapter;
   C.   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
10-3-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the as-built elevation
of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   D.   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
10-3-8 of this chapter;
   E.   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
10-3-9 of this chapter;
   F.   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
10-3-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   G.   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
10-3-14 of this chapter as is necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   H.   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, State, and Federal permits;
   I.   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse;
   J.   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   K.   Cooperate with State and Federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   L.   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies
of State and Federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development
activities subject to this chapter;
   M.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain,
and
   N.   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
10-3-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not
exempted by law shall commence any development in the floodplain without first
obtaining a development permit from the Mayor. The Mayor shall not issue a
development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements
of this chapter.
   B.   Application For Permit: The application for development permit shall be
accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
10-3-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   C.   Actions By Mayor:
      1.   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the Mayor
shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any
development located on land that can be shown by survey data to be higher than
the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled after the date
of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map is not in the floodplain and
therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any
development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and
hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map,
is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   The Mayor shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification. The Mayor shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other Federal, State, and local permits, approvals or permit-not-
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The Mayor
shall not issue a permit unless all other Federal, State, and local permits
have been obtained.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
10-3-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   A.   Standards For Certain Activities: Except as provided in subsection B of
this section, no development shall be allowed which, acting in combination with
existing and anticipated development, will cause any increase in flood heights
or velocities or threat to public health and safety. The following specific
development activities shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources Statewide Permit Number 2:
         a.   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one foot (1').
         b.   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half foot (0.5') at a point one thousand
feet (1,000') upstream of the proposed structure.
         c.   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile.
         d.   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel.
         e.   The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the State of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/
OWR permit.
         f.   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 3:
         a.   The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells, or other
similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers.
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 4:
         a.   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
         b.   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
         c.   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream.
         d.   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris.
         e.   All disturbed areas shall be returned to preconstruction grades
and revegetated.
         f.   All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electrical Safety
Code, and Federal requirements must be met.
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 5:
         a.   The boat dock must not extend more than fifty feet (50') into a
waterway and no more than one-fourth (1/4) of the width of the waterway and
shall not extend beyond the navigational limits established by the IDNR and
Corps of Engineers.
         b.   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet (10').
         c.   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
landowner's shoreline frontage nor fifty feet (50').
         d.   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet (10') of the projected
property line.
         e.   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
         f.   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water.
         g.   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with flotation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
         h.   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill.
         i.   Nonfloating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which will
minimize obstruction to flow.
         j.   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or Corp of Engineers.
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6: The following activities (not involving
fill or positive change in grade) are covered by this permit:
         a.   The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or septic
tanks not crossing a lake or stream.
         b.   The construction of light poles, signposts, and similar
structures.
         c.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures.
         d.   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures
such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports.
         e.   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten (10) square feet in any dimension.
Only one such building on a property is authorized by this Statewide permit.
         f.   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are made
to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7:
         a.   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end-section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection.
         b.   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour velocity
of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the use of
riprap or other design measures.
         c.   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation.
         d.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8:
         a.   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of the
river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet (3') of cover shall be provided.
The riverbed, lake bed or streambed shall be returned to its original
condition.
         b.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized, upon completion of construction.
         c.   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause "water
pollution", as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5), shall
be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be
crossed.
         d.   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days prior
to the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9:
         a.   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric-formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. “Urban
areas” are defined as: areas of the State where residential, commercial, or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten (10) years. (The Department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban).
         b.   In addition to the materials listed in subsection A8a of this
section, other materials (e.g., tire revetments) may be utilized in rural
areas, provided all other conditions of this permit are met.
         c.   The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto
bodies, garbage or debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause “water
pollution”, as defined by the Environmental Protection Act.
         d.   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one thousand
feet (1,000').
         e.   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
         f.   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project.
         g.   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of the
bank.
         h.   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full-width
and cross-sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site. For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe
of the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the cross-sectional
area of the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent (10%) nor the
volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of the
stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and
to lessen the quantity of material required.
         i.   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
         j.   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         k.   In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless: 1) it is constructed in alignment with an
existing seawall(s) or gabion structure(s), and 2) the volume of material
placed, including the structure, would not exceed two (2) cubic yards per
linear foot.
         l.   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, State, and
Federal laws and rules, and shall not be placed in a floodway.
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10:
         a.   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
         b.   The principal structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
         c.   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred
(500) square feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another
property, and must not involve the placement of any fill material.
         d.   No construction shall be undertaken in, or within fifty feet
(50') of, the bank of the stream channel.
         e.   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions.
         f.   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing structure
shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition must be
submitted to the IDNR/OWR for review.
         g.   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of the IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11:
         a.   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed one thousand feet (1,000').
         b.   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel.
         c.   The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
         d.   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            (1)   Removed from the floodway;
            (2)   Used to stabilize an existing bank, provided no materials
would be placed higher than the existing top of bank, and provided the cross-
sectional area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than ten
percent (10%), nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per
linear foot of streambank;
            (3)   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain
area such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            (4)   Used to stabilize an existing levee, provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            (5)   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
Department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
            (6)   Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         e.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the streambanks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of the IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 12:
         a.   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            (1)   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the
backwater induced by the existing structure; and
            (2)   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         b.   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects, the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
         c.   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100- year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by the IDNR/OWR.)
         d.   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the Department's Statewide Permit Number 9 (Minor Shoreline, Channel and
Streambank Protection Activities) or Statewide Permit Number 11 (Minor
Maintenance Dredging Activities).
         e.   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the conditions of this
subsection A11.
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of the IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 13:
         a.   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has received all required Federal, State and local
authorizations.
         b.   The term “temporary” shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
         c.   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
         d.   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any
channel or floodway.
         e.   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or stream
channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents that
the temporary structure will meet the requirements of Special Condition Number
3 of this Statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum,
confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the backwater
induced by the temporary structure.
         f.   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with subsection A12e of this
section.
         g.   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
         h.   Materials used for the project shall not cause "water pollution",
as defined by the Environmental Protection Act.
      13.   Any development determined by the IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State floodway permit
requirements.
   B.   Other Development Activities: Other development activities not listed
in subsection A of this section may be permitted only if:
      1.   A permit has been issued for the work by the IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an the IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
10-3-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   A.   All Buildings: In addition to the damage prevention requirements of
section
10-3-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the effective date hereof. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the effective date hereof. If
substantially damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in section
10-3-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Residential Or Nonresidential Buildings: Residential or nonresidential
buildings can meet the building protection requirements by one of the following
methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent landfill in accordance
with the following;
         a.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
         b.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
         c.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure;
         d.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material; and
         e.   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties, and, when necessary, stormwater management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         a.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters.
         b.   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         c.   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation.
         d.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation, provided they are waterproofed;
            (3)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space; or
            (4)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation; provided, that the following conditions are met:
         a.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         b.   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
         c.   The interior grade of the craw space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.
         d.   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four feet
(4') at any point.
         e.   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event.
         f.   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
         g.   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   C.   Nonresidential Buildings: Nonresidential buildings may be structurally
dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation), provided a licensed professional
engineer or architect certifies that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   D.   Manufactured Homes: Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be
permanently installed on site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection B of this section; and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile
Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois Administrative Code section
870.
   E.   Travel Trailers And Recreational Vehicles: Travel trailers and
recreational vehicles on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per
year shall meet the elevation requirements of subsection D of this section
unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      5.   The vehicle’s largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model.
      10.   Must either:
         a.   Be entirely be supported by jacks; or
         b.   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   F.   Garages, Sheds And Other Accessory Structures: Garages, sheds or other
minor accessory structures constructed ancillary to an existing residential use
may be permitted, provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate State and/or Federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) in market value or replacement cost, whichever is greater, or less
than five hundred (500) square feet.
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
10-3-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The Mayor shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are
known, in all official actions related to land management use and development.
   B.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of sections
10-3-6 and 10-3-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall
include the following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain. Where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      3.   A signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2). Streets, blocks lots, parks and
other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to
preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible, the
floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
10-3-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   A.   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
10-3-6 and 10-3-7 of this chapter, the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
10-3-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation, whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   B.   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not
to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
10-3-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained. In addition, the Village shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
10-3-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Board of Trustees for a
variance. The Board of Trustees shall review and make a determination on the
applicant's request for a variance. The Board of Trustees may attach such
conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the
intent of this chapter.
   A.   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all
of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP.
      7.   All other State and Federal permits have been obtained.
   B.   The Board of Trustees shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of the building protection standards of section
10-3-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   C.   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
10-3-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
the definition of “historic structures” in section
10-3-2 of this chapter, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
10-3-6 and 10-3-7 of this chapter, subject to the conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
10-3-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the Village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
made lawfully hereunder.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
10-3-13: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Village to
fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program. However, this
chapter does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve
eligibility in the program. Nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair
any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and
other ordinance easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
10-3-14: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Board of Trustees may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The
Board of Trustees shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   A.   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The Village shall make application to the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the Court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
      4.   The Village shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property.
   B.   The Village shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended. The Board of
Trustees is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the
subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing, indicate the
reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve
the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit. No site development permit shall be
permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the Board of
Appeals. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and
shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation;
and
      2.   the time and place of the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee
shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on their behalf. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Trustees shall determine whether the
permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   C.   Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 2007-6-1, 6-7-2007)
CHAPTER 4: BUILDING CODE 1
Section
10-4-1: Adoption of Various Codes by Reference; Penalties
10-4-2: Building Permits and Fees
10-4-3: Contractor Registration
10-4-4: Inspection
10-4-5: Grandfather Clause
 
Notes
1 1. (SOURCE: 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq.; Ord. No. 2014-8-2; 1990 Code § 40-3-2.4
  and § 40-3-2.5)
10-4-1: ADOPTION OF VARIOUS CODES BY REFERENCE; PENALTIES:
   A.   Codes Adopted: The International Building Code, 2006 edition, and all
amendments thereto, and the International Residential Code, 2006 edition, both
published by the International Code Council, Inc., are hereby adopted by
reference as and for the building code of the Village, pursuant to the
provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3-1 et seq.; provided, that any
reference in said codes to the "building official" shall be read as meaning the
Building Official of the Village or its designee; and provided further, that in
the event any of the provisions of said codes are in conflict with State law or
with any other ordinance of the Village, the State law or other Village
ordinance shall prevail. In addition, the following codes as utilized by the
Sangamon County Department of Public Health are adopted by reference: 1997
Illinois Accessibility Code or the most current edition by State statute; 2004
Illinois Plumbing Code or the most current edition by statute; 2005 National
Electrical Code; 2009 International Energy Conservation Code.
   B.   Copies on File: The Village Clerk shall place on file three (3) copies
of each code adopted in subparagraph A above and shall make such codes
available for public use, inspection, and examination.
   C.   Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
the codes adopted by this Chapter 4 shall be subject to a Class B violation and
fine as provided in section
1-4-13 of this Code. Each day any violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 2021-1-1, 1-11-2021)
10-4-2: BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES:
   A.   Building Permit Required: Any person, prior to beginning work on any of
the items listed below, shall obtain a building permit from the Village.
      1.   New structures, changing the footprint or roof profile of any
structure; and/or
      2.   New driveways, sidewalks, retaining walls with exposed face of
twenty inches (20") high, swimming pools, outdoor kitchens, built in
fireplaces, or fences more than twenty inches (20") high measuring from the
ground; or changing the footprint or height of any of these listed items; and/
or
      3.   Any construction, modification, maintenance or repair that requires
installation or relocation of water lines, electrical lines, or sewer lines; or
that results in changes to the framing, support or foundation of exterior or
load bearing walls of a structure; and/or
      4.   Any work on Village right-of-way.
      5.   Structures are defined under section 12-2-2, "Definitions", of this
Code.
   B.   Fees: The fees to be paid for each permit are as follows:
      1.   Demolition Permit: $75.00 (includes partial and entire demolition
projects).
      2.   Building Permits:
         a.   Residential Construction:
            i.   Living Space: $0.20 per square foot.
            ii.   Nonliving Space (i.e., garage): $0.10 per square foot.
         b.   Commercial Construction:
            i.   New structure or addition to existing structure: $0.25 per
square foot.
      3.   Miscellaneous Permits:
         a.   Sheds - Portable And Unattached: No charge.
         b.   Sheds With Concrete Foundation: $25.00.
         c.   Decks - Attached And Unattached: $25.00.
         d.   Concrete Pads: $25.00.
         e.   Swimming Pools: $50.00.
         f.   Roof Mount Solar Energy System Installed On A Residential
Structure: $50.00.
      4.   Other Fees: As established by the Board or administrative order.
   C.   Fees Separate: Building permit fees are separate and distinct from
inspection fees. Issuance of a building permit does not exempt the property
owner from compliance with Federal, State and local laws, which includes the
Village's zoning regulations.
   D.   Exemptions from Building Permits: A building permit is not required for
minor repairs, maintenance, or other minor work.
   E.   Eligibility for Building Permit: A building permit shall not be issued
to any person other than the owner or owners of the real estate on which a
building is to be constructed or remodeled, except the contractor, as agent for
the owners, may apply for or be issued a building permit. A building permit
shall not be issued to a contract purchaser of real estate unless the owner or
owners of the real estate join in the application.
   F.   Required Documents:
      1.    All applications or requests for building permits shall be
accompanied by a drawing, preferably drafted to scale, showing the location on
the lot of the building or addition to a building, all applicable setback
lines, lot dimensions, and angles.
      2.   All requests or applications for building permits shall be
accompanied by building plans properly dimensioned and detailed, with
structural elements designated.
      3.    All applications and requests for building permits for any new
building or any addition to an existing building involving the remodeling or
installation of new plumbing, heating, ventilation, air conditioning, or
electrical systems shall be accompanied by a properly drafted plan of the
system involved, giving types of materials, unit capacities, wire sizes, and
breaker size service entrances.
      4.    An estimate of the anticipated cost of construction shall accompany
each request or application for a building permit.
      5.   Any and all contractors doing work within the Village on projects
that require a building permit shall register with the Village providing
documentation of license (as applicable by Federal, State or County
requirements), and proof of insurance in an appropriate amount, to include
liability, auto and workers compensation insurance. The registration shall be
valid for one (1) calendar year.
      6.    All of the documents required above to accompany a request or
application for a building permit shall remain on file with the Village.
   G.   Failure to Obtain or Comply Building Permit: Anyone who does not obtain
the proper building permit(s) prior to construction shall pay double the cost
of the original permit. The proper building permit must be obtained within
twenty four (24) hours of notification by the Village official of the need to
do so. Additionally, failure to comply with the building plan as originally
submitted to the Village shall result in the removal of the building/structure
or a fine in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which shall be
determined by the Village in its sole and absolute discretion. In such event,
the person or entity which fails to comply with the building plans as submitted
must then provide new and accurate plans for construction, pay all appropriate
fees, and obtain new permit(s). (Ord. 2021-1-1, 1-11-2021; amd. Ord. 2025-09,
9-15-2025)
10-4-3: CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION:
   A.   Registration: Each contractor doing work within the Village on projects
that require permits shall register with the Village before doing business
within the Village. A registration is valid for one (1) year from the date of
issuance. There shall be a registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
contractor.
   B.   Exemption from Registration: Any person acting within the scope of his
or her employment with a public utility or with the Village is exempt from
registration.
   C.   Violations; Penalty: A person who violates this section is subject to a
penalty for each violation. A violation with respect to any single job
constitutes a separate violation. For example, a contractor who works on a roof
one (1) day and comes back the second day to work on the roof without having
registered commits two (2) separate violations. Three (3) or more (3)
violations prohibit the contractor from working in the Village on any project
for one (1) year. (Ord. 2021-1-1, 1-11-2021)
10-4-4: INSPECTION:
   A.   The person applying for the building permit shall be responsible to
obtain any necessary inspections of the proposed construction. The Village will
provide a system of inspections and enforcement of residential building codes
by Sangamon County. The owner shall be responsible for all inspection costs. At
a minimum, inspection shall be made at the following stages of construction:
      1.   Setback inspection.
      2.   Footings: Footings must be inspected prior to pouring.
      3.   Plumbing ground work: Ground work installations must be inspected
prior to pouring.
      4.   Rough-in; plumbing, electrical and mechanical. These inspections
will be made after all internal and external electrical, mechanical and
plumbing work has been roughed-in and prior to installing drywall or other
surface.
      5.   Framing: This inspection shall be made prior to installing drywall
or other surface.
      6.   Electrical service.
      7.   Recommended final/certificate of occupancy, which shall be subject
to final review and approval.
   B.   The following types of work require inspection:
      1.   New structures.
      2.   Changing the footprint or roof profile of any structure.
      3.   Construction, modification, maintenance or repair that requires
installation or relocation of water lines, electrical lines, or sewer lines; or
that results in changes to the framing, support or foundation of exterior or
load bearing walls of a structure. (Ord. 2021-1-1, 1-11-2021)
10-4-5: GRANDFATHER CLAUSE:
No existing building or structure not in compliance with any of the codes
adopted herein as of the effective date of this subchapter or of any amendment
hereto, and no building, the foundation of which has been laid as of the
effective date of this subchapter or any amendment hereto which is completed
within six (6) months of the effective date of this subchapter or the
amendment, shall be deemed to be in violation of this subchapter by reason of
continuation of the non-complying condition; nor is any owner required to bring
any such structure into compliance with any code adopted hereunder. (Ord. 2021-
1-1, 1-11-2021)
TITLE 11: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Chapter
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS   1
CHAPTER 1: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
Section
11-1-1: Purpose
11-1-2: Relationship To Zoning Regulations
11-1-3: Definitions
11-1-4: Applicability Of Chapter; Exceptions
11-1-5: General Requirements
11-1-6: Permitted Uses
11-1-7: Administratively Approved Uses
11-1-8: Special Use Permits
11-1-9: Buildings Or Other Equipment Storage
11-1-10: Removal Of Abandoned Antennas And Towers
11-1-11: Nonconforming Uses
11-1-12: Special Procedures For Special Use Determinations
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the
siting of wireless communications towers and antennas.
   B.   The goals of this chapter are to:
      1.   Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
      2.   Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas;
      3.   Minimize the total number of towers throughout the Village;
      4.   Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as
a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
      5.   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent
possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the Village is minimal;
      6.   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through
careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging
techniques;
      7.   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the Village quickly, effectively, and efficiently;
      8.   Consider the public health and safety of communication towers; and
      9.   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
   C.   In furtherance of these goals, the Village shall give due consideration
to its Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Map, existing land uses, and environmentally
sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
(Ord. 13-7-1, 7-1-2013)
11-1-2: RELATIONSHIP TO ZONING REGULATIONS:
This chapter is closely related to and shall be interpreted together with the
zoning title of this Code (see title 12 of this Code). All terms contained in
this chapter shall have the same meanings as when used in title 12 of this
Code, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. However, in the event of
any conflict between this chapter and title 12 of this Code, this chapter shall
control.
(Ord. 13-7-1, 7-1-2013)
11-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light
poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or
conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA: Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK: The lines that connect a provider’s towers/cell sites to one
or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers,
or the public switched telephone network.
FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT: Means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the
tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS: Any tower or antenna for which a
building permit or conditional permitted use permit has been properly issued
prior to the effective date hereof, including permitted towers or antennas that
have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not
expired.
TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose
of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar
communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers,
or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative
tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support
thereto.
VILLAGE: Refers to the Village of Spaulding.
ZONING COMMITTEE: The committee of the Village Board having jurisdiction over
zoning matters.
ZONING TITLE: Refers to title 12 of this Code.
(Ord. 13-7-1, 7-1-2013)
11-1-4: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   New Towers And Antennas: All new towers or antennas in the Village
shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in subsections B, C
and D of this section.
   B.   Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas: This chapter
shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under
seventy feet (70') in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed
amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive- only
antennas.
   C.   Preexisting Towers Or Antennas: Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter, other
than tie requirements of subsections
11-1-5F and G of this chapter.
   D.   AM Array: For purposes of implementing this chapter, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which
functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower.
Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the
outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units
may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right.
(Ord. 13-7-1, 7-1-2013)
11-1-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Principal Or Accessory Use: Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses under the zoning title of this Code. A
different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not
preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.
   B.   Lot Size: For the purpose of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zoning district regulations, including, but not
limited to, setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such
requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the
antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
   C.   Inventory Of Existing Sites: Each applicant for an antenna or tower
shall provide, along with its application, an inventory of its existing towers,
antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the
jurisdiction of the Village or within one mile of the border thereof, including
specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The
Village may share such information with other applicants applying for
administrative approvals or conditional use permits under this chapter or other
organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the
Village; provided, however, that the Village is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are
available or suitable.
   D.   Aesthetics: Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject
to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness.
      2.   At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding
buildings.
      3.   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral
color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the
supporting structure as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
   E.   Lighting: Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
   F.   State Or Federal Requirements: All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the
State or Federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas.
If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers
and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of
the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling State or Federal agency.
Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised
standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower
or antenna at the owner’s expense.
   G.   Building Codes; Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance
with standards contained in applicable State or local Building Codes and the
applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries
Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the Village
concludes that a tower fails to comply with such Codes and standards and
constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to
the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such
tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said thirty (30) days shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
   H.   Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this
chapter and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public
utilities, or private utilities.
   I.   Franchises: Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation of a
wireless communication system in the Village have been obtained and shall file
a copy of all required franchises with the Zoning Committee.
   J.   Public Notice: For purposes of this chapter, any conditional permitted
use request, variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved use or
conditional permitted use shall require public notice to all abutting property
owners and all property owners of properties that are located within the
corresponding separation distance listed in section
11-1-8B5b, Table 2, of this chapter, in addition to any notice otherwise
required by the zoning title of this Code.
   K.   Signs: No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
   L.   Buildings And Support Equipment: Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of
section
11-1-9 of this chapter.
   M.   Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan: The Village encourages the users of towers
and antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple towers
and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be
given priority in the review process.
(Ord. 13-7-1, 7-1-2013)
11-1-6: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   General: The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted
uses and shall not require administrative approval or a special use permit.
   B.   Permitted Uses: The following uses are specifically permitted:
Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled
by the Village, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower
has been approved by the Village, and irrespective of the applicable zoning
district.
(Ord. 13-7-1, 7-1-2013)
11-1-7: ADMINISTRATIVELY APPROVED USES:
   A.   General: The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
administrative approvals for towers and antennas:
      1.   The Zoning Committee may administratively approve the uses listed in
this section.
      2.   Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the
Village Clerk providing the information set forth in subsections
11-1-8B1 and B3 of this chapter and a nonrefundable fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) to reimburse the Village for the costs of reviewing the application.
The Village Clerk shall transmit the application to the Zoning Committee.
      3.   The Zoning Committee shall review the application for administrative
approval and determine if the proposed use complies with section
11-1-5 and subsections
11-1-8B4 and B5 of this chapter.
      4.   The Zoning Committee shall respond to each such application within
sixty (60) days after receiving it by either approving or denying the
application. If the Zoning Committee fails to respond to the applicant within
said sixty (60) days, then the application shall be deemed to be denied.
      5.   In connection with any such administrative approval, the Zoning
Committee may, in a case involving shared use, administratively waive any
zoning district setback requirements in subsection
11-1-8B4 of this chapter or separation distances between towers in subsection
11-1-8B5 of this chapter by up to fifty percent (50%).
      6.   In connection with any such administrative approval, the Zoning
Committee may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles, administratively
allow the reconstruction of an existing tower to monopole construction.
      7.   If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant’s
administrative remedy shall be limited to filing an application for a special
use permit pursuant to section
11-1-8 of this chapter.
   B.   List Of Administratively Approved Uses: The following uses may be
approved by the Zoning Committee after conducting an administrative review:
      1.   Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional
buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or
antenna, in any industrial zoning district.
      2.   Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with
the terms of subsections B2a and B2b of this section.
         a.   Antennas On Existing Structures: Any antenna which is not
attached to a tower may be approved by the Zoning Committee as an accessory use
to any commercial, industrial, professional, institutional, or multi-family
structure of eight (8) or more dwelling units, provided:
            (1)   The antenna does not extend more than thirty feet (30') above
the highest point of the structure;
            (2)   The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
            (3)   The antenna complies with all applicable Building Codes.
         b.   Antennas On Existing Towers: An antenna which is attached to an
existing tower may be approved by the Zoning Committee and, to minimize adverse
visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers,
collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers shall take
precedence over the instruction of new towers, provided such collocation is
accomplished in a manner consistent with the following:
            (1)   A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the
existing tower, unless the Zoning Committee allows reconstruction as a
monopole.
            (2)   Height:
               (A)   An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt, to a taller
height, not to exceed thirty feet (30') over the tower’s existing height, to
accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna.
               (B)   The height change referred to in subsection B2b(2)(A) of
this section may only occur one time per communication tower.
               (C)   The additional height referred to in subsection B2b(2)(A)
of this section shall not require an additional distance separation as set
forth in section
11-1-8 of this chapter. The tower’s premodification height shall be used to
calculate such distance separations.
            (3)   On-Site Location:
               (A)   A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna may be moved on-site within fifty feet
(50') of its existing location.
               (B)   After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation,
only one tower may remain on the site.
               (C)   A relocated on-site tower shall continue to be measured
from the original tower location for purposes of calculating separation
distances between towers pursuant to subsection
11-1-8B5 of this chapter. The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no way
be deemed to cause a violation of subsection
11-1-8B5 of this chapter.
               (D)   The on-site relocation of a tower which comes within the
separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands as
established in subsection
11-1-8B5 of this chapter shall only be permitted when approved by the Zoning
Committee.
      3.   Locating any new tower in a nonresidential zoning district other
than industrial, provided a licensed professional engineer certifies the tower
can structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the
applicant; the Zoning Committee concludes the tower is in conformity with the
goals set forth in section
11-1-1 of this chapter and the requirements of section
11-1-5 of this chapter; the tower meets the setback requirements in subsection
11-1-8B4 of this chapter and separation distances in subsection
11-1-8B5 of this chapter; and the tower meets the following height and usage
criteria:
         a.   For a single user, up to ninety feet (90') in height;
         b.   For two (2) users, up to one hundred twenty feet (120') in
height; and
         c.   For three (3) or more users, up to one hundred fifty feet (150')
in height.
      4.   Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple
low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such
as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not
require the use of towers.
(Ord. 13-7-1, 7-1-2013)
11-1-8: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   General Requirements: The following provisions shall govern the
issuance of special use permits for towers or antennas by the Plan Commission:
      1.   If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under section
11-1-6 of this chapter or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to
section
11-1-7 of this chapter, then a special use permit shall be required for the
construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts.
      2.   Applications for special use permits under this section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of the zoning title of this Code,
except as modified this section.
      3.   In recommending the grant of a special use permit, the Plan
Commission may suggest conditions to the extent the Plan Commission concludes
such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed
tower on adjoining properties.
      4.   Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
      5.   An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the information
described in this section and a nonrefundable fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00), plus a commitment to reimburse the Village its out-of-pocket costs
for a review by a licensed engineer.
   B.   Towers:
      1.   Information Required: In addition to any information required for
applications for special use permits pursuant to the zoning title of this Code,
applicants for a special use permit for a tower shall submit the following
information:
         a.   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses
and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), zoning
classification of the site and all properties within the applicable separation
distances set forth in subsection B5 of this section, adjacent roadways,
proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of
the proposed tower and any other structures, topography, parking, and other
information deemed by the Zoning Committee to be necessary to assess compliance
with this chapter.
         b.   Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
         c.   The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted
residentially zoned properties.
         d.   The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to subsection
11-1-5C of this chapter shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The
applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s)
and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
         e.   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
         f.   Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
         g.   A description of compliance with subsections
11-1-5C, D, E, F, G, J, L, and M of this chapter; and subsections B4 and B5 of
this section, and all applicable Federal, State or local laws.
         h.   A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction
of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future
users.
         i.   Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for
the tower(s) described in the application and other towers and antennas owned
or operated by the applicant in the Village.
         j.   A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or
structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the
proposed new tower.
         k.   A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Village based upon existing physical, engineering,
technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is
erected.
      2.   Factors Considered In Granting Special Use Permits For Towers: In
addition to the standards for consideration of special use permit applications
pursuant to the zoning title of this Code, the Plan Commission shall consider
the following factors in determining whether to recommend issuance of a special
use permit, although the Plan Commission may recommend waiver or reduction of
the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the Plan
Commission concludes that the goals of this chapter are better served thereby:
         a.   Height of the proposed tower;
         b.   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
         c.   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
         d.   Surrounding topography;
         e.   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
         f.   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
         g.   Proposed ingress and egress; and
         h.   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as
discussed in subsection B3 of this section.
      3.   Availability Of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures, Or
Alternative Technology: No new tower shall be recommended unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Plan Commission that no
existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the
use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna.
An applicant shall submit information requested by the Plan Commission related
to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing
tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant’s
proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
         a.   No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meets the applicant's engineering requirements.
         b.   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet the applicant’s engineering requirements.
         c.   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
         d.   The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant’s proposed antenna.
         e.   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower
or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower
development are presumed to be unreasonable.
         f.   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
         g.   The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell
network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a
wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new
tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
      4.   Setbacks: The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the
Plan Commission may recommend reduction of the standard setback requirements if
the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby:
         a.   Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least seventy five
percent (75%) of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
         b.   Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
      5.   Separation: The following separation requirements shall apply to all
towers and antennas for which a special use permit is required; provided,
however, that the Plan Commission may reduce the standard separation
requirement if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby.
         a.   Separation From Off-Site Uses/Designated Areas:
            (1)   Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower
to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated areas as specified in
Table 1, except as otherwise provided in Table 1.
            (2)   Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards established in Table 1.
TABLE 1
 
Off-Site Use/Designated Area               Separation Distance
Vacant, single-family or duplex
residentially                              200 feet or 300% height of tower
Single-family or duplex residential units   
zoned land which is either platted or has  200 feet or 300% height of tower,
preliminary subdivision plan approval      whichever is greatest
which is not expired
Vacant unplatted residentially zoned lands 100 feet or 100% of height of tower,
                                           whichever is greater
Existing multi-family residential units    100 feet or 100% of height of tower,
greater than duplex units                  whichever is greatest
Nonresidentially zoned lands or            None; only setbacks apply
nonresidential uses
 
         b.   Separation Distances Between Towers: Separation distances between
towers shall be applicable for and measured between the proposed tower and
preexisting towers. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or
following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the
proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation
distance (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2.
TABLE 2
EXISTING TOWERS - TYPES
 
                      Lattice Guyed Monopole 75 Feet In Monopole Less Than 75
                                    Height Or Greater   Feet In Height
Lattice               5,000   5,000 1,500               750
Guyed                 500     500   1,500               750
Monopole 75 feet in   1,500   1,500 1,500               750
height or greater
Monopole less than 75 750     750   750                 750
feet in height
 
      6.   Security Fencing: Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not
less than six feet (6') in height and shall also be equipped with an
appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that the Plan Commission
may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate.
      7.   Landscaping: The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding towers for which a special use permit is required; provided,
however, that the Plan Commission may waive such requirements if the goals of
this chapter would be better served thereby:
         a.   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property
used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at
least four feet (4') wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
         b.   In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.
         c.   Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as
towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property
perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
(Ord. 13-7-1, 7-1-2013)
11-1-9: BUILDINGS OR OTHER EQUIPMENT STORAGE:
   A.   Antennas Mounted On Structures Or Rooftops: The equipment cabinet or
structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the following:
      1.   The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than two hundred
twenty five (225) square feet of gross floor area or be more than fifteen feet
(15') in height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less than
sixty five feet (65') in height, the related unmanned equipment structure, if
over one hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area or eight feet (8')
in height, shall be located on the ground and shall not be located on the roof
of the structure.
      2.   If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment structure and other equipment and structures shall not
occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the roof area.
      3.   Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable Building Codes.
   B.   Antennas Mounted On Utility Poles Or Light Poles: The equipment cabinet
or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in accordance
with the following:
      1.   In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be
located:
         a.   In a front or side yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no
greater than three feet (3') in height or sixteen (16) square feet of gross
floor area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of fifteen feet (15')
from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate height of at least forty three inches (43") to forty
eight inches (48") and a planted height of at least thirty six inches (36").
         b.   In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater
than five feet (5') in height or twenty five (25) square feet in gross floor
area. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height of eight feet (8') and a planted height of at least thirty six
inches (36").
      2.   In commercial or industrial districts, the equipment cabinet or
structure shall be no greater than five feet (5') in height or twenty five (25)
square feet of gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by
an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet (8') and a planted
height of at least thirty six inches (36").
   C.   Antennas Located On Towers: The related unmanned equipment structure
shall not contain more than two hundred twenty five (225) square feet of gross
floor area or be more than fifteen feet (15') in height, and shall be located
in accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in
which located.
   D.   Modification Of Building Size Requirements: The requirements of
subsections A, B and C of this section may be modified by the Zoning Committee
in the case of administratively approved uses or by the Plan Commission in the
case of uses permitted by special use to encourage collocation.
(Ord. 13-7-1, 7-1-2013)
11-1-10: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve
(12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or
tower shall remove the same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from
the Village notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an
abandoned antenna or tower within said ninety (90) days shall be grounds to
remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or
more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective
until all users cease using the tower.
(Ord. 13-7-1, 7-1-2013)
11-1-11: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   No Expansion Of Nonconforming Use: Towers that are constructed and
antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or
structure.
   B.   Preexisting Towers: Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement
with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be permitted on such
preexisting towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a
preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Rebuilding Damaged Or Destroyed Nonconforming Towers Or Antennas:
Notwithstanding section
11-1-10 of this chapter, bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are
damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain
administrative approval or a special use permit and without having to meet the
separation requirements specified in subsections
11-1-8B4 and B5 of this chapter. The type, height, and location of the tower on
site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility approval.
Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable
Building Codes and shall be obtained within one hundred eighty (180) days from
the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if
said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as
specified in section
11-1-10 of this chapter.
(Ord. 13-7-1, 7-1-2013)
11-1-12: SPECIAL PROCEDURES FOR SPECIAL USE DETERMINATIONS:
The procedures for special uses shall be the same as in the zoning title of
this Code with respect to a public hearing and approval of the special use by
ordinance of the Corporate Authorities (see title 12, chapter 3, article C of
this Code). However, the following requirements, peculiar to the
Telecommunications Act; shall apply:
   A.   If the applicant shows that the antenna tower and the equipment to be
installed thereon meet all requirements of the FCC, the Plan Commission shall
disallow and disregard evidence regarding the environmental effects (including
interference) of radio frequency emissions, and the Village Board shall
disregard any such evidence it making its final determination.
   B.   All findings of the Plan Commission shall be in writing and shall be
based on substantial evidence.
   C.   Since the Telecommunications Act requires a written record, there shall
be a certified shorthand reporter present at any public hearing, and a written
transcript shall be prepared of any public hearing.
   D.   The Village Board shall not take final action on a special use permit
application until all fees required to be paid, including reimbursement of the
cost of an engineering review, have been paid.
(Ord. 13-7-1, 7-1-2013)
TITLE 12: ZONING
Chapter
PURPOSE; SCOPE; APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION   1
RULES AND DEFINITIONS   2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT   3
   ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS   3A
   VARIANCES   3B
   SPECIAL USE PERMITS   3C
   AMENDMENTS   3D
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP   4
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS   5
A AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT   6
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS   7
   R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT (SMALL LOTS)   7A
   R-2 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT (LARGE LOTS)   7B
B-2 GENERAL RETAIL AND B-3 RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICTS   8
I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT   9
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING   10
SIGNS   11
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS   12
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS   13
NONCONFORMITIES   14
CHAPTER 1: PURPOSE; SCOPE; APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION
Section
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Purpose
12-1-3: Scope
12-1-4: Application And Interpretation
12-1-5: Disclaimer Of Liability
12-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and cited as the ZONING CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF
SPAULDING, ILLINOIS.
(1990 Code § 40-1-1)
12-1-2: PURPOSE:
In accordance with State law, this title regulates lots, structures, and uses
in order to preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and
welfare. More specifically, this title is intended to assist in achieving the
following objectives:
   A.   To assist in community planning and development consistent with the
need to promote public health, safety, welfare, comfort and morals;
   B.   To encourage the development of buildings and uses on appropriate sites
in order to maximize community-wide social and economic benefits while
accommodating the particular needs of all residents, and to discourage
development on inappropriate sites;
   C.   To protect and enhance the character and stability of sound existing
residential, commercial, and industrial areas, and to gradually eliminate
nonconforming uses and structures;
   D.   To conserve and increase the value of taxable property throughout the
Village;
   E.   To ensure the provision of adequate light, air, and privacy for the
occupants of all buildings;
   F.   To protect persons and property from damage caused by fire, flooding,
and improper sewage disposal;
   G.   To provide adequate and well designed parking and loading space for all
buildings and uses, and to reduce vehicular congestion on the public streets
and highways;
   H.   To ensure the proper design and improvement of mobile home parks;
   I.   To promote the use of signs which are safe, aesthetically pleasing,
compatible with their surroundings, and legible in the circumstances in which
they are seen; and
   J.   To provide for the efficient administration and fair enforcement of all
the substantive regulations in this title.
(1990 Code § 40-1-2)
12-1-3: SCOPE:
This title shall be applicable only within the corporate limits of the Village.
(1990 Code § 40-1-3)
12-1-4: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: If any provision of this code is declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, that decision
shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this code.
(1990 Code § 40-1-6)
   B.   Interpretation: Every provision of this chapter shall be construed
liberally in favor of the Village, and every requirement imposed herein shall
be deemed minimal. Whenever the requirements of this chapter differ from the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted and effective ordinance, regulation,
deed restriction, or covenant, the more stringent requirement shall prevail.
(1990 Code § 40-1-4)
12-1-5: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   A.   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
official, board member, agent, or employee of the Village shall render himself
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under
this chapter (see Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity
Act).
   B.   Any suit brought against any official, board member, agent, or employee
of the Village, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge
of his duties under this chapter shall be defended by the Village Attorney
until the final determination of the legal proceedings.
(1990 Code § 40-1-5)
CHAPTER 2: RULES AND DEFINITIONS
Section
12-2-1: Rules Of Word Construction
12-2-2: Definitions
12-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
In constructing the intended meaning of terminology used in this title, the
following rules shall be observed:
   A.   Words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them
in section
12-2-2 of this chapter unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in said section
12-2-2 shall have their standard English dictionary meanings.
   B.   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders.
   C.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
   D.   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
the plural shall include the singular.
   E.   The term “shall” is mandatory; the term “may” is discretionary.
   F.   All distances shall be measured to the nearest integral foot. Six
inches (6") or more shall be deemed one foot (1').
   G.   References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections
within that section; but a reference to a particular subsection designates only
that subsection.
   H.   A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific
terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly limited.
(1990 Code § 40-2-1)
12-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ABUTTING: Having a common lot line or district line. (Synonym for “adjacent”.)
ACCESSORY USE: Any structure or use that is:
   A.   Subordinate in size or purpose to the principal structure or use which
it serves;
   B.   Necessary or contributing to the comfort and convenience of the
occupants of the principal structure or use served; and
   C.   Located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served.
ACCESSWAY: A curb cut, ramp, driveway, or other means for providing vehicular
access to an off- street parking or loading area.
ADMINISTRATOR: The official appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent
of the Board of Trustees, or his representative, to administer this title.
(Synonymous with “Zoning Administrator”.)
AGRICULTURE: Any one or any combination of the following: The growing of farm
or truck garden crops, operating an apiary, orcharding, dairying, pasturage,
horticulture, floriculture, or animal/poultry husbandry (including kennels).
The term AGRICULTURE encompasses the farmhouse and accessory uses and
structures customarily incidental to agricultural activities.
AISLE: A vehicular trafficway within an off-street parking area used as a means
of access/egress from parking spaces.
ALLEY: A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting premises that front on a nearby street.
ALTER: To change the size, shape, or use of a structure.
AMENDMENT: A change in the provisions of this title (including the District
Map), properly effected in accordance with State law and the procedures set
forth herein.
ANCHOR: Any approved device to which a mobile home is tied down to keep it
firmly attached to the stand on which it is placed.
ASPHALTIC CONCRETE: A mixture of petroleum byproducts and gravel used for
paving to form a smooth, permanent surface. ASPHALTIC CONCRETE does not mean
“oil and chip”.
ATTACHED: As applied to buildings, means having a common wall and/or a common
roof.
BILLBOARD: Any single- or double-faced sign displaying messages or advertising
not associated with the premises on which the said sign is located or to which
it is affixed.
BLOCK: An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers, or ways
(except alleys, pedestrianways, or exterior boundaries of a subdivision unless
the exterior boundary is a street, highway, or way), or bounded by a
combination of streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way,
waterways or corporate boundary lines.
BOARD OF APPEALS: The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village.
BUFFER STRIP: An area of land undeveloped except for landscaping, fences, etc.,
used to protect a use situated on one lot from the deleterious effects of the
use on the adjacent lot.
BUILDING: Any covered structure permanently affixed to land and designed or
used to shelter persons or chattels.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average grade at the
front wall of a building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or
to the deck line of mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and
ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE: The line nearest the front of and across a lot, delineating the
minimum open space required between the front of a structure and the street
right-of-way line.
BULK: Any one or any combination of the following structural or site design
characteristics:
   A.   Size or height of structure.
   B.   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
streets, or other structures.
   C.   Lot area.
   D.   Yards or setbacks.
CENTERLINE:
   A.   The centerline of any right-of-way having a uniform width.
   B.   The original centerline where a right-of-way has been widened
irregularly.
   C.   The new centerline, whenever a road has been relocated.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE, FINAL: A permit issued by the Administrator
indicating that a lot, or newly completed structure, or use complied with all
pertinent requirements of this title and, therefore, may be occupied or used.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE, INITIAL: A permit issued by the Administrator
indicating a proposed lot, structure, or use which is in conformity with the
requirements of this title.
CLINIC: An establishment wherein licensed physicians, including chiropractic
physicians, or dentists practice medicine or dentistry, but where overnight
lodging for sick or injured persons is not provided.
CLUB/LODGE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members
organized for some purpose(s) and paying regular dues and whose facilities are
restricted to members and their guests, not including a group organized solely
or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial
enterprise.
COMMERCIAL USE/ESTABLISHMENT: Any use or establishment wherein goods are
purchased or sold, whether to the consuming public (retail) or to other
businesses (wholesale), or which serve as an office and storage from which
goods are delivered to a purchaser.
CONFORMING: In compliance with the applicable provisions of this title.
CONVENIENCE/GASOLINE SERVICE STATION: A building or premises or portion thereof
used for retail sales of gasoline, oil and accessories of motor vehicles and
general convenience service goods to include the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages, not for consumption on the premises where sold.
CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER: A legally binding order issued by the Administrator in
accordance with the procedures set forth herein to effect compliance with this
title.
DETACHED: As applied to buildings, means surrounded by yards with no walls or
roof in common with another building on the same lot as a principal structure
or other building.
DEVELOP: To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of
land, or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation therefor.
DIMENSIONS: Refers to both lot depth and lot width.
DISTRICT, ZONING: A portion of the territory of the Village wherein certain
uniform requirements or various combinations thereof apply to structures, lots
and uses under the terms of this title.
DRIVEWAY: A minor way commonly providing vehicular access to a garage or off-
street parking area.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used primarily as living
quarters for one or more families but not including hotels, motels, or other
accommodations for the transient public.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof containing three (3)
or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing one dwelling unit and intended
for the occupancy of one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling containing two (2) dwelling units (also known
and referred to as a “duplex”).
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed or used as living quarters by one
family. A DWELLING UNIT always includes a bathroom, a kitchen and a sleeping
area.
EASEMENT: A right to use another person's real property for certain limited
purposes.
ENCLOSED: As applied to a building, means covered by a permanent roof and
separated on all sides from adjacent open space or other buildings by fixed
exterior walls or by common walls, with openings only for windows and doors.
ENLARGE: To increase the size (floor area, height, etc.) of an existing
principal structure or accessory use, or to devote more land to an existing
use.
ERECT: To build or construct.
ESTABLISHMENT: Either of the following:
   A.   An institutional, business, commercial, industrial activity that is the
sole occupant of one or more buildings; or
   B.   An institutional, business, commercial, industrial activity that
occupies a portion of a building such that:
      1.   The use activity is a logical and separate entity from the other
activities with the building and not a department of the whole; and
      2.   The use activity has either a separate entrance from the exterior of
the building, or a separate entrance from a common and clearly defined entryway
that has direct access to the exterior of the building.
EXISTING: Actually constructed or in operation on the effective date hereof.
FAMILY:
   A.   A single individual doing his own cooking and living upon the premises
as a separate housekeeping unit; or
   B.   A collective body of persons doing their own cooking and living
together upon the premises as a separate housekeeping unit in a domestic
relationship based upon birth, marriage, adoption or employment as domestic
servants; or
   C.   A group of not more than three (3) unrelated persons doing their own
cooking and living together on the premises as a separate housekeeping unit
pursuant to a mutual housekeeping agreement (not including a group occupying a
boarding or rooming house, club, fraternity, or hotel).
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from
the center of the common walls of attached buildings. GROSS FLOOR AREA includes
basement floors, attic floor space, halls, closets, stairwells, space devoted
to mechanical equipment, and enclosed porches.
FRONTAGE: The linear extent of the front (street side) of a lot or
establishment.
GREENHOUSE: See definition of NURSERY.
HEREAFTER: Any time after the effective date hereof.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any business, profession, or occupation, conducted for gain,
entirely within a dwelling or on residential premises in conformity with the
provisions of this title.
IMMOBILIZE: As applied to a mobile home, means to remove the wheels, tongue,
and hitch and/or to place on a permanent foundation.
INTERSECTION: The point at which two (2) or more public rights-of-way
(generally streets) meet.
JUNKYARD: A tract of land, including any accessory structures thereon, that is
used for buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling, packing, disassembling
or handling waste or scrap materials. Such scrap materials include vehicles,
machinery, and equipment not in operable condition (or parts thereof), and
metals, glass, paper, plastic, rags, and rubber tires. A lot on which three (3)
or more inoperable vehicles are stored shall be deemed a JUNKYARD. A JUNKYARD
includes an automobile wrecking yard.
KENNEL: Any structure or premises or portion thereof on which more than three
(3) dogs, cats, or other household domestic animals over four (4) months of age
are kept for the purpose of breeding or boarding.
LOADING SPACE: An off-street space used for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT: A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or
future) of transfer of ownership or development. A "lot" may or may not
coincide with a LOT OF RECORD.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear
lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut for their
full length upon streets. Both such sidelines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT COVERAGE: The portion of a lot that is occupied by buildings or structures,
including accessory buildings or structures.
LOT DEPTH: The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot boundary abutting the street.
LOT LINE, REAR: An interior lot line which is most distant from and most nearly
parallel to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear
lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision
recorded with the Sangamon County Recorder of Deeds, in accordance with State
law.
LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS: Refers to the lot area, width, and depth requirements of
the applicable district.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut
two (2) approximately parallel streets.
LOT WIDTH: The mean horizontal width of a lot measured at right angles to the
side lot lines at the building line.
MAINTENANCE: The routine upkeep of a structure, premises, or equipment,
including the replacement or modification of structural components to the
extent necessary to keep said structure in sound condition.
MOBILE HOME: A structure designed for permanent habitation and so constructed
as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently attached to
its frame, from the place of its construction to the location or subsequent
location at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and designed to
permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more persons;
provided, that any such structure resting on permanent foundation with wheels,
tongue and hitch permanently removed shall not be construed as a MOBILE HOME,
but shall be an immobilized mobile home. A mobile home should not be confused
with a camping trailer or recreational vehicle.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of less than five (5) acres in area in single
ownership/control, developed with facilities for accommodating occupied mobile
homes in accordance with the requirements of this title.
MOBILE HOME SPACE: A portion of a mobile home park designed and improved for
the placement of one mobile home and the private use of the occupants thereof.
MOBILE HOME STAND: The part of a mobile home space beneath the mobile home that
includes the concrete slab on which the home is placed and to which it is
anchored.
MOBILE OR PORTABLE MARQUEE: A term used to describe any sign designed to be
moved from place to place, including, but not limited to, signs attached to
wood or metal frames designed to be self- supporting and moveable; or paper,
cardboard, or canvas signs wrapped around supporting poles.
MODULAR HOMES: Any detached single-family dwelling that is transported in whole
or component parts to the site where it will be permanently located in
assembled form on a permanent foundation to fully comply with the adopted
Building Code, if any.
NONCONFORMING: As applied to a lot, structure or use, means lawfully existing
on the effective date hereof, but not in compliance with the applicable
provisions hereof.
NUISANCE: Any thing, condition, or conduct that endangers health, or
unreasonably offends the senses, or obstructs the free use and comfortable
enjoyment of property, or essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment
of life.
NURSERY: A tract of land on which trees, shrubs, and other plants are raised
for transplanting and/or sale, and including any structure in which said
activities are conducted.
NURSERY SCHOOL: An establishment for the part-time care and/or instruction at
any time of day of four (4) or more unrelated children of pre-elementary school
age.
NURSING HOME: A building used as a medical care facility for persons who need
long-term nursing care and medical service, but do not require intensive
hospital care.
OFFICE: Any building or portion thereof in which the business (usually clerical
and administrative affairs) of a commercial/service enterprise or professional
person is transacted.
OVERLAY DISTRICT: A zoning district superimposed over one or more standard
(primary) zoning districts or portions thereof for the purpose of controlling
developmental problems caused by such factors as steep slopes, wet soils,
flooding, etc.
PARKING AREA/LOT, OFF-STREET: Land that is improved in accordance with this
title and used primarily for the storage of passenger motor vehicles, free of
charge or for compensation. An OFF- STREET PARKING LOT, depending on the
circumstances of its use, may be either a principal use or an accessory use.
PARKING LOT, COMMERCIAL: Land that is improved in accordance with this Code
which shall be limited to automobiles and trucks one ton and under.
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET: An area at least twenty feet (20') long and ten feet
(10') wide within an off-street parking area or garage, used for the storage of
one passenger motor vehicle.
PERMITTED USE: Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular
district(s), provided it conforms with all the requirements applicable to such
district(s).
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, organization, or corporate body.
PREMISES: A lot and all the structures and uses thereon.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING/STRUCTURE/USE: The main structure erected on or the main use
occupying a lot, as distinguished from an accessory (subordinate) structure or
use.
PROPERTY LINE: See definition of Lot Line.
PUBLIC UTILITIES: Utilities which are either government-owned or owned by an
established firm serving a wide geographical area and/or a substantial number
of persons.
RECONSTRUCT: As applied to nonconforming structures, means to rebuild after
damage or destruction.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A term encompassing any type of vehicle used primarily
for pleasure, such as travel trailers, motor homes, boats, snowmobiles, etc.
REFUSE: Garbage (food wastes) and trash, but not sewage or industrial wastes.
RELOCATE: To move to another portion of a lot or to a different lot.
REMODEL: As applied to a dwelling, means to enlarge (or reduce) the structure's
bulk, alter its roofline or openings to the outside, or relocate interior
walls; but does not mean reconstruct or repair.
REPAIR: To restore to sound condition, but not to reconstruct or remodel.
RESTRICTIVE: Tending to keep within prescribed limits.
RETAIL: Refers to the sale of goods or services directly to the consumer rather
than to another business.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC: A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has dedicated
to the Village or to another unit of government for streets and alleys.
ROOFLINE: A horizontal line parallel to the average ground level of a building
along the front thereof, which line delineates the highest point of a flat
roof; or where the flat surface area of a gable, hip, mansard, or gambrel roof
is in view from the ground level, the line of demarcation between the flat
surface and the vertically structured facade; or the line along the front of a
building delineating the roofline between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and
gambrel roofs.
SCREENING: Trees, shrubs, walls, solid fences, etc., used as a means of view
and noise control.
SEMI-FINISHED MATERIALS: Materials which have been sufficiently processed at
heavy industrial facilities so that they are no longer in their raw state but
are readily usable by light industry for assembly or manufacture into consumer
goods.
SERVICE BUILDING: A structure within a mobile home park or travel trailer park
that contains toilet facilities, clothes washers and dryers and, in some
instances, a convenience store.
SERVICE STATION: A building and premises or portion thereof designed and used
for the retail sale of gasoline or other automotive fuel, oil, and automotive
parts, supplies, and accessories. A SERVICE STATION may include facilities for
washing vehicles and for making minor automotive repairs.
SERVICE USE/ESTABLISHMENT: Any use or establishment where services are provided
for remuneration either to individuals or to other firms or which serves as an
office and supplies storage from which services are provided to the purchaser
at his or her premises.
SETBACK: The horizontal distance from the lot line in question to the side of
the structure facing that lot line or to the edge of the area of operation of
the principal use (in the case of a use which does not involve a structure).
SIGN: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, used to
advertise, identify, display, or attract attention to a person, establishment,
product, service, or event by any means including words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illuminations, etc. The term SIGN includes,
but is not limited to, every projecting sign, freestanding sign, window sign,
awning, canopy, marquee sign; changeable copy sign, illuminated sign; moving
sign, temporary sign; portable sign; pennants, banners, streamers, or any other
attention-getting devices; or other display, whether affixed to a building or
painted on the walls or erected elsewhere on the premises. The term SIGN
excludes features of a building which are an integral part of the building’s
design (e.g., the “castle-look” of a White Castle restaurant).
SIGN AREA: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the
extreme limits of the message and the background thereof, calculated in
accordance with the provisions of this title.
SIGN AREA ALLOWANCE: The maximum total sign area of all signs that an
establishment is permitted to display.
SIGN, CANOPY/MARQUEE: Any sign affixed to, painted on, or suspended from an
awning, canopy, marquee, or similar overhang.
SIGN, FLUSH-MOUNTED: Any sign attached to or erected against a wall of a
structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately parallel
to the plane of the wall and not projecting more than eighteen inches (18"). A
flush-mounted sign displays only messages associated with the building to which
said sign is attached.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: Any sign supported by one or more uprights, poles, or
braces placed in or upon the ground; or any sign supported by any structure
erected primarily for the display and support of the sign; provided, that a
freestanding sign displays only messages associated with the premises on which
said sign is situated.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign which is suspended from or supported by a wall,
awning, canopy, marquee, etc., and which is approximately perpendicular
thereto. A projecting sign displays only messages associated with the structure
to which it is attached.
SKIRTING: The covering affixed to the bottom of the exterior walls of a mobile
home to conceal the underside thereof.
SPECIAL USE: A use that has unusual operational, physical, or other
characteristics which distinguish it from the permitted uses of a district, but
which can be made compatible with the intended overall development within a
district. Special uses commonly must meet special standards not necessarily
applicable to permitted uses in the district, and are allowed only by permit.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: A permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this
title to regulate development of a special use.
STOP ORDER: A type of corrective action order used by the Administrator to halt
work in progress that is in violation of this title.
STREET: A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term STREET
includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, turnpike, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court, and similar designations, but excludes an
alley or a way for pedestrian use only.
STREET, PRIVATE: Any street providing access to abutting property that is not
maintained by and dedicated to the Village or other public entity.
STRINGENT: Binding and/or exacting.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or attached to
something having a fixed location on the ground. All buildings are structures,
but not all structures are buildings.
TOPOGRAPHY: The relief features or surface configuration of an area.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or a structure thereon is
designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.
USE VARIANCE: A type of amendment (not variance) that allows a use in a
district where said use would not be allowed under existing provisions of this
title.
UTILITY SUBSTATION: A secondary utility facility such as an electrical
substation, gas regulation station, telephone exchange facility, sewage
treatment plant, etc.
VACANT: As applied to a lot, means that no structure is situated thereon.
VARIANCE: A relaxation of the strict application of the lot size, setbacks, or
other bulk requirements applicable to a particular lot or structure.
VILLAGE: Either the territory or the local government of the Village.
WHOLESALE: Refers to the sale of goods or services by one business to another
business.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign visible from the exterior of a building or structure
which is painted directly on the surface of a window or affixed to or suspended
immediately behind the window for the purpose of informing passersby of the
identity of the proprietor or business, or of the product or service which can
be obtained on the premises.
YARD: Open space that is unobstructed, except as specifically permitted in this
title, and that is located on the same lot as the principal building.
YARD, FRONT: A yard which is bounded by the side lot lines, front lot line, and
the building line.
YARD LINE: A line in a lot that is generally parallel to the lot line along
which the yard in question extends and which is not nearer to such lot line at
any point than the required depth or width of said yard.
YARD, REAR: A yard which is bounded by side lot lines, rear lot line and rear
yard line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard which is bounded by the rear yard line, front yard line,
side yard line, and side lot line.
ZONING MAP: The map(s) and any amendments thereto designating zoning districts
and incorporated into this title by reference.
(1990 Code § 40-2-2)
CHAPTER 3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
12-3-1: Zoning Administrator
12-3-2: Certificates Of Zoning Compliance
12-3-3: Appeals
12-3-4: Filing Fees
12-3-5: Complaints
12-3-6: Enforcement
12-3-7: Penalties
12-3-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to administer and
enforce the provisions of this title. This broad responsibility encompasses,
but is not limited to, the following specific duties:
   A.   To review and pass upon applications for initial and final certificates
of zoning compliance;
   B.   To inspect lots, structures, and uses to determine compliance with this
title, and where there are violations, to initiate appropriate corrective
action;
   C.   To review and forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals all appeals and
applications for variances, special use permits, and amendments;
   D.   To maintain up-to-date records of matters related to this title,
including, but not limited to, district maps, certificates of zoning
compliance, special use permits, variances, interpretive decisions of the
Zoning Board of Appeals, amendments and all applications/documents related to
any of these items;
   E.   To republish the Zoning District Map not later than March 31 if any
rezonings or annexations have been approved during the preceding calendar year;
   F.   To provide information to the general public on matters related to this
title; and
   G.   To perform such other duties as the Board of Trustees may prescribe
from time to time.
(1990 Code § 40-9-1)
12-3-2: CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Initial Certificate:
      1.   Required; Restrictions On Issuance:
         a.   Upon the effective date hereof, no lot shall be created, no land
shall be developed, no new use or structure shall be established or erected,
and no existing use or structure shall be enlarged, extended, altered,
relocated, or reconstructed until an initial certificate of zoning compliance
has been issued.
         b.   The Administrator shall not issue an initial certificate of
zoning compliance unless, following consultation with technically qualified
persons as necessary, he determines that the proposed activity conforms to the
applicable provisions of this title.
(1990 Code § 40-9-2)
      2.   Application And Information Required:
         a.   Every applicant for an initial certificate of zoning compliance
shall submit to the Administrator, in graphic and/or narrative form, all the
items of information listed in subsection A2b of this section that are
applicable to the particular project. The Administrator shall decide which
items are applicable.
         b.   Items of information are as follows:
            (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
            (2)   Name and address of the owner or operator of the proposed
lot, structure or use, if different from subsection A2b(1) of this section;
            (3)   Brief, general description/explanation of the proposal;
            (4)   Location of the proposed lot, use or structure, and its
relationship to adjacent lots, uses, or structures;
            (5)   Area and dimensions of the site for the proposed structure or
use;
            (6)   Existing topography of the site, and proposed finished grade;
            (7)   Existing and proposed screening, landscaping, and erosion
control features on the site, including the parking area;
            (8)   Height and setbacks of the proposed structure;
            (9)   Number and size of proposed dwelling units, if any;
            (10)   Location and number of proposed parking/loading spaces and
accessways;
            (11)   Identification and location of all existing or proposed
utilities, whether public or private; and/or
            (12)   Any other pertinent information that the Administrator may
require.
(1990 Code § 40-9-2.1)
      3.   Duration Of Certificate: Initial certificates of zoning compliance
shall be valid for one year, or until revoked for failure to abide by a
corrective action order. The Administrator may renew initial certificates of
zoning compliance for successive one-year periods upon written request,
provided the applicant is making a good faith effort to complete the authorized
work.
(1990 Code § 40-9-2.2)
      4.   Relationship To Building Permit: Upon the effective date hereof, no
building permit for the erection, enlargement, extension, alteration, or
reconstruction of any structure shall be issued until the applicant for such
permit has properly obtained an initial certificate of zoning compliance
pertaining to such work.
(1990 Code § 40-9-2.3)
   B.   Final Certificate: No lot or part thereof recorded or developed after
the effective date hereof, and no structure or use, or part thereof, that has
been erected, enlarged, altered, relocated, or reconstructed after the
effective date hereof shall be used, occupied, or put into operation until a
final certificate of zoning compliance has been issued. The Administrator shall
not issue a final certificate of zoning compliance until it has been
determined, by inspection, that the work authorized by the initial certificate
of zoning compliance has been completed in accordance with approved plans.
Failure to obtain a final certificate of zoning compliance shall constitute a
separate violation of this title.
(1990 Code § 40-9-3)
12-3-3: APPEALS:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the
Zoning Administrator in any matter related to the interpretation or enforcement
of any provisions of this title may be made and treated in accordance with
Illinois law and the provisions of this section.
(1990 Code § 40-10-11)
   B.   Filing; Record Transmittal: Every appeal shall be made within forty
five (45) days of the matter complained of by filing with the Administrator and
the Zoning Board of Appeals a written notice specifying the grounds for appeal.
Every appeal shall also be filed with the Soil and Water Conservation District
as per State law. Not more than five (5) working days after the notice of
appeal has been filed, the Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Appeals
all records pertinent to the case. A filing fee is required.
(1990 Code § 40-10-12)
   C.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all further action on the matter
being appealed unless the Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of
Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that, for reasons
stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, further action shall not be stayed unless the Zoning
Board of Appeals or the Circuit Court grants a restraining order for due cause
and so notifies the Administrator.
(1990 Code § 40-10-13)
   D.   Public Hearing; Notice: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public
hearing on every appeal within a reasonable time after the filing of the appeal
notice. At the hearing, any interested party may appear and testify, either in
person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the time,
date, and place of the hearing, and briefly describing the issue to be decided
shall be given not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days
before the hearing:
      1.   By first class mail to all parties whose property is within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of the lot affected by the appeal;
      2.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
Village; and
      3.   By posting in places of business within the Village, including the
Village Hall.
(1990 Code § 40-10-14)
   E.   Recommendation By Board Of Appeals: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
recommend to the Board of Trustees for their decision and opinion of the appeal
within a reasonable time after the hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals, in
their opinion to the Board of Trustees, may recommend to reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or to modify or amend the decision or order appealed from to
the extent and in the manner that they deem appropriate. In so performing their
duties, the Zoning Board of Appeals has all the powers of the Administrator.
(1990 Code § 40-10-15)
   F.   Decision By Board Of Trustees: The Board of Trustees shall render a
decision on the appeal within a reasonable time after receiving the appropriate
records and recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Board of
Trustees may uphold the recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals or make
such other decision as they deem appropriate. In so doing, the Board of
Trustees has all the powers of the Administrator and Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1990 Code § 40-10-16)
12-3-4: FILING FEES:
The Board of Trustees shall establish (and may amend from time to time) a
schedule of filing fees for the various permits and procedures listed in this
Code. Said fees are intended to defray the administrative costs connected with
the processing/conducting of such permits or procedures. The fees do not
constitute a tax or other revenue-raising device. All such fees shall be paid
by the applicant to the Village Clerk.
(1990 Code § 40-9-7)
12-3-5: COMPLAINTS:
Whenever any violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint on forms provided by the Administrator.
The Administrator shall record such complaints, promptly investigate, and, if
necessary, institute appropriate corrective action.
(1990 Code § 40-9-6)
12-3-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Corrective Action Order:
      1.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever the Zoning Administrator finds, by
inspection or otherwise, that any lot, structure, or use, or work thereon is in
violation of this title, he shall so notify the responsible party and shall
order appropriate corrective action.
(1990 Code § 40-9-4)
      2.   Contents Of Order: The order to take corrective action shall be in
writing and shall include:
         a.   A description of the premises sufficient for identification;
         b.   A statement indicating the nature of the violation;
         c.   A statement of the remedial action necessary to effect
compliance;
         d.   The date by which the violation must be corrected;
         e.   A statement that the alleged violator is entitled to a conference
with the Administrator if he so desires;
         f.   The date by which an appeal of the corrective action order must
be filed, and a statement of the procedure for so filing; and
         g.   A statement that failure to obey a corrective action order shall
result in revocation of the certificate of zoning compliance and may result in
the imposition of fines.
(1990 Code § 40-9-4.1)
      3.   Service Of Order: A corrective action order shall be deemed properly
served upon the owner, occupant, or operator of the offending lot, structure,
or use if it is:
         a.   Served upon him personally;
         b.   Sent by certified mail to his last known address; or
         c.   Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the affected premises.
(1990 Code § 40-9-4.2)
      4.   Stop Work Order: Whenever any work is being done in violation of an
initial certificate of zoning compliance, the Administrator's corrective action
order may state that the violation must cease immediately. In such case, the
corrective action order is equivalent to a stop order.
(1990 Code § 40-9-4.3)
   B.   Emergency Measures: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title,
whenever the Administrator determines that any violation of this title poses an
imminent peril to life or property, he may institute, without notice or
hearing, any necessary proceedings to alleviate the perilous condition.
(1990 Code § 40-9-5)
12-3-7: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who is convicted of a violation of this title shall be fined
not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), plus costs. Each day on which a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
(1990 Code § 40-9-8; amd. 2019 Code)
   B.   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Village from taking
any other lawful action that may be necessary to secure compliance with this
title.
(1990 Code § 40-9-8)
ARTICLE A: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Section
12-3A-1: Board Established
12-3A-2: Membership; Appointment; Compensation
12-3A-3: Term of Office; Removals And Vacancies
12-3A-4: Meetings
12-3A-5: Records
12-3A-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established in accordance with Illinois
law (65 ILCS 5/11-13-3).
(1990 Code § 40-10-1)
12-3A-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION:
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members, all of whom
shall reside within the Village. Each Board member shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. One of the members
so appointed shall be named as Chair at the time of his appointment. Each Board
member shall receive compensation as established by the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 40-10-2)
12-3A-3: TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVALS AND VACANCIES:
   A.   Every member of the Zoning Board of Appeals, which was established
pursuant to the former Zoning Code, shall be entitled to serve on the Zoning
Board of Appeals established by this article until the date his term of office
would have expired if the former Zoning Code had remained in effect. Any person
appointed to the Zoning Board of Appeals on or after the effective date hereof
shall hold office for five (5) years from the date of his appointment, and
until his successor has been selected and qualified.
   B.   With the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, the Mayor may
remove any member of the Zoning Board of Appeals for cause after a public
hearing. Vacancies on the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filled for the
unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the same manner
as provided for the appointment of new members.
(1990 Code § 40-10-3)
12-3A-4: MEETINGS:
All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chair and at such times as the Board may determine. All Board meetings shall be
open to the public. The Board may adopt their own rules of meeting procedures
consistent with this title and the applicable Illinois Statutes. The Board may
select such officers as it deems necessary. The Chair, or in his absence the
Acting Chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Four
(4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of
at least four (4) members shall be necessary to authorize any Board action.
(1990 Code § 40-10-4)
12-3A-5: RECORDS:
   A.   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and examinations. These
minutes shall indicate the absence of any member, the vote or abstention of
each member on each question, and any official action taken.
   B.   A copy of every rule, variance, order or decision of the Board shall be
filed immediately with the Village Clerk and shall be a public record.
(1990 Code § 40-10-5)
ARTICLE B: VARIANCES
Section
12-3B-1: Variances Described
12-3B-2: Application; Information
12-3B-3: Public Hearing; Notice
12-3B-4: Advisory Report; Findings Of Fact
12-3B-5: Action By Village Board
12-3B-1: VARIANCES DESCRIBED:
A variance is a relaxation of the requirements of this title that are
applicable to a particular lot, structure, or use. A so-called "use variance"
which would allow a use that is neither permitted nor special in the district
in question is not a variance, it is an amendment, and may be granted only as
provided in article D of this chapter.
12-3B-2: APPLICATION; INFORMATION:
   A.   Filing Application: Every application for a variance shall be filed
with the Administrator on a prescribed form. Every variance application shall
also be filed with the Soil and Water Conservation District as per State law.
The Administrator shall promptly transmit said application, together with any
advice he might wish to offer, to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   B.   Information: The application shall contain sufficient information to
allow the Board to make an informed decision and shall include at a minimum,
the following. A filing fee is required.
      1.   Name and address of the applicant;
      2.   Location of the structure/use for which the variance is sought;
      3.   Brief description of adjacent lots, structures, and/or uses;
      4.   Brief description of the problems/circumstances engendering the
variance request;
      5.   Brief, but specific, explanation of the desired variance;
      6.   Specific section(s) of this title containing the regulations which,
if strictly applied, would cause a serious problem; and
      7.   Any other pertinent information that the Administrator may require.
(1990 Code § 40-10-19)
12-3B-3: PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE:
   A.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on each
variance request within a reasonable time after the variance application is
submitted to them. At the hearing, any interested party may appear and testify
either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the
time, date, and place of the hearing, and the nature of the proposed variance,
shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before
the hearing:
      1.   By first class mail to the applicant and to all parties whose
property is within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property affected by
the proposed variance;
      2.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
Village; and
      3.   By posting in places of business within the Village, including the
Village Hall.
   B.   This notice shall contain the particular location for which the
variation is requested as well as a brief statement of what the proposed
variation consists. Any notice required by this section need not include a
metes and bounds legal description of the location for which the variation is
requested, provided that the notice includes: (i) the common street address or
addresses and (ii) the property index number (“PIN”) or numbers of all the
parcels of real property contained in the area for which the variation is
requested.
(1990 Code § 40-10-20)
12-3B-4: ADVISORY REPORT; FINDINGS OF FACT:
Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall submit their advisory report to the Village Board. The report shall state
the recommendation of the Board of Appeals regarding the proposed variance. The
Board of Appeals shall not recommend any variance unless, based upon the
evidence presented to them, they determine that:
   A.   The proposed variance is consistent with the general purposes of this
Code;
   B.   Strict application of the district requirements would result in great
practical difficulties or hardship to the applicant, and prevent a reasonable
return on the property;
   C.   The proposed variance is the minimum deviation from such requirements
that will alleviate the difficulties/hardship, and allow a reasonable return on
the property;
   D.   The plight of the applicant is due to peculiar circumstances not of his
own making;
   E.   The peculiar circumstances engendering the variance request are not
applicable to another property within the district and, therefore, a variance
would be a more appropriate remedy than an amendment (rezoning); and
   F.   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the
area where the premises in question is located, nor materially frustrate
implementation of the Village Comprehensive Plan.
(1990 Code § 40-10-21)
12-3B-5: ACTION BY VILLAGE BOARD:
The Village Board shall act on every proposed variance at their next regularly
scheduled meeting following submission of the advisory report of the Board of
Appeals. Without further public hearing, the Village Board may approve or
disapprove any proposed variance by a simple majority vote of all the members
then holding office.
(1990 Code § 40-10-22)
ARTICLE C: SPECIAL USE PERMITS
Section
12-3C-1: Review And Approval Required
12-3C-2: Application; Information
12-3C-3: Public Hearing; Notice
12-3C-4: Action By Board Of Trustees
12-3C-1: REVIEW AND APPROVAL REQUIRED:
This title divides the Village into various districts, and permits in each
district as a matter of right only those uses which are clearly compatible with
one another. Certain other uses, because of their special operational or
physical characteristics, may or may not have a detrimental impact on nearby
permitted uses, depending upon their precise location, manner of operation and
other factors. Such “special uses” require careful case-by-case review, and may
be allowed only after review and approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1990 Code § 40-10-24)
12-3C-2: APPLICATION; INFORMATION:
   A.   Application; Information: Every applicant for a special use permit
shall submit to the Zoning Administrator in narrative and/or graphic form, the
items of information enumerated in subsection B of this section. The
Administrator shall promptly transmit the completed application, together with
any comments or recommendation he might have, to the Zoning Board of Appeals. A
filing fee is required.
   B.   Items Of Information:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant;
      2.   Name and address of the owner or operator of the proposed structure
or use, if different from subsection B1 of this section;
      3.   Nature of the proposed use, including type of activity, manner of
operation, number of occupants or employees, and similar matters;
      4.   Location of the proposed use or structure and its relationship to
existing uses of structures on adjacent lots;
      5.   Area and dimensions of the site for the proposed structure or use;
      6.   Existing topography of the site and proposed finished grade;
      7.   Existing and proposed screening, landscaping, and erosion control
features on the site, including the parking area;
      8.   Height and setbacks of the proposed structure;
      9.   Number and size of the proposed dwelling units, if any;
      10.   Number and location of proposed parking/loading spaces and
accessways;
      11.   Identification and location of all existing or proposed utilities,
whether public or private; and/or
      12.   Any other pertinent information that the Administrator may require.
(1990 Code § 40-10-25)
12-3C-3: PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE:
   A.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on every
special use permit application within a reasonable time after the application
is submitted to them. At the hearing, any interested party may appear and
testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice
indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing and the nature of the
proposed special use shall be given not more than thirty (30) days nor less
than fifteen (15) days before the hearing:
      1.   By first class mail to the applicant and to all parties whose
property is within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the lot line of the
proposed special use;
      2.   By publication in a newspaper published within the Village; and
      3.   By posting in places of business within the Village, including the
Village Hall.
   B.   Any notice required by this section need not include a metes and bounds
legal description of the area classified for special uses, provided that the
notice includes: (i) the common street address or addresses and (ii) the
property index number (“PIN”) or numbers of all the parcels of real property
contained in the area classified for special uses.
(1990 Code § 40-10-26)
ARTICLE D: AMENDMENTS
Section
12-3D-1: Generally
12-3D-1: GENERALLY:
   A.   Authority: The regulations imposed and the districts created under the
authority of this title may be amended, from time to time, by ordinance in
accordance with applicable statutes. An amendment shall be granted or denied by
the Village Board only after a public hearing before the Zoning Board of
Appeals and a report of its findings and recommendations has been submitted to
the Village Board.
   B.   Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by the Village
Board, by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a resident or owner of property in
the Village.
   C.   Processing: An application for an amendment shall be filed with the
Village Clerk and thereafter introduced to the Village Board. Such application
shall be forwarded from the Village Board by the Village Clerk to the Zoning
Board of Appeals with a request to hold a public hearing in accordance with
applicable statutes, and thereafter to submit a report of its findings and
recommendations to the Village Board.
   D.   Decisions: The Village Board, after receiving the report of the Zoning
Board of Appeals, may grant or deny any proposed amendment in accordance with
applicable statutes, or may refer it back to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
further consideration.
   E.   Protests: The favorable vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the
Village Board is required to pass an amendment to this title when the proposed
amendment is opposed, in writing, by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the
frontage proposed to be altered, by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the
frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners
of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed
to be altered. (65 ILCS 5/11-13-14)
CHAPTER 4: ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
Section
12-4-1: Districts And Minimum Areas Established
12-4-2: Zoning Map
12-4-3: Interpretation Of District Boundaries
12-4-4: Zoning Of Annexed Land
12-4-1: DISTRICTS AND MINIMUM AREAS ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Zoning Districts: In order to implement the regulatory scheme of this
title so as to achieve the objectives enumerated in section
12-1-2 of this title, the entire Village is hereby divided into the following
zoning districts:
District Designation Minimum Area
District                                    Designation Minimum Area
Agricultural                                A           None
Single-Family Residence (Small Lots)        R-1         5 acres
One- and Two-Family Residences (Large Lots) R-2         3 acres
Mobile Housing                              R-4         3 acres
General Retail Business                     B-2         1 acre
Service Retail Business                     B-3         1 acre
Industrial (Restricted)                     I-1         5 acres
 
   B.   Minimum Area: The minimum area requirement (which is intended to
prevent spot zoning) refers to the smallest total area of contiguous parcels
that can properly be given the particular district classification. The minimum
area requirement is not satisfied merely because the acreage of numerous
noncontiguous parcels, when aggregated, happens to equal or exceed the minimum
area indicated in subsection A of this section.
(1990 Code § 40-3-1)
12-4-2: ZONING MAP:
   A.   Boundaries: The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby
established as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Village. This map,
including all notations and other information thereon, is hereby made a part of
this title by reference. The Official Zoning Map shall be kept on file in the
Administrator’s Office.
(1990 Code § 40-3-2)
   B.   Annual Publication: In accordance with the State law, if any changes
are made in the zoning district or regulations during a calendar year, the
Village Clerk shall publish the revised Official Zoning Map of the Village not
later than March 31 of the following year.
(1990 Code § 40-3-2.1)
12-4-3: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
In determining, with precision, what territory is actually included within any
zoning district, the Administrator shall apply the following rules:
   A.   Where a district boundary as indicated on the Zoning Map approximately
follows any of the features listed below, the corresponding feature shall be
deemed the district boundary:
      1.   Centerline of any street, alley, or highway: Such centerline.
      2.   Lot line: Such lot line.
      3.   Railroad tracks: Right-of-way line of such tracks.
      4.   Stream: Center of such stream.
      5.   Section, fraction, or survey lines: Such lines.
   B.   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is legally vacated, the
zoning districts adjoining each side of such vacated public way shall
automatically extend to the center of such way, and all territory included in
the vacated way shall thereafter be subject to all regulations of the extended
districts.
(1990 Code § 40-3-2.2)
12-4-4: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
Any territory hereafter annexed to the Village shall automatically be in the R-
1 Single-Family Residence District, until duly changed by an amendment to this
title; except, that the Village Board of Trustees, with the advice of the
Zoning Board, may annex any territory as any other zoning district or districts
herein established if all legal requirements for zoning the property at the
time of the annexation and the requirements for amending this title by the
extension of the zoning district provisions are met.
(1990 Code § 40-3-2.3)
CHAPTER 5: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
12-5-1: General Prohibition
12-5-2: Unlisted Uses Prohibited
12-5-3: Compliance With Minimum Standards
12-5-4: Access Required
12-5-5: Front Setbacks
12-5-6: Intrusions Into Yards
12-5-7: Exceptions To Height Limits; Vision Triangle
12-5-8: Sewer Systems
12-5-9: Accessory Uses
12-5-10: Parabolic Or Dish Antennas
12-5-1: GENERAL PROHIBITION:
It shall be unlawful to do the following within the Village: a) erect, use,
occupy, enlarge, alter, relocate, or reconstruct any structure or part thereof;
b) create any lot; or c) use, occupy, or develop any lot or part thereof except
in conformity with the provisions of this title.
(1990 Code § 40-3-3)
12-5-2: UNLISTED USES PROHIBITED:
Whenever any use is not specifically listed as permitted or special within a
particular zoning district, such use shall be deemed prohibited in that
district. However, if the Village Board determines that the unlisted use is
similar to and compatible with the listed uses, they may allow such use by
amending this title in accordance with chapter 7, article D of this title. The
Village Board's decision shall become a permanent public record, and any
unlisted use that they approve shall thereafter have the same status as listed
uses.
(1990 Code § 40-3-4)
12-5-3: COMPLIANCE WITH MINIMUM STANDARDS:
Except as specifically provided otherwise in this title, every lot must meet
the minimum area, minimum dimensions, and minimum setback requirements of the
district in which it is located independently; that is, without counting any
portion of an abutting lot.
(1990 Code § 40-3-5)
12-5-4: ACCESS REQUIRED:
No building shall be erected on any lot unless such lot abuts, or has permanent
easement of access to, a public street or private street that conforms to the
standards set forth in title 13 of this Code.
(1990 Code § 40-3-6)
12-5-5: FRONT SETBACKS:
   A.   Corner/Through Lots: Every lot with multiple frontages (such as corner
or through lots) shall meet the front setback requirements of the district in
which it is located on every side having frontage.
(1990 Code § 40-3-7)
   B.   Certain Built-Up Areas: Except as specifically provided otherwise in
the business district(s) and in all residential zoning districts where lots
having fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage on one side of a street
between intersections (that is, in one block) are developed with buildings, and
the front setbacks of those lots do not differ by more than ten feet (10'), the
minimum required front setback on that block shall be the average of the
existing front setbacks; provided, however, that in any built-up area, no front
setback greater than fifty feet (50') shall be required.
(1990 Code § 40-3-8)
12-5-6: INTRUSIONS INTO YARDS:
To the extent indicated below, the following features of principal buildings
may intrude into required yards without thereby violating the minimum setback
requirements:
 
Features                                              Maximum Intrusion
Cornices, chimneys, planters or similar architectural 2 feet
features
Fire escapes                                          4 feet
Patios                                                No limit
Porches, if unenclosed and at ground level            6 feet
Balconies                                             4 feet
Canopies, roof overhangs                              4 feet
 
(1990 Code § 40-3-9)
12-5-7: EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITS; VISION TRIANGLE:
   A.   Necessary Appurtenances: Chimneys, church spires, parapet walls,
cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, antennas, or other necessary
appurtenances commonly constructed above the roofline shall be permitted to
exceed the maximum height limitations of the district in which they are located
if they comply with all other pertinent ordinances of the Village.
   B.   Vision Triangle: On corner lots, in the triangular portion of land
bounded by intersecting street lines and a line joining these street lines at
points thirty feet (30') from the point of intersection, no obstruction,
whether natural or manmade, shall intrude into the air space that is between
two feet (2') and ten feet (10') above the level of the adjacent street.
12-5-8: SEWER SYSTEMS:
In all districts, property owners of all buildings and places where people
live, work, or assemble shall provide for the sanitary disposal of all sewage
in accordance with the following requirements:
   A.   Public System: Whenever the public sanitary sewerage system is
reasonably accessible (that is, when the distance from the property in question
to the nearest public sewer with available capacity does not exceed 600 feet),
all sewage shall be discharged into such system, whether or not a private
sewerage system already exists or is more convenient.
   B.   Private System:
      1.   Whenever the public sewerage system is not reasonably accessible, a
private sewerage system shall be installed and used, and mobile home parks
shall provide a centralized sewerage/septic system for the use of dwelling
units thereof. All private sewerage systems shall be designed, constructed,
operated and maintained in conformity with the following requirements:
         a.   Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act (225 ILCS 225/1 et
seq.), as amended from time to time;
         b.   Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code, promulgated by the
Director of the Illinois Department of Public Health, as amended from time to
time;
         c.   Pertinent current regulations issued by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency; and
         d.   Applicable codes and regulations of the Village, particularly the
subdivision regulations.
      2.   The Administrator shall not issue any initial certificate of zoning
compliance unless, following consultation with the Village Engineer, he is
satisfied that these requirements will be met.
(1990 Code § 40-3-11)
12-5-9: ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Permitted:
      1.   Any accessory use shall be deemed permitted in a particular zoning
district if such use:
         a.   Meets the definition of “accessory use” found in section
12-2-2 of this title;
         b.   Is accessory to a principal structure or use that is allowed in a
particular zoning district as a permitted or special use; and
         c.   Is in compliance with the restrictions set forth in subsection B
of this section.
      2.   If an accessory structure is attached to a principal structure, it
shall be considered part of such structure.
(1990 Code § 40-3-12)
   B.   Restrictions:
      1.   Height: No accessory use shall be higher than:
         a.   Fifteen feet (15') in any residential district; or
         b.   Twenty five feet (25') in any other zoning district;
Provided, there shall be no height limit on agriculture-related accessory
structures.
      2.   Setbacks: No accessory use in any zoning district shall be located
in any part of any yard (front, side, or rear) that is required because of the
setback regulations of such district; provided, that except as specifically
provided otherwise in any residential district, an accessory use may be located
as close as five feet (5') to any side or rear lot line.
      3.   Yard Coverage: Accessory uses shall not cover more than thirty
percent (30%) of a required rear yard.
      4.   Use As Dwelling: Use of any accessory structure as a permanent
dwelling (i.e., more than 3 months’ continuous occupancy) is strictly
prohibited throughout the Village.
(1990 Code § 40-3-12.1)
12-5-10: PARABOLIC OR DISH ANTENNAS:
   A.   Requirements: Parabolic or dish-type antennas located outside of a
business or residence shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Number: Maximum number per business lot or residence lot shall be
one. Businesses selling these discs shall be allowed a maximum of three (3),
and only one of these shall be allowed in front of the building.
      2.   Location:
         a.   The parabolic or dish-type antenna shall be located in the rear
yard; except, that when the main building is on a corner lot, the parabolic or
dish-type antenna cannot be closer to the adjoining side street than the main
building is permitted to be located.
         b.   (1) The parabolic or dish-type antenna shall be placed in the
rear yard; except, that if a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained from
the rear yard, the antenna may be located on the side yard of the property,
subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator and subject to the other
requirements of this section.
         b.   (2) In the event that a usable satellite signal cannot be
obtained from the rear or side yard of the property, such antenna may be placed
on the roof of a structure subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator
and subject to the other requirements of this section (see subsection A6 of
this section).
         c.   All parts of the parabolic or dish-type antenna structure must be
a minimum of five feet (5') from all property lines of the lot.
      3.   Screening: Screening shall be as deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator for commercial installations.
      4.   Design And Installation Specifications:
         a.   The parabolic or dish-type antenna shall be mounted on a steel
pipe support embedded in a concrete foundation, and the parabolic or dish-type
antenna, when turned perpendicular to the ground, together with the base, shall
not extend more than fifteen feet (15') above the ground. In the event that a
usable signal cannot be obtained at a height of fifteen feet (15'), then the
pole may be raised to the minimum height necessary to obtain a clear signal for
the installation. The main diameter of the parabolic or dish-type antenna shall
not exceed eleven feet (11').
         b.   The base assembly shall be adequately anchored to the steel pipe
support so as not to constitute a hazard in winds of eighty (80) miles per hour
velocity. Structural design for the parabolic or dish-type antenna base
assembly, steel pipe support and concrete foundation shall conform to the
applicable provisions in the most recent edition of the International Building
Code. All plans, computations and specifications required for such design work
shall be prepared by an architect or engineer, or said structural design shall
be warranted by the manufacturer or installer, and shall be reviewed and
approved by the Village Engineer.
      5.   Safety Concerns: Observance of safe distances between the parabolic
or dish-type antenna, appendages thereto, and public utility wires in
accordance with public utility requirements shall be mandatory. Polar-mount and
drive-motor systems shall conform to the National Electric Code requirements in
existence at the time of application for a permit.
      6.   Roof-Mounted Antennas: Parabolic or dish-type antenna shall be roof-
mounted, unless the dish is four feet (4') or less in diameter and is mounted
on the rear portion of the roof.
      7.   Use As A Sign: No parabolic or dish-type antenna shall be used or
serve as a sign for the purpose of advertisement by a business or commercial
unit.
      8.   Zoning Occupancy Permit Required: A zoning occupancy permit shall be
required prior to erection of any parabolic or dish-type antenna.
   B.   Variances: All petitions for relief from the provisions of this section
shall be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals and approved by the Village
Board.
   C.   Exemptions From Provisions: This section shall not apply to any
existing parabolic or dish-type antennas which have been installed prior to the
effective date hereof.
   D.   Nuisance Declared: Any violation of this section is hereby declared to
be a nuisance.
   E.   Injunction: In addition to any other relief provided by this Code, the
Village Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an
injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this section. Such
application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order,
temporary injunction and permanent injunction.
(1990 Code § 40-3-14)
CHAPTER 6: A AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
Section
12-6-1: Description
12-6-2: Lot And Building Requirements
12-6-3: Permitted Uses
12-6-4: Special Uses
12-6-1: DESCRIPTION:
The A Agricultural District encompasses areas that are presently undeveloped or
sparsely developed and that, for various reasons, should remain so for the
foreseeable future. Some tracts of land in this district are fertile and
relatively level and best suited for agricultural pursuits. Other tracts in
this district have such poor soils, steep slopes, inadequate natural drainage,
and/or other problems, or are simply so distant from existing developed areas
that the provision and maintenance of roads, utilities, and stormwater drainage
systems would be impractical or exceedingly expensive to the tax-paying public.
(1990 Code § 40-4-1)
12-6-2: LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   One Dwelling Per Lot: In the A District, only one dwelling shall be
situated on any lot.
   B.   Specific Lot And Building Requirements: Every principal building
erected in the A District shall conform to the following requirements:
      1.   Minimum lot area: One acre.
      2.   Minimum lot width: One hundred fifty feet (150') at the established
building line.
      3.   Minimum lot depth: One hundred fifty feet (150').
      4.   Minimum setbacks:
         a.   From front lot line: Fifty feet (50').
         b.   Side yards: Minimum setback from either side lot line shall be
fifteen feet (15')
         c.   From rear lot line: Thirty feet (30').
      5.   Minimum building height (does not apply to accessory agricultural
structures): Thirty feet (30').
(1990 Code § 40-4-3)
12-6-3: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses in accordance with section
12-5-9 of this title.
Agriculture, including all uses commonly classified as such, provided the
requirements of section
12-12-2 of this title are met.
Cemeteries.
Government uses of the Village, State, County, Township, or a village not
needing development or requiring any building structure.
Nurseries, greenhouses, temporary produce stands.
Single-family dwellings.
(1990 Code § 40-4-4)
12-6-4: SPECIAL USES:
Agricultural implement sales.
Amusement facilities, such as go-cart tracks, miniature golf courses, etc.
Animal hospitals.
Churches and other places of formal worship.
Clubs or lodges, private; but not those which have as their chief activity a
service customarily carried on as a business.
Golf courses, regulation size.
Government uses other than those of the Village.
Home occupations.
Institutions, such as convents, retreat houses, seminaries, etc.
Kennels, commercial.
Nursing homes, sanitariums.
Utility substations.
(1990 Code § 40-4-5)
CHAPTER 7: RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A: R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT (SMALL LOTS)
Section
12-7A-1: Description
12-7A-2: Special Restrictions
12-7A-3: Lot And Building Requirements
12-7A-4: Permitted Uses
12-7A-5: Special Uses
12-7A-1: DESCRIPTION:
In the R-1 Single-Family Residence District (Small Lots), land is principally
used for or is best suited for detached, single-family dwellings and related
educational, religious, and recreational facilities. The regulations for this
district are intended to stabilize and preserve sound existing single-family
neighborhoods, and to promote the development of subdivisions offering a range
of new, conventionally constructed, single-family housing. Other types of
residences (mobile homes, duplexes, apartments, etc.) are strictly prohibited
in this district.
(1990 Code § 40-4-7)
12-7A-2: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   One Principal Building Per Lot: In the R-1 District, only one principal
building shall be situated on any lot.
   B.   Mobile Homes (see also article C of this chapter and title 10, chapter
2 of this Code):
      1.   No mobile home shall be brought into or placed anywhere in the R-
1 District except with the special permission from the Board of Appeals for use
as temporary housing during construction of a permanent dwelling in compliance
with all appropriate provisions of this title.
      2.   No existing mobile home in the R-1 District shall be immobilized,
unless a special use permit is granted.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to replace any existing mobile home located in
the R-1 District which is not immobilized at the effective date hereof, and an
existing mobile home which has been immobilized unless it is to be subsequently
occupied by the present owner-occupant, without a special use permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals. Mobile homes used as rental properties shall not be
replaced.
(1990 Code § 40-4-8)
12-7A-3: LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
Every principal building erected in the R-1 District shall conform to the
following requirements:
   A.   Minimum lot Area: Twenty one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780)
square feet (or prevailing County requirements).
   B.   Minimum lot width: Fifty feet (50') at the established building line.
   C.   Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet (100').
   D.   Minimum setbacks:
      1.   From front lot line: Twenty five feet (25').
      2.   From either side lot line: Five feet (5').
      3.   From rear lot line: Twenty five feet (25').
   E.   Maximum building height: Two (2) stories, not to exceed thirty feet
(30').
(1990 Code § 40-4-9)
12-7A-4: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses in accordance with section
12-5-9 of this title.
Agriculture, including all uses commonly classified as such, provided the
requirements of section
12-12-2 of this title are met.
Government uses of the Village not requiring development or building
structures.
Single-family dwellings, conventionally constructed.
(1990 Code § 40-4-10)
12-7A-5: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance
with chapter 3, article C of this title:
Churches and related religious facilities.
Home occupations, but only in conformity with the requirements of section
12-12-4 of this title.
Schools.
Utility substations.
(1990 Code § 40-4-11)
ARTICLE B: R-2 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT (LARGE LOTS)
Section
12-7B-1: Description
12-7B-2: Special Restrictions
12-7B-3: Lot And Building Requirements
12-7B-4: Permitted Uses
12-7B-5: Special Uses
12-7B-1: DESCRIPTION:
The R-2 One- and Two-Family Residence District (Large Lots) encompasses areas
suitable for conventionally-constructed single-family dwellings as well as
related educational, religious, and recreational facilities. The regulations
for this district are intended to stabilize and preserve sound existing single-
family neighborhoods, and to promote the development of subdivisions offering a
range of new conventionally-constructed single-family housing. Other types of
residences (mobile homes, duplexes, apartments, etc.) are strictly prohibited
in this district.
(1990 Code § 40-4-12)
12-7B-2: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS:
The provisions of section
12-7A-2 of this chapter shall be controlling in this district.
(1990 Code § 40-4-15)
12-7B-3: LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
Every principal building erected in the R-2 District shall conform to the
following requirements:
   A.   Minimum lot area: Twenty nine thousand fifty five (29,055) square feet.
   B.   Minimum lot width: Seventy feet (70') at the established building line.
   C.   Minimum lot depth: One hundred feet (100').
   D.   Minimum setbacks:
      1.   From front lot line: Twenty five feet (25').
      2.   From either side lot line: Ten feet (10').
      3.   From rear lot line: Twenty five feet (25').
   E.   Maximum building height: Two (2) stories, not to exceed thirty feet
(30').
(1990 Code § 40-4-16)
12-7B-4: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the R-1 District (see section
12-7A-4 of this chapter).
(1990 Code § 40-4-17)
12-7B-5: SPECIAL USES:
Any use allowed by special use permit in the R-1 District (see section
12-7A-5 of this chapter).
Duplex dwelling units
Nursing homes.
(1990 Code § 40-4-18)
CHAPTER 8: B-2 GENERAL RETAIL AND B-3 SERVICE RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Section
12-8-1: Description
12-8-2: Lot And Building Requirements
12-8-3: Permitted Uses
12-8-4: Special Uses
12-8-1: DESCRIPTION:
The B-2 General Retail Business and B-3 Service Retail Business Districts
primarily encompass the long established commercial areas of the Village where
a wide range of goods and services is offered to the general public at retail
or wholesale.
(1990 Code § 40-4-40)
12-8-2: LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum lot area: None.
   B.   Minimum lot width: Fifty feet (50').
   C.   Minimum lot depth: None.
   D.   Minimum setbacks: Generally, whatever standards are necessary to comply
with applicable off-street parking and loading requirements. However, in no
case may setbacks be less than fifteen feet (15') at the front, ten feet (10')
at the side and twenty feet (20') at the rear lot lines (see subsection
12-5-5B of this title).
   E.   Maximum building height: Forty five feet (45').
(1990 Code § 40-4-41)
12-8-3: PERMITTED USES:
The following shall be permitted uses:
Any use permitted in the R-4 District (see section
12-7C-4 of this title).
Accessory uses in accordance with section
12-5-9 of this title.
Churches and related facilities.
Clubs and lodges.
Commercial establishments, wholesale and retail.
Government uses of the Village.
Medical/dental clinics.
Offices.
Service establishments.
(1990 Code § 40-4-42)
12-8-4: SPECIAL USES:
The following shall be special uses:
Utility substations.
(1990 Code § 40-4-43)
CHAPTER 9: I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Section
12-9-1: Description
12-9-2: Use Restrictions
12-9-3: Lot And Structure Requirements
12-9-4: Permitted Uses
12-9-1: DESCRIPTION:
The I-1 Industrial District is intended to provide for areas where light
industry, research facilities, warehouses, and wholesale businesses may locate
without detriment to the remainder of the community. In these areas, a
satisfactory correlation of factors required by such uses exists or can be
readily achieved.
(1990 Code § 40-4-52)
12-9-2: USE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Nuisances Prohibited: No production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing, repair, sale, or storage of goods, materials, or equipment shall
unreasonably interfere with the use, occupancy, or enjoyment of neighboring
properties or the community as a whole. Unreasonable interferences include, but
are not limited to, excessive traffic congestion, loud or shrill noises,
excessive emission of smoke, emission of toxic gases, excessive glare, and
noxious odors.
   B.   Enclosed Activities: All production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing or repair activities shall be conducted within completely enclosed
structures. Such use activities shall not normally create a nuisance
discernible beyond the property line. Storage areas may be open to the sky, but
shall be enclosed by walls or fences (whether solid or chainlink), including
gates, at least eight feet (8') high.
   C.   Buffer Strips: Wherever any industrial use located in this district
abuts any residential district, a twenty foot (20') wide view and noise control
buffer strip shall be installed. Such buffer strip shall consist of densely
planted shrubbery that is at least five feet (5') high when planted and that
can be expected to reach a height of ten feet (10') when full grown.
(1990 Code § 40-4-53)
12-9-3: LOT AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum lot area: One-half (1/2) acre.
   B.   Minimum lot width: One hundred twenty five feet (125') at the
established building line.
   C.   Minimum lot depth: One hundred fifty feet (150').
   D.   Minimum setbacks:
      1.   From front lot line: Twenty five feet (25').
      2.   From any side lot line: Twenty five feet (25').
      3.   From rear lot line: Twenty five feet (25').
   E.   Maximum structure height: Fifty feet (50').
(1990 Code § 40-4-54)
12-9-4: PERMITTED USES:
Provided all the use restrictions of this district are observed (see section
12-9-2 of this chapter), the following uses are permitted:
Any use permitted in the B-2 or B-3 District except single-family and/or
multiple-family dwellings.
Accessory uses in accordance with section
12-5-9 of this title.
Assembly, manufacturing, or processing of any commodity from semifinished
materials, provided explosives, flammable gases or liquids, or live animals are
not involved.
Freight and bus terminals and related mass transportation facilities.
Research and development facilities not involving explosives or flammable gases
or liquids.
Service stations.
Utility substations or government uses.
Warehousing or wholesaling of goods, except explosives, flammable gases or
liquids, or live animals.
(1990 Code § 40-4-55)
CHAPTER 10: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Section
12-10-1: Application Of Provisions
12-10-2: Existing Parking And Loading Facilities
12-10-3: Parking Lot Design Standards
12-10-4: Parking Location
12-10-5: Design And Location Of Loading Facilities
12-10-6: Computation Of Parking And Loading Spaces
12-10-7: Required Number Of Parking And Loading Spaces
12-10-8: Truck Parking
12-10-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with this
chapter for all structures and uses erected or established after the effective
date hereof.
(1990 Code § 40-5-1)
12-10-2: EXISTING PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
   A.   Existing off-street parking or loading facilities located on the same
lot as the use served shall not be reduced, or if already less than, shall not
be further reduced, below the requirements and standards for similar new
structures or uses.
   B.   When an existing structure or use is damaged or destroyed and
subsequently repaired or rebuilt, parking/loading facilities equivalent to any
maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored, but
additional parking/loading spaces need not be provided.
   C.   Whenever the use of any structure or premises is intensified through
addition of dwelling units, increased floor area, greater seating capacity,
etc., additional off-street parking and loading spaces commensurate with such
intensification shall be provided.
   D.   Whenever the existing use of a structure is changed to a different use,
off-street parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required herein
for such new use.
(1990 Code § 40-5-1.1)
12-10-3: PARKING LOT DESIGN STANDARDS:
All off-street parking lots shall conform to the following standards:
(1990 Code § 40-5-2)
   A.   Spaces:
      1.   Every off-street parking space shall be at least ten feet (10') wide
and twenty feet (20') long, and shall have at least seven feet (7') of vertical
clearance. Every space shall be situated so that no part of any parked vehicle
overhangs the public right-of-way.
      2.   Markings shall be laid and restored as often as necessary to clearly
delineate each parking space.
(1990 Code § 40-5-2.1)
   B.   Interior Aisles: Aisles within parking lots shall be sufficiently wide
to permit safe and efficient vehicular movement in the aisles and into and out
of parking spaces. Aisles designed for two-way traffic shall be at least twenty
two feet (22') wide. One-way aisles designed for sixty degree (60°) parking
shall be at least eighteen feet (18') wide.
(1990 Code § 40-5-2.2)
   C.   Accessways:
      1.   Parking lots shall be designed so that ingress to or egress from a
parking space is from an aisle or driveway, not directly from the public right-
of-way.
      2.   No accessway to any parking lot shall be located within thirty feet
(30') of any corner formed by the intersection of the rights-of-way of two (2)
or more streets. At intersections where traffic- control devices are installed,
the Administrator may increase this requirement as necessary to prevent
hazards.
      3.   Parking lot accessways (as well as residential driveways) and public
streets shall be aligned to form, as closely as feasible, right angles.
      4.   The accessway to every parking lot located in any business district
or in the Industrial District shall be at least twenty four feet (24') wide
unless two (2) one-way drives, each twelve feet (12') wide, are provided.
      5.   The accessway to every parking lot located in any residential
district shall be at least ten feet (10') wide; but if the parking area is
longer than one hundred feet (100'), access shall be provided either by one
two-way drive at least twenty feet (20') wide or by two one-way drives, each at
least ten feet (10') wide.
(1990 Code § 40-5-2.3)
   D.   Surfacing: Parking lots shall be graded and improved with a compacted
stone base at least four inches (4") thick, surfaced with at least two inches
(2") of asphaltic concrete or approved comparable material. (Oil and chip is
not comparable material.)
(1990 Code § 40-5-2.4)
   E.   Lighting: Any light(s) used to illuminate any parking lot shall be
arranged or shielded so as to confine direct light rays within the lot lines of
the parking lot to the greatest extent practicable.
(1990 Code § 40-5-2.5)
   F.   Landscaping:
      1.   In order to reduce heat and glare, to minimize blowing of dust and
trash, and to reduce the oppressive visual effects of large open parking areas,
landscaping may be required within every parking lot that contains twenty (20)
or more parking spaces.
      2.   When required, a landscaping plan (either a separate document or an
element of a more inclusive development plan) shall accompany every application
for an initial certificate of zoning compliance to develop any parking lot that
will contain twenty (20) or more parking spaces.
      3.   The landscaping plan shall include the following information:
         a.   Proposed type, amount, size, and spacing of plantings, including
trees, shrubbery, and ground cover;
         b.   Proposed size, construction materials, and drainage of landscaped
islands; and
         c.   Sketch indicating proposed spatial relationships of landscaped
areas, parking spaces, automobile circulation, and pedestrian movement.
(1990 Code § 40-5-2.6)
12-10-4: PARKING LOCATION:
All off-street parking shall be located in conformity with the following
requirements:
   A.   Dwellings:
      1.   Parking spaces accessory to any dwelling shall be located on the
same lot as the dwelling. Such parking spaces shall not be located in any front
yard except in the driveway, but may be located in the side or rear yards.
      2.   Each parking space accessory to a multi-family dwelling shall be
unobstructed so that no vehicle need be moved in order to allow another vehicle
to enter/exit the parking area; provided, that this requirement shall not be
applicable to two-family dwellings.
   B.   Business/Industrial Uses:
      1.   Every off-street parking space accessory to any business or
industrial use shall be located within five hundred feet (500') of the use
served; provided, that no portion of any parking lot for nonresidential uses
shall extend into any residential district, except by written permission of the
Administrator.
      2.   In any business district or in the Industrial District, off-street
parking facilities for different buildings or uses may be provided
collectively, but only if the total number of spaces so located together is not
less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use, and if all other
pertinent regulations are observed.
(1990 Code § 40-5-3)
12-10-5: DESIGN AND LOCATION OF LOADING FACILITIES:
All off-street loading facilities shall conform to the following minimum
standards:
   A.   Size Of Space: Every off-street loading space shall be at least twelve
feet (12') wide and forty five feet (45') long, exclusive of aisle and
maneuvering space, and shall have vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet
(14'). In no case shall a vehicle being loaded or unloaded overhang into the
public right-of-way.
   B.   Accessway: Every off-street loading space shall have a safe means of
vehicular access to a street or alley. Such accessway shall be at least twelve
feet (12') wide.
   C.   Surfacing: Every off-street loading area shall be improved with a
compacted stone base at least seven inches (7") thick, and shall be surfaced as
provided in title 13 of this Code for "local streets".
   D.   Buffer Strips: No loading space or area for vehicles over two (2) ton
cargo capacity shall be developed closer than fifty feet (50') to the lot line
of any lot located in any residential district unless such space/area is
completely enclosed by walls, a solid fence, or closely planted shrubbery at
least ten feet (10') in height and of sufficient density to block the view from
residential property.
   E.   Location: Every off-street loading space shall be located on the same
parcel of land as the use served and not closer than fifty feet (50') to the
intersection of the rights-of-way of two (2) or more streets, and not on any
required front yard.
(1990 Code § 40-5-4)
12-10-6: COMPUTATION OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
In computing the number of parking spaces required by this title, the Zoning
Administrator shall apply the following rules:
   A.   In computing parking space requirements based on the number of
employees, the maximum number of employees on the premises at any period of the
day shall be used. "Employee parking" means one parking space shall be required
per one and one-half (1.5) employees, unless otherwise stated.
   B.   In computing parking or loading space requirements on the basis of
building floor area, the gross floor area shall be used.
   C.   Whenever it is necessary to translate gross parking lot area into
number of parking spaces, three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross area
shall be deemed one parking space.
   D.   If computation of the number of parking or loading spaces required by
this title results in a fractional space, any fraction of one-half (1/2) or
more shall be counted as one space.
   E.   No space or portion thereof needed to satisfy the minimum applicable
requirement for number of off-street parking or loading spaces shall be counted
as part of the off-street parking or loading spaces required for another
structure or use.
(1990 Code § 40-5-5)
12-10-7: REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as indicated in tabular
form below. For any use that is not listed in the table, the same amount of
parking and loading space shall be provided as is required for the most similar
listed use. The Zoning Administrator shall make the determination of
similarity.
Use Parking Spaces Required Loading Spaces Required (If Any)
Use                 Parking Spaces Required                 Loading Spaces
                                                            Required (If Any)
Dwellings,
lodgings:
                                                            1 space if the use
Motels, boarding    1 space per lodging unit, plus employee has 20,000 sq. ft.
houses              parking                                 or more of floor
                                                            area
Mobile homes and    2 spaces per unit                       Not applicable
immobilized homes
Multi-family        2 spaces per dwelling unit              Not applicable
dwellings
Single-family and
two- family         2 spaces per dwelling unit              Not applicable
dwellings
Educational,
institutional,
recreational:
Churches, assembly  1 space per 4 seats in the largest      Not applicable
halls               seating area
Libraries, museums  1 space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area   On review by the
                                                            Administrator
                                                            To 50,000 sq. ft.
                                                            of gross floor
Nursing homes       1 space per 5 beds                      area, 1 space;
                                                            50,001 to 100,000
                                                            gross sq. ft., 2
                                                            spaces
Schools (elementary 1 space for every 20 students that the  On review by the
and junior high)    building is designed to accommodate,    Administrator
                    plus employee parking
Commercial, office,
service:
                                                            To 10,000 sq. ft.
                                                            of gross floor
All commercial and                                          area: 1 space; more
service uses,                                               than 10,000 sq.
unless specifically 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor  ft.: 1 space, plus
indicated otherwise area                                    1 additional space
below                                                       per 50,000 sq. ft.
                                                            of gross floor area
                                                            in excess of 10,000
                                                            sq. ft.
Banks, savings and
loans:
Walk-in             1 space per 300 sq. ft. of  gross floor
                    area, plus employee parking             Both walk-in and
                                                            drive- in: to
                                                            30,000 sq. ft. of
                                                            gross floor area:
Drive-in            5 spaces per teller window              none required;
                                                            30,001 to 100,000
                                                            sq. ft.: 1 space

Beauty shops and    2 spaces per chair, plus employee       Not applicable
barbershops         parking
                    4 spaces per bowling lane, plus         Not applicable,
Bowling alleys      additional spaces as required herein    except as required
                    for affiliated uses such as restaurants for affiliated uses
                    and taverns
Car washes          5 spaces per wash lane                  Not applicable
                                                            To 25,000 sq. ft.
                                                            of gross floor
                                                            area: 2 spaces;
                                                            more than 25,000
                                                            sq. ft. of gross
Furniture and       1 space per 600 sq. ft. of gross floor floor area: 2
appliance stores    area                                    spaces, plus 1
                                                            additional space
                                                            per 25,000 sq. ft.
                                                            of gross floor area
                                                            in excess of 25,000
                                                            sq. ft.
                    1 space per 150 sq. ft. of gross floor
Home occupations    area devoted to the home occupation in  Not applicable
                    addition to the parking requirements
                    for the dwelling
                                                            To 30,000 sq. ft.
Offices generally,                                          of gross floor
but not medical/    1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor  area: none
dental offices      area                                    required. 30,001 to
                                                            100,000 sq. ft.: 1
                                                            space
Offices, medical/   1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor
dental              area or 3 spaces per professional,      Not applicable
                    whichever is greater
                    1 space per 5 seats, plus 1 space per   1 space per 10,000
Mortuaries          funeral vehicle, but not less than 20   sq. ft. or more of
                    spaces per chapel or state room         gross floor area
Restaurants,
refreshment stands:
                    1 space per 4 seats or 1 space per 50
Sit-down            sq. ft. of gross floor area, whichever  Both sit-down and
                    is greater                              drive-in: 1 space
                                                            per structure
                                                            having 10,000 sq.
Drive-in            1 space per 25 sq. ft. of gross floor   ft. or more of
                    area                                    gross floor area


Service stations    2 spaces per service stall, plus        Not applicable
                    employee parking
                                                            1 space per
                    1 space per 2 seats or 1 space per 50   structure having
Taverns             sq. ft. of gross floor area, whichever  10,000 sq. ft. or
                    is greater                              more of gross floor
                                                            area
Theaters:
Indoor              1 space per 4 seats in largest seating  Not applicable
                    area
Drive-in            On review by the Administrator
                                                            To 25,000 sq. ft.
                                                            of gross floor area
                    1 space per 600 sq. ft. of enclosed     and open lot area:
                    gross floor area plus: up to 10,000 sq. 2 spaces. More than
Vehicle sales       ft. of open lot area devoted to sale/   25,000 sq. ft. of
(autos, boats,      display of vehicles. 1 space per 2,500  gross floor area
trailers, etc.)     sq. ft. of open lot area. Above 10,000  and open lot area:
                    sq. ft., 4 spaces, plus 1 additional    2 spaces, plus 1
                    space per 5,000 sq. ft. of open lot     additional space
                    area in excess of 10,000 sq. ft.        per 25,000 sq. ft.
                                                            in excess of 25,000
                                                            sq. ft.
Industrial:
                                                            To 20,000 sq. ft.
                                                            of gross floor
                                                            area: 1 space;
                                                            20,001 to 50,000
                                                            sq. ft.: 2 spaces.
Any manufacturing,  Employee parking (1.5 spaces per        50,001 to 90,000
warehousing, or     employee), plus 1 space per company     sq. ft.: 3 spaces;
other industrial    vehicle, plus 1 visitor space per 25    above 90,000 sq.
use                 employees on the major shift            ft.: 3 spaces, plus
                                                            1 additional space
                                                            per 50,000 sq. ft.
                                                            of gross floor area
                                                            in excess of 90,000
                                                            sq. ft.
 
(1990 Code § 40-5-6)
12-10-8: TRUCK PARKING:
Semitrucks and heavy duty commercial vehicles are hereby prohibited from
parking on commercial parking lots.
(1990 Code § 40-5-7)
CHAPTER 11: SIGNS
Section
12-11-1: Compliance Required
12-11-2: Sign Area
12-11-3: Special Situations
12-11-4: Sign Maintenance; Nonhazardous Conditions
12-11-5: Illumination
12-11-6: Movement Prohibited
12-11-7: Nonconforming Signs
12-11-8: Prohibited Signs
12-11-9: Signs Permitted In Zoning Districts
12-11-9-1: All Districts
12-11-9-2: Agricultural And Residential Districts
12-11-9-3: Business And Industrial Districts
12-11-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Any sign not expressly permitted in this chapter shall be deemed prohibited.
(1990 Code § 40-6-1)
12-11-2: SIGN AREA:
   A.   Definition: As used in this chapter, the term "sign area" means the
area of the one imaginary square or rectangle which would completely enclose
all the letters, parts, or symbols of a sign.
(1990 Code § 40-6-2.1)
   B.   Computation: Within the limitations and restrictions as further
provided in this chapter, the total area of all signs which an establishment is
permitted to display shall be computed according to the following formula:
      One and one-half (1.5) square feet of sign area per one foot (1') of
street frontage for the first one hundred feet (100') of such frontage, plus
one square foot of sign area per one foot (1') of frontage in excess of one
hundred feet (100') of such frontage;
      provided, that no establishment in any district shall display more than
three hundred (300) square feet of sign on any street front.
(1990 Code § 40-6-2)
12-11-3: SPECIAL SITUATIONS:
   A.   Except as specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, if an
establishment has frontage on two (2) or more streets, each side having such
frontage shall be considered separately for purposes of determining compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. However, the area allowance for signs
shall not be aggregated so as to permit such establishment to display on any
one frontage a greater area of signs than would be permitted by application of
the formula set forth in subsection
12-11-2B of this chapter for a single frontage.
   B.   The side of an establishment adjacent to an off-street parking area
shall not be deemed frontage unless the establishment has no other frontage.
(1990 Code § 40-6-2.2)
12-11-4: SIGN MAINTENANCE; NONHAZARDOUS CONDITIONS:
   A.   No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free
access or egress from any door, window, fire escape, or driveway.
   B.   No sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner that it
interferes with, obstructs the view of, or is likely to be confused with any
authorized traffic-control device.
   C.   Every sign shall be designed and constructed in conformity with any
applicable provisions of the adopted Building and Development Code (Title 11).
   D.   Every sign shall be maintained in neat and attractive condition by its
owner. The sign supports shall be kept painted to prevent rust or
deterioration.
(1990 Code § 40-6-3)
12-11-5: ILLUMINATION:
Illumination of signs is permitted, subject to the following requirements:
   A.   The light source is shaded, shielded, or directed so as to avoid the
creation or continuation of any nuisance or traffic hazard;
   B.   Only steady (not blinking/flashing) illumination is permitted; and
   C.   The owner shall keep and maintain every sign in a neat and attractive
manner.
(Ord. 2018-3-1, 3-5-2018)
12-11-6: MOVEMENT PROHIBITED:
Every sign that revolves, rotates, or mechanically moves in any manner is
prohibited.
(1990 Code § 40-6-5)
12-11-7: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: A NONCONFORMING SIGN means any lawfully erected sign or
billboard that does not conform to one or more provisions of this chapter or an
amendment hereto.
(1990 Code § 40-6-6)
   B.   Restrictions: Any nonconforming sign that does not pose an imminent
peril to life or property may lawfully remain subject to all the restrictions
on the enlargement, alteration, relocation, or reconstruction of nonconforming
structures set forth in chapter 13 of this title; provided, that:
      1.   Merely changing the message displayed on a nonconforming sign shall
not be construed as a prohibited alteration;
      2.   Whenever any sign is nonconforming solely because it is appurtenant
to a nonconforming commercial/industrial use located in any residential
district, said sign shall be treated in the same manner as it would be if it
were appurtenant to a commercial/industrial use located in any business
district or in the Industrial District.
(1990 Code § 40-6-6.1)
12-11-8: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
Except as specifically noted otherwise, the following signs and street graphics
are strictly prohibited throughout the Village:
   A.   Pennants, streamers, strings of light bulbs, spinners or similar
devices.
   B.   Signs attached to trees, fences or public utility poles, other than
warning signs posted by government officials or public utilities.
   C.   Defunct signs, including the posts or other supports therefor that
advertise or identify an activity, business, product, or service no longer
conducted on the premises where such sign is located.
   D.   Roof-mounted signs.
(1990 Code § 40-6-7)
12-11-9: SIGNS PERMITTED IN ZONING DISTRICTS:
12-11-9-1: ALL DISTRICTS:
Any sign or other street graphic enumerated in this section that complies with
the indicated requirements is permitted in any district of the Village. Such
signs or street graphics shall not be debited against the displaying the
establishment's sign area allowance (see subsection
12-11-2B of this chapter).
   A.   Construction Signs: Construction signs identifying the architects,
engineers, contractors, and other individuals or firms involved with the
construction, and/or announcing the character or purpose of the building, but
not advertising any product. Such signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square
feet in area, shall be confined to the site of the construction, and shall be
removed within fourteen (14) days after the intended use of the project has
begun.
   B.   Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs indicating the sale, rental, or
lease of the premises on which they are located. Such signs on residential
property shall not exceed four (4) square feet. On other property, such signs
shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. Not more than one real estate sign
per street front shall be erected on any lot. Such signs shall be removed
within seven (7) days of the sale, rental or lease.
   C.   Political Signs: Political signs announcing candidates seeking public/
political office and/or political issues and other pertinent information. Not
more than one such sign shall be erected on any lot or premises. In any
residential district, political signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square
feet. In other districts, such signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square
feet. Political signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the election
to which they pertain, by the party responsible for their erection.
   D.   Garage Sale Signs: Garage sale signs advertising a garage or yard sale
to be held on private residential property. Such signs shall not exceed four
(4) square feet and shall not be posted for longer than five (5) days.
   E.   Public Interest Signs And Street Banners: Public interest signs and
street banners publicizing a charitable or nonprofit event of general public
interest. in any residential district, public interest signs shall not exceed
thirty two (32) square feet. Public interest signs and street banners shall be
permitted only for fourteen (14) days before and seven (7) days after the
event.
   F.   Governmental, Public And Directional Signs: Governmental, public and
directional signs such as traffic control signs; railroad crossing signs; legal
notices; signs indicating the location of underground cables; no trespassing
signs; no parking signs; signs indicating the entrances and exits of parking
lots; signs indicating the location of public telephones; restrooms, etc; and
so forth.
   G.   Institutional Signs: Institutional signs identifying a public,
charitable, or religious institution. Such signs shall be located on the
premises of the institution, shall not obstruct the vision of motorists, and
shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet.
   H.   Integral Signs: Integral signs carved into stone or inlaid so as to
become part of the building, and containing such information as date of
erection, name of building, and memorial tributes.
   I.   Home Occupation Signs: Home occupation signs identifying only the name
and occupation of the residents: Home occupation signs shall not be
illuminated, and shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet.
   J.   Subdivision Entrance Signs (Identifying A Residential Subdivision Or
Apartment Complex): Subdivision entrance signs identifying a residential
subdivision or apartment complex shall contain no commercial advertising, and
shall be of a dimension, construction and erection so as to be unobstrusive and
compatible with the surrounding landscape.
   K.   House Numbers And/Or Name Of Occupant Signs: House numbers and/or name
of occupant signs shall be located on the lot to which the sign applies. Such
signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet for single-family dwellings, nor six
(6) square feet for multiple-family dwellings.
   L.   Signs Located In The Interior Of Any Building: Signs location in the
interior of any building or within an enclosed lobby or court of any building
or group of buildings, provided such signs are designed and located to be
viewed exclusively by the patrons or residents of such buildings.
(1990 Code § 40-6-8)
12-11-9-2: AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
On or after the effective date hereof, no sign other than those listed in
section
12-11-9-1 of this section
12-11-9 shall be erected in the Agricultural District or in any residential
district.
(1990 Code § 40-6-9)
12-11-9-3: BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
No establishment located in any business district or in the Industrial District
shall display on any street front a total area of sign in excess of the
allowance derived by application of the formula set forth in subsection
12-11-2B of this chapter. Additionally, signs in any business district or in
the Industrial District shall conform to the following requirements:
(1990 Code § 40-6-10)
   A.   Flush-Mounted Signs: No flush mounted (wall) sign shall:
      1.   Project more than eighteen inches (18") from the wall or surface to
which it is attached; or
      2.   Extend above the roofline of the building to which it is attached.
(1990 Code § 40-6-10.1)
   B.   Window Signs: Signs permanently (i.e., longer than 30 days) mounted in
display windows shall be debited against the sign area allowance of the
particular establishment. Window signs mounted for shorter periods shall not be
debited.
(1990 Code § 40-6-10.2)
   C.   Projecting Signs: No establishment shall display more than one
projecting sign on any street front. No projecting sign shall:
      1.   Project above the roofline of the building to which it is attached;
or
      2.   Extend below a point eight feet (8') above the ground or pavement;
or
      3.   Project over a driveway or behind the curb line of any public
street; or
      4.   Project more than four feet (4') from the building to which it is
attached; or
      5.   Exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. (1990 Code § 40-6-10.3)
   D.   Canopy Or Marquee Signs: Signs mounted flush on any canopy or marquee
shall be considered flush-mounted (wall) signs, and shall meet the requirements
of subsection A of this section. Signs suspended beneath a canopy or marquee
shall be considered projecting signs, and shall meet the requirements of
subsection C of this section.
(1990 Code § 40-6-10.4)
   E.   Freestanding Signs: No establishment shall display more than one
freestanding sign on any street front. Freestanding signs, whether mounted on
the ground or post-mounted, shall comply with the following regulations:
      1.   No part of any freestanding sign shall intrude into any public
right-of-way. No part of any freestanding sign that extends below a point ten
feet (10') above the ground or pavement shall be located closer than ten feet
(10') from the public right-of-way line.
      2.   The area of any freestanding sign, calculated in accordance with
subsection
12-11-2B of this chapter shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
      3.   When attached to its structural supports, no part of any
freestanding sign shall extend more than twenty feet (20') above the ground or
pavement.
      4.   The length or width of any freestanding sign shall not exceed twelve
feet (12').
(1990 Code § 40-6-10.5)
   F.   Billboards: Billboards and other off-premises advertising signs are
strictly prohibited in every district except the Industrial District. No
billboard shall:
      1.   Be stacked on top of another billboard; or
      2.   Be located closer than twenty five feet (25') to any lot line or any
public right-of-way; or
      3.   Be located closer than five hundred feet (500') from any other
billboard on the same side of the roadway; or
      4.   Extend more than twenty feet (20') above the ground or pavement; or
      5.   Exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area.
(1990 Code § 40-6-10.6)
CHAPTER 12: SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
Section
12-12-1: Application Of Provisions
12-12-2: Agricultural Activities
12-12-3: Fences And Walls
12-12-4: Home Occupations
12-12-5: Junkyards
12-12-6: Nursing Homes
12-12-7: Recreational Vehicles
12-12-8: Service Stations
12-12-9: Swimming Pools
12-12-10: Utility Substations
12-12-11: Kennels
12-12-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter establishes lot and structure requirements and design/operational
standards for specific, potentially troublesome structures and uses. These
regulations apply in every zoning district where the specific structure or use
is permitted or allowed by special use permit, but if more stringent
regulations are applicable in any particular district, such regulations shall
prevail.
(1990 Code § 40-7-1)
12-12-2: AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Farm Animals: No barn, stable, shed, or other structure intended to
shelter farm animals shall be erected closer than two hundred feet (200') to
any existing dwelling, or closer than two hundred feet (200') to any lot line
of residential property, whichever distance is greater. Similarly, fences shall
be erected or other means shall be taken to prevent farm animals from
approaching closer than two hundred feet (200') to any existing dwelling or
closer than two hundred feet (200') to any lot line or residential property,
whichever distance is greater.
   B.   Farm Equipment/Commodities: No agricultural equipment or commodities
(including, but not limited to, harvested crops, fertilizer, pesticides/fuels)
shall be stored outdoors closer than three hundred feet (300') to an existing
dwelling or any lot line of residential property. If said equipment/commodities
are stored within a completely enclosed structure, the structure shall be
located at least one hundred feet (100') from any lot line of residential
property.
   C.   Barbed Wire/Electrical Fences: See subsection
12-12-3A of this chapter.
(1990 Code § 40-7-2)
12-12-3: FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   No barbed wire or electrically charged fence shall be erected or
maintained anywhere in the Village (see also section
9-1-7 of this Code).
   B.   All privacy fences must be constructed post in (back yard) finish side
out (flat side) and are only allowed up to eight (8) foot in back yard and four
foot in front.   
   C.   No fence, wall, or other obstruction shall be erected within any public
right-of-way, except by written permission of the Zoning Administrator.
   D.   No fence, wall, or other obstruction shall be erected in violation of
the Illinois Drainage Code (70 ILCS 605/1-1 et seq.), as amended from time to
time.
(1990 Code § 40-7-3)
12-12-4: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Definition: A HOME OCCUPATION means any business, profession, or
occupation conducted for gain or support entirely within any dwelling or on any
residential premises.
   B.   Special Use: Within the Village, every home occupation shall be
considered a special use.
   C.   Regulations: No home occupation shall be established or conducted
except in conformity with the following regulations:
      1.   Unrelated Employees: A home occupation shall employ not more than
one individual who is unrelated to the family residing on the premises.
      2.   Floor Space: The total area devoted to a home occupation shall not
exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the dwelling or
five hundred (500) square feet, whichever is less.
      3.   Dwelling Alterations:
         a.   In any residential district, a dwelling shall not be altered to
accommodate a home occupation in such a way as to materially change the
residential character of the building.
         b.   No detached secondary structure may be constructed to accommodate
the conduct of the home occupation in any residential district.
      4.   Outdoor Storage: In any residential district, unenclosed storage of
equipment or materials used in connection with a home occupation is prohibited.
Police officers have a right to check recreational vehicle for permanent
dwelling, if suspected.
      5.   Nuisances: A home occupation shall not generate any offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, or electrical interference
noticeable at or beyond the lot lines. If found in violation, an ordinance fine
in an amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) will be assessed for a first
offense and the fine doubles for a second offense. Recreational vehicles must
be moved.
(1990 Code § 40-7-4)
12-12-5: JUNKYARDS:
   A.   No part of any junkyard, which includes any lot on which three (3) or
more inoperable vehicles are stored, shall be located closer than five hundred
feet (500') to the boundary of any residential district.
   B.   All vehicles, parts, and equipment shall be stored within a completely
enclosed structure or within an area screened by a wall, solid fence, or
closely planted shrubbery at least ten feet (10') high and of sufficient
density to block the view from adjacent property.
(1990 Code § 40-7-5)
Cross-reference:
   See definition of JUNKYARD in section
12-2-2 of this title
12-12-6: NURSING HOMES:
   A.   The lot on which any nursing home is situated shall have a minimum
width and depth of two hundred feet (200'), and a minimum area of two (2)
acres.
   B.   The principal building of any nursing home shall be located at least
twenty five feet (25') from all lot lines.
(1990 Code § 40-7-6)
12-12-7: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Regulations:
      1.   Not more than two (2) recreational vehicles shall be parked on any
lot. They shall not be parked on a street.
      2.   No recreational vehicle shall be used as a permanent dwelling.
      3.   No recreational vehicle shall be used as an office or for any other
commercial purpose.
      4.   Recreational vehicles shall be required to have setbacks as required
for accessory buildings.
   B.   Exemptions: The regulations of this section do not apply to
recreational vehicles parked in a permitted travel trailer park or on a
permitted recreational vehicles sales lot.
(1990 Code § 40-7-7)
12-12-8: SERVICE STATIONS:
   A.   All gasoline pumps and other service facilities shall be located at
least twenty feet (25') from any street right-of-way line, side lot line, or
rear lot line.
   B.   Every accessway shall be located at least two hundred feet (200') from
the principal building of any fire station, school, public library, church,
park, or playground; and at least thirty feet (30') from any intersection of
public streets.
(1990 Code § 40-7-8)
12-12-9: SWIMMING POOLS:
   A.   No private swimming pool or similar recreational structure, including,
but not limited to, hot tubs, wading pools, or a jacuzzi/whirlpool, whether
public or private, shall be permanently located in any front yard or closer
than twenty five feet (25') to any side or rear lot line.
   B.   Every swimming pool that is more than two feet (2') deep shall be
enclosed by a wall or fence at least four feet (4') in height. The passage
through such wall or fence shall be equipped with a gate.
   C.   Any violation of this section will be issued a fine starting at one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense with ten (10) days to correct. If
not corrected within the allotted time frame, the fine will be doubled.
(1990 Code § 40-7-9)
12-12-10: UTILITY SUBSTATIONS:
Every electrical substation, gas regulator station, telephone exchange
facility, private sewage treatment plant, private water storage facility, or
similar facility shall be deemed a special use and shall conform to the
following regulations:
   A.   Every lot on which any such facility is situated shall meet the minimum
area and dimension requirements of the district in which it is located. Every
part of any such facility shall be located at least twenty five feet (25') from
all lot lines or shall meet the district setback requirements, whichever is
greater.
   B.   In any residential district, every such facility shall be designed,
constructed, and operated so that it is compatible with the residential
character of the area.
   C.   Screening at least ten feet (10') in height and of sufficient density
to block the view from adjacent property shall be installed around every such
facility. Furthermore, if the Administrator determines that the facility poses
a safety hazard (for example, if there are transformers exposed), he shall
require that a secure fence at least ten feet (10') in height be installed
behind the planting screen.
(1990 Code § 40-7-10)
12-12-11: KENNELS:
   A.   The lot on which any kennel is situated shall have a minimum area of
three (3) acres.
   B.   Every kennel shall be located at least three hundred feet (300') from
the nearest dwelling, and at least two hundred feet (200') from a residential
lot line.
(1990 Code § 40-7-11)
Cross-reference:
   See also subsection
6-3A-8C of this Code
CHAPTER 13: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Section
12-13-1: Purpose
12-13-2: Definitions
12-13-3: Roof Mount SESs
12-13-4: Ground Mount SESs
12-13-5: Requirements For All SESs
12-13-6: Building Integrated Systems
12-13-7: Special Use Requirements
12-13-8: Administration
12-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the construction, installation,
and operation of solar energy systems (“SES”) in the Village of Spaulding in a
manner that promotes economic development and ensures the protection of health,
safety, and welfare while also avoiding adverse impacts. It is the intent of
this chapter to encourage the development of SESs that reduce reliance on
foreign and out-of-state energy resources, and bolster local economic
development and job creation. This chapter is not intended to abridge safety,
health or environmental requirements contained in other applicable codes,
standards, or ordinances. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to
nullify any provisions of local, State or Federal law.
12-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY: As applied to a building, structure, or use, one which is on the
same lot with, incidental to and subordinate to the main or principal structure
or use and which is used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or
principal structure, or the main or principal use.
BUILDING INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: A solar energy system that consists of integrating
photovoltaic modules into the building structure as the roof or facade and
which does not alter the relief of the roof.
GROUND MOUNT SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system that is directly
installed into the ground and is not attached or affixed to an existing
structure.
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: A solar energy system that produces electricity by the use
of semiconductor devices called photovoltaic cells that generate electricity
whenever light strikes them.
QUALIFIED SOLAR INSTALLER: A trained and qualified electrical professional who
has the skills and knowledge related to the construction and operation of solar
electrical equipment and installations and has received safety training on the
hazards involved.
ROOF MOUNT: A solar energy system in which solar panels are mounted on top of a
building roof as either a flush mounted system or as modules fixed to frames
which can be tilted toward the south at an optical angle.
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the
form of heat or light by a solar collector.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES): The components and subsystems required to convert
solar energy into electric or thermal energy suitable for use. The area of the
system includes all the land inside the perimeter of the system, which extends
to any fencing. The term applies, but is not limited to, solar photovoltaic
systems, solar thermal systems and solar hot water systems.
12-13-3: ROOF MOUNT SESs:
Roof mount SESs shall be permitted with a building permit in all zoning
districts where there is a principal structure. The building permit application
shall be submitted and shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable zoning
requirements. Building or roof mount SESs shall not exceed the maximum allowed
height for principal structures in any zoning district, and the collector
surface and mounting devices shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of
the building on which the system is mounted or built.
12-13-4: GROUND MOUNT SESs:
Ground mount solar energy systems shall be permitted in all zoning districts
only with a special use permit, subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Height: Ground mount SESs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height
when oriented at maximum tilt.
   B.   Residential Zoning Districts: SESs shall not be allowed as the primary
use or the principal structure in any Residential Zoning District. Ground mount
SESs shall not be allowed in a front yard of any Residential Zoning District.
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   Ground mount SESs shall meet the accessory structure setbacks for
the zoning district in which the unit is located, but in no event shall the
setback be less than five feet (5').
      2.   Ground mount SESs shall not extend beyond the side yard or rear yard
setback when oriented at minimum design tilt.
      3.   Ground mount SES installations shall not be located within fifty
feet (50') of any principal structure that is used for residential purposes
unless the owner of the property with the residential structure joins in the
application for special use for the ground mount SES.
   D.   Screening: All ground mount SES installations shall be appropriately
screened as reasonably determined during the special use permit process set
forth in section
12-13-7 of this chapter.
12-13-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SESs:
   A.   Reflection Angles: Reflection angles for solar collectors shall be
oriented such that they do not project glare onto adjacent properties.
   B.   Visibility: Solar energy systems shall be located in a manner to
reasonably minimize view blockage for surrounding properties and shading of
property to the north while still providing adequate solar access for
collectors.
   C.   Safety: Roof mount SESs, excluding building integrated systems, shall
allow for adequate roof access for firefighting purposes to the south facing or
flat roof upon which the panels are mounted.
   D.   Building Code: All SESs shall meet the requirements of the applicable
Village Building and Property Maintenance Codes.
   E.   Installation: All SES installations shall be performed by a qualified
solar installer.
   F.   Connection Inspection: Any connection of an SES to the public utility
grid shall be inspected by the appropriate public utility.
   G.   Approved Solar Components: Electric SES system components shall have a
UL listing or approved equivalent.
   H.   Appearance: Brand labels that are visible from the lot boundary of the
subject property shall be removed.
12-13-6: BUILDING INTEGRATED SYSTEMS:
Building integrated systems shall be permitted in all zoning districts but
shall meet the requirements of the applicable Village Building and Property
Maintenance Codes.
12-13-7: SPECIAL USE REQUIREMENTS:
All ground mount solar energy systems, including those that are the primary use
of the lot or are designed for providing energy to off-site uses or export to
the wholesale market, require a special use permit. The special use permit
application shall include, in addition to all information generally required
for special use applications, all of the following:
   A.   Property Lines: Existing property lines.
   B.   Buildings And Surfaces: Existing buildings and impervious surfaces.
   C.   Site Plan: A site plan of proposed conditions showing the following:
      1.   Location and spacing of the solar panels.
      2.   New electrical equipment other than at the existing building or
substation that is to be the connection point for the SES.
      3.   Perimeter fencing having a maximum height of eight feet (8') shall
be installed around the boundary of the SES. The fence shall contain
appropriate warning signage that is posted such that it is clearly visible on
the site.
   D.   Manufacturer Specifications: The manufacturer’s specifications and
recommended installation methods for all major equipment, including solar
panels, mounting systems and foundations for poles and racks.
   E.   Connection And Interconnection: A description of the method of
connecting the solar array to a building or substation, and utility
interconnection details with a copy of written notification to the utility
company requesting the proposed interconnection.
   F.   Setbacks: Information establishing that the SES is located a minimum of
fifty feet (50') from any principal residential dwelling that is not part the
special use permit.
12-13-8: ADMINISTRATION:
Any person or business entity who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses
to comply with, or resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall face fines of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
CHAPTER 14: NONCONFORMITIES
Section
12-14-1: Purpose
12-14-2: Nonconforming Lots
12-14-3: Nonconforming Structures
12-14-4: Nonconforming Uses Occupying A Structure
12-14-5: Nonconforming Uses Of Land
12-14-6: Nonconformities Under Permit Authority
12-14-1: PURPOSE:
The requirements imposed by this title are designed to guide the use of land by
encouraging the development of structures and uses that are compatible with the
predominant character of each of the various districts. Lots, structures, and
uses of land or structures that do not conform to the requirements of the
district in which they are located tend to impede appropriate development. For
example, nonconformities are frequently responsible for heavy traffic on
residential streets, the overtaxing of parking facilities, the creation of
nuisances, and/or the lowering of property values. The regulations of this
chapter are intended to alleviate such existing/potential problems by
encouraging the gradual elimination of nonconformities.
(1990 Code § 40-8-1)
12-14-2: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
   A.   Vacant Lot: Any vacant lot that does not conform to one or more of the
lot size (area dimensions) requirements of the district in which it is located
may, nonetheless, be developed for any use permitted in that district if such
vacant lot:
      1.   Was recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds prior to
the effective date hereof (or pertinent amendment hereto); and
      2.   Is at least fifty feet (50') wide.
(1990 Code § 40-8-2)
   B.   Two Or More Lots In Common Ownership: If two (2) or more lots or
combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage were of
record and in common ownership on the effective date hereof, and if one or more
of those lots does not meet the minimum lot width, depth, or area requirements
of the district in which it is located, the land involved shall be considered
an undivided parcel. No portion of any such parcel shall be developed except in
compliance with this title, nor shall any such parcel be divided so as to
create a lot that does not meet the requirements of this title.
(1990 Code § 40-8-2.1)
12-14-3: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
   A.   Any otherwise lawful structure which exists on the effective date
hereof, but which could not be erected under the terms of this title because of
requirements/restrictions concerning lot size, height, setbacks, or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, may lawfully
remain, subject to the following provisions:
      1.   Maintenance: A nonconforming structure may be maintained by ordinary
repairs.
      2.   Enlargement; Alteration: A nonconforming structure shall not be
enlarged or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity.
      3.   Relocation: A nonconforming structure shall not be moved unless,
after relocation, it will conform to all the regulations of the district in
which it will be situated.
      4.   Reconstruction: A nonconforming structure which is destroyed or
damaged by any means shall not be reconstructed if the Administrator determines
that the cost of such reconstruction exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
structure's market value at the time of loss, unless, after reconstruction, the
structure will conform to all applicable regulations of the district in which
it is located. In the event the Administrator determines the estimated cost of
reconstruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of the structure's market value
at the time of loss, repairs or reconstruction shall be permitted, provided
such work starts within six (6) months from the date the damage occurred and is
diligently pursued to completion.
   B.   The Administrator may require that the reconstruction cost estimate be
made by a bona fide construction contractor, and that the structure's market
value at the time of loss be determined by a licensed real estate appraiser.
The owner of the damaged structure shall be responsible for obtaining these
estimates for the Administrator.
(1990 Code § 40-8-3)
12-14-4: NONCONFORMING USES OCCUPYING A STRUCTURE:
If any lawful use occupying a structure exists on the effective date hereof,
but would not be allowed under the terms of this title, such use may lawfully
continue, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Maintenance: Any structure housing a nonconforming use may be
maintained through ordinary repairs.
   B.   Enlargement; Alteration; Reconstruction; Relocation: No structure
housing a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, structurally altered,
reconstructed, or relocated unless fifty percent (50%) of the structure is
changed to a permitted use.
   C.   Extension Of Use: No conforming use may be extended to any part(s) of
the structure not intended or designed for such use, nor shall the
nonconforming use be extended to occupy any land outside such structure.
   D.   Change Of Use: A nonconforming use occupying a structure may be changed
to a similar use, to a more restrictive use, or to a conforming use. Such use
shall not thereafter be changed to a less restrictive use.
   E.   Discontinuance Of Use: When a nonconforming use of a structure or of a
structure and premises in combination is discontinued for twelve (12)
consecutive months or for eighteen (18) months during any three (3) year
period, the nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed. Any
discontinuance caused by government action and without any contributing fault
by the nonconforming user shall not be counted in calculating the length of
discontinuance.
(1990 Code § 40-8-4)
12-14-5: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
Any lawful use of land existing on the effective date hereof that would not be
permitted under the terms of this title may lawfully continue, subject to the
following provisions:
   A.   Intensification Or Extension Of Use: A nonconforming use of land shall
not be intensified or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was
occupied by such use on the effective date hereof.
   B.   Relocation: No nonconforming use of land shall be moved, in whole or in
part, unless such use, upon relocation, will conform to all pertinent
regulations of the district to which it is proposed to be located.
   C.   Change Of Use: Whenever a nonconforming use of a building has been
changed to a more restrictive use or to a conforming use, such use shall not
thereafter be changed to a less restrictive use. If no structural alterations
are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another
nonconforming use of the same or more restricted classification.
   D.   Discontinuance: When a nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a
period of twelve (12) consecutive months, it shall not thereafter be resumed,
and any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the applicable district
regulations. Any discontinuance caused by government action and without any
contributing fault by the owner or operator shall not be counted in calculating
the length of discontinuance.
(1990 Code § 40-8-5)
12-14-6: NONCONFORMITIES UNDER PERMIT AUTHORITY:
The regulations of this chapter shall not apply to any change in an existing
structure or to any change in the use of a structure or of land for which a
permit was issued prior to the effective date hereof, or any pertinent
amendment hereto; provided, that the work authorized by such permit is
completed within a reasonable time.
(1990 Code § 40-8-6)
TITLE 13: SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS   1
RULES AND DEFINITIONS   2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT   3
PRELIMINARY PLAT   4
ENGINEERING PLANS; REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS   5
FINAL PLAT   6
SCHEDULES AND BONDS   7
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
Section
13-1-1: Title
13-1-2: Purpose
13-1-3: Scope
13-1-4: Application And Interpretation
13-1-5: Suitability Of Land For Subdivision
13-1-6: Exemptions From Provisions
13-1-7: Disclaimer Of Liability
13-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known, referred to, and cited as THE SUBDIVISION CODE.
(1990 Code § 34-1-1)
13-1-2: PURPOSE:
In accordance with State law, this chapter regulates the subdivision and
development of land in order to assist in achieving the following specific
objectives:
   A.   To preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety and
welfare;
   B.   To implement the Village Comprehensive Plan and the Official Map;
   C.   To provide a pleasant living environment by furthering the orderly
layout and development of land;
   D.   To avoid legal and other problems by requiring that subdivided land be
properly monumented and recorded;
   E.   To conserve and increase the value of land, improvements and buildings
throughout the Village;
   F.   To preserve the Village's natural beauty and topography to the maximum
feasible extent;
   G.   To protect against injury or damage caused by pollution, stormwater
runoff, or erosion and sedimentation;
   H.   To provide safe and convenient access to new developments and to avoid
traffic congestion and unnecessary public expenditures by requiring the proper
location, design, and construction of streets and sidewalks;
   I.   To ensure the proper installation and maintenance of adequate water
mains, sanitary sewers, stormwater sewers, and other utilities and services;
and
   J.   To ensure that in conservation areas, adequate parks and similar
facilities can be made available to serve the residents of new developments.
(1990 Code § 34-1-3)
13-1-3: SCOPE:
   A.   For the purpose of present and future development of the Village and
for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare of
persons living within the territory governed, the provisions and regulations
hereafter contained shall govern the subdividing and platting of lands lying
within the corporate limits of the Village and within all unincorporated
territory located within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the Village, as now
or hereafter existing, except as otherwise provided in this title. Within the
area of jurisdiction of the Village, the provisions of the Statutes of the
State of Illinois are hereby adopted as part of the “Official Plan of the
Village”.
   B.   This title prescribes procedures for the subdivision or resubdivision
of land within the area of jurisdiction of the Village and comprises the
procedures, requirements, standards and specifications with respect thereto.
(1990 Code § 34-1-2)
13-1-4: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: No lot, tract or parcel of land in a
“subdivision”, as defined herein, may be conveyed unless a final plat of the
property has been approved according to the requirements and provisions of this
title and recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds, except in
those instances in section
13-1-6 when subdivision plats will not be required.
(1990 Code § 34-1-5)
   B.   Interpretation: This title is intended as minimum requirements to
provide for coordinated, efficient, and economic development of the Village, to
ensure the adequacy of street and utility facilities, and to promote the public
health, safety and welfare. Thus, in accordance with State law, whenever this
title imposes higher standards than the County subdivision ordinance and the
Plat Act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes, said higher standards shall supersede
the County regulations in the unincorporated territory located within the
subdivision jurisdiction of the Village.
(1990 Code § 34-1-4)
13-1-5: SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR SUBDIVISION:
Land unsuitable for subdivision development due to drainage, flood hazard area,
hillside area, rock formation or any other condition or conditions constituting
a danger to health, life or property shall not be approved for subdivision
development unless the subdivider presents evidence or data satisfactory to the
Plan Commission, establishing that the methods proposed to meet any such
condition(s) are adequate to avoid any danger to health, life, or property.
(1990 Code § 34-1-6)
13-1-6: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this title do not apply, and no subdivision plat is required,
in any of the following instances; provided, however, all of the resulting
divisions shall conform to the zoning regulations:
   A.   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five (5)
acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access.
   B.   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any recorded
subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
   C.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and
contiguous land.
   D.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a
right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other
pipelines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
   E.   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants
or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
   F.   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
   G.   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the
division into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or tract of
land existing on July 17, 1959, and not involving any new streets or easements
of access; provided, however, a plat of survey shall be prepared by a
registered surveyor and submitted to the Plan Commission.
   H.   The sale of a single lot of less than five (5) acres from a larger
tract when a plat of survey is made by a registered surveyor; provided, that
this exemption shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots from the same
larger tract of land, as determined by the dimensions and configuration of the
larger tract on October 1, 1973; and provided also, that this exemption does
not invalidate any local requirements applicable to the subdivision of land.
   I.   The division of land for cemetery use. Under the circumstances when
subdivision plats are not required as described in this section, the Plan
Commission reserves the right to request a plat of survey or other
documentation if there is a need for said survey or documentation in order to
verify conformance to the zoning regulations and/or to ensure that the division
of property is in accordance with the purpose and objectives of this title as
listed in section
13-1-2 of this chapter.
(1990 Code § 34-1-9)
13-1-7: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   A.   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
official, board member, agent or employee of the Village shall render himself
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under
this title.
(1990 Code § 34-1-10)
   B.   Any suit brought against any official, board member, agent, or employee
of the Village as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this title shall be defended by the Village Attorney until the
final determination of the legal proceedings.
(1990 Code § 34-1-10)
CHAPTER 2: RULES AND DEFINITIONS
Section
13-2-1: Rules Of Word Construction; Adoption Of Certain Definitions By
Reference
13-2-2: Definitions
13-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION; ADOPTION OF CERTAIN DEFINITIONS BY
REFERENCE:
   A.   The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted
in accordance with the following rules of construction: Whenever a word or term
defined hereinafter appears in the text of this title, its meaning shall be
construed as set forth in the definition thereof.
(1990 Code § 34-1-7)
   B.   All definitions otherwise contained in the zoning regulations, if any,
and this Village Code are hereby adopted by reference.
(1990 Code § 34-1-8)
13-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
AREA, GROSS: The entire area within the boundary lines of the territory
proposed for subdivision, including the area to be dedicated for street and
alley rights-of-way and public use.
BARRIER (NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL): Any street, highway, river, pond, canal,
railroad, levee, embankment or screening by a fence or hedge.
COMMISSION: The Plan Commission of the Village (see title 2, chapter 1 of the
Village Code).
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan or any portion hereof adopted by the Village for
the coordinated physical development, including, among other things, plans and
programs regarding the location, character and extent of highways,
transportation routes, bridges, public buildings or uses, utilities, schools,
residential, commercial or industrial land uses, parks, forests, dams, drainage
facilities and projects affecting the conservation of natural resources of the
Village.
CUL-DE-SAC: A short, minor, local street, having only one end open for
vehicular traffic and the other end permanently terminated by a turn-around for
vehicles.
DESIGN: The arrangement of uses on the land and use of land for easements, lots
and rights-of-way, including material, alignment, grade, and width of these
elements.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: All land subject to periodic inundation from overflow or
natural waterways when subjected to the maximum possible runoff from three
inches (3") of rain per hour as calculated by approved engineering methods
subject to periodic ponding.
HILLSIDE AREA: An area with an average slope of twenty percent (20%) or more.
IMPROVEMENT: Refers to site grading, street work and utilities (including
water, sewer, electric, gas and stormwater), to be installed or agreed to be
installed by the subdivider on land to be used for public or private streets
and easements or other purposes as are necessary for the general use of lot
owners in the subdivision.
IMPROVEMENT PLAN: The engineering plans showing types of materials and
construction details for the physical structures and facilities to be installed
both in or in conjunction with the subdivision.
LAND USE PLAN: The long-range plan for the desirable use of land in the Village
as officially adopted and as amended from time to time by the Village Board of
Trustees or appropriate corporate authority.
LOADING SPACE: An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or
contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials and which abuts
upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
PARKING LANE: An auxiliary lane of a street used primarily for vehicular
parking.
PLANS: All of the drawings, including plats, cross-sections, profiles, working
details and specifications which the subdivider prepares or has prepared to
show the character, extent and details of improvements required in chapter 5 of
this title, and which plans shall conform to any requirements of the Plan
Commission as to scale and details for submittal to the appropriate officials
of the Village for consideration, approval or disapproval.
PLAT: The maps, drawings, charts, and other documents complying with all
applicable provisions of this title which constitute the plan for subdivision
and which the subdivider submits to the Village for consideration of approval.
PLAT, FINAL: A plat prepared to the requirements of chapter 6 of this title
and, if approved, will be submitted to the County Recorder of Deeds for
recordation.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A plat drawn upon tracing paper or other material from which
reproduction can be made and conforming to the requirements of chapter 4 of
this title.
PREMISES: A lot, together with all the buildings and uses thereon.
PUBLIC SEWER AND WATER FACILITIES: Those water and/or sewer facilities of the
Village, County, State, Federal and/or a sanitary sewer district and/or
privately-owned public facilities which comply with applicable public health
standards.
RESUBDIVISION: See definition of SUBDIVISION.
ROAD, COUNTY: A term denoting a tract of land which is used primarily for the
purposes of vehicular movement and includes all of the facilities and
improvements within the rights-of-way. This tract of land must have been
presented to and accepted by the County Superintendent of Highways.
ROADBED: The graded portion of a street upon which the base course, surface
course, shoulders and median are constructed.
ROADWAY: The entire improved portion of the street, including shoulders,
parking lanes, travelways, curbs and gutters which lie between the right-of-way
lines.
SETBACK LINE: The line parallel to the front, side, or rear lot line
establishing the minimum space to be provided as the front, side or rear yard.
SLOPE: The degree of natural inclination of the existing ground.
STREET: A general term denoting a public or private way for the purpose of
vehicular travel. The term includes all facilities which normally occur within
the right-of-way. The term shall also include such other designation for a
street as: a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court, or as otherwise designated, but excluding
an alley or a way for pedestrian use only.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street designed or utilized primarily for high vehicular
speeds and heavy volume of traffic on a continuous route, with intersections at
grade, and which may have direct access to abutting properties, and on which
geometric design and traffic-control measures are used to expedite the safe
movement of through traffic.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street which carries or is proposed to carry intermediate
volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial streets and which may or may
not be continuous.
STREET, LOCAL: A street used primarily for access to abutting properties,
providing for minimum speeds and traffic volumes.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS OR SERVICE ROAD: A local street parallel and adjacent
to arterial streets providing access to abutting properties.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed which requires permanent or temporary location
on the ground or is attached to something having a permanent or temporary
location on the ground.
STUB: A street that is temporarily terminated, but that is planned for future
continuation.
SUBDIVIDE: See definition of SUBDIVISION.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, or
other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide
land in a manner that constitutes a SUBDIVISION as herein defined.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for the
purpose of either immediate or future sale, rental, or building development, or
any other uses, or the establishment or dedication of a public street or alley
through a tract of land regardless of size. The term "subdivision" shall also
include all resubdivisions of land or lots.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: A division of land into two (2), but not more than four
(4), lots, all of which front upon an existing street, not involving new
streets or other rights-of-way, easements, improvements, or other provisions
for public areas and facilities.
TOPOGRAPHY: The relief features or surface configuration of an area of land.
TRAVELWAY: That portion of a street used for the movement of vehicles,
exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes.
VACATE: To terminate the legal existence of a right-of-way or subdivision, and
to so note on the final plat recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds.
VARIANCE, SUBDIVISION: A relaxation in the strict application of the design and
improvement standards set forth in this title.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The Zoning Administrator or the person designated by the
Village Board to enforce and administer the provisions of this title or his
duly appointed representative(s).
(1990 Code § 34-1-7)
CHAPTER 3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
13-3-1: Enforcement Official
13-3-2: Variances
13-3-3: Amendments
13-3-4: Fees
13-3-5: Vacation Of Plats
13-3-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The Zoning Administrator, referred to herein as “the Administrator”, is hereby
authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this title.
This broad responsibility encompasses, but is not limited to, the following
specific duties:
   A.   To review and forward preliminary and final plats to the Plan
Commission;
   B.   To transmit improvement plans to the Village Engineer for his review;
   C.   To issue stop orders as necessary when the Village Engineer determines
that approved improvements are being constructed in violation of this title;
   D.   To pursue actions authorized in this title when a developer fails to
complete required improvements;
   E.   To evaluate and make decisions concerning proposed minor changes in
approved final plats;
   F.   To review and forward applications for subdivision variances to the
Plan Commission;
   G.   To periodically review the provisions of this title to determine
whether revisions are needed, and to make recommendations to the Plan
Commission as necessary;
   H.   To maintain up-to-date records of matters pertaining to this title,
including, but not limited to, preliminary plats, as-built records of completed
improvements, final plats, variances, and amendments; and
   I.   To provide information to subdividers/developers and to the general
public on matters related to this title.
(1990 Code § 34-5-1)
13-3-2: VARIANCES:
   A.   Application And Filing For Variance: Any subdivider/developer desiring
a variance from the requirements of this title shall file a written application
therefor with the Zoning Administrator at the same time that he files his
preliminary plat. The application shall fully explain the grounds for the
variance request, and specify the sections of this title which, if strictly
applied, would cause great practical difficulties or hardship. The
Administrator shall prepare an advisory report on the variance application and
submit it, together with the completed application, to the Plan Commission.
   B.   Review By Plan Commission: The Plan Commission shall review the
variance application and the Administrator's comments and submit their advisory
report to the Village Board, together with their recommendation on preliminary
plat approval. The Plan Commission's advisory report shall be responsive to all
the variances standards set forth in subsection C of this section.
   C.   Action By Village Board; Standards: At the same meeting at which they
take action on the application for preliminary plat approval, the Village Board
shall decide by resolution whether to grant or deny the requested subdivision
variance. A copy of their decision, clearly stating their reasons therefor and
the exact texts of any variance granted, shall be attached to both the
preliminary and final plats. The Village Board stall not grant any subdivision
variance unless, based upon the information presented to them, they determine
that:
      1.   The proposed variance is consistent with the general purposes of
this title; and
      2.   Strict application of the subdivision design and improvement
requirements would result in great practical difficulties or hardship to the
applicant, not a mere inconvenience; and
      3.   The proposed variance is the minimum deviation from the subdivision
requirements that will alleviate the difficulties/hardships; and
      4.   The plight of the applicant is due to peculiar circumstances not of
his own making; and
      5.   The peculiar circumstances engendering the variance request are not
applicable to other tracts, and therefore, a variance would be a more
appropriate remedy than an amendment; and
      6.   the variance, if granted, will not substantially impair
implementation of the Village Community Plan, including the Official Map.
(1990 Code § 34-5-2)
13-3-3: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Proposal; Hearing: Amendments to this title may be proposed by the
Zoning Administrator, any member of the Village Board, any Plan Commission
member, or any party in interest. Every amendment proposal shall be filed on a
prescribed form in the Administrator’s Office. The Administrator shall promptly
transmit each proposal, together with any comments or recommendations he may
wish to make to the Plan Commission for a public hearing.
(1990 Code § 34-5-3)
   B.   Advisory Report; Action By Village Board: Within a reasonable time
after the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall submit an advisory report
to the Village Board. The Village Board shall act on the proposed amendment at
their next regularly scheduled meeting following submission of the report.
Without another public hearing, the Village Board may either pass or reject the
proposed amendment or may refer it back to the Plan Commission for further
consideration.
(1990 Code § 34-5-4)
13-3-4: FEES:
All fees indicated below shall be paid to the Village Clerk. The fees are
intended to defray the administrative costs connected with the processing/
conducting of the listed item. They do not constitute a tax or other revenue-
raising device.
 
Procedure                 Fee
Filing preliminary plat   $150.00
Filing improvement plans  $50.00
Improvement inspection    Actual engineering costs
Filing final plat         $100.00 plus $5.00 per lot
Filing variance request   $100.00
Filing amendment proposal $100.00
 
(1990 Code § 34-5-5)
13-3-5: VACATION OF PLATS:
In accordance with State law, any plat or part thereof may be vacated by the
owner of the tract at any time before the sale of any lot therein by a written
vacation instrument to which a copy of the plat is attached. If there are
public service facilities in any street, other public way, or easement shown on
the plat, the instrument shall reserve to the Village or other public entity or
public utility owning such facilities the property, rights-of-way and easements
necessary for continuing public service by means of those facilities and for
maintaining or reconstructing the same. The vacation instrument shall be
approved by the Village Board in the same manner as plats of subdivision and
shall also be approved by the County Superintendent of Highways, the highway
commissioner of the appropriate township, and the public utilities involved. In
the case of the platted tracts wherein any lots have been sold, the written
vacation instrument must also be signed by all the owners of lots in said
tracts.
(1990 Code § 34-5-7)
CHAPTER 4: PRELIMINARY PLAT
Section
13-4-1: Application Of Provisions
13-4-2: Pre-Application Conference
13-4-3: Preliminary Plan And Plat
13-4-4: Specifications And Supporting Data
13-4-5: Minimum Standards Of Design
13-4-6: Approval Of Preliminary Plan
13-4-7: Minor Subdivisions Exempt
13-4-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   No land within the subdivision jurisdiction of the Village (other than
land that is specifically exempted from the requirements of this title as
provided in section
13-1-6 of this title) shall be subdivided or developed, except in compliance
with the regulations of this title and the applicable provisions of State law.
No lot in any subdivision shall be conveyed until:
      1.   The portion of the subdivision in which the lot is located has been
improved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter or until a
performance bond or other security has been posted to assure the completion of
such improvements; and
      2.   The final plat of the subdivision has been approved by the Village
Board and recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds.
   B.   No building permit shall be issued to allow construction on any lot
conveyed in violation of this section.
(1990 Code § 34-2-2)
13-4-2: PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE:
Before submitting a preliminary plan and plat, the applicant is encouraged to
confer with the Zoning Administrator and the Plan Commission and other official
units of government affected thereby as well as those providing services to the
area in question to initiate pre-planning activities and obtain information and
guidance before entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial
expense in the preparation of detailed plans, surveys and other data.
(1990 Code § 34-2-1)
13-4-3: PRELIMINARY PLAN AND PLAT:
   A.   Filing Plan And Plat: The subdivider shall file with the Village, at
the Office of the Zoning Administrator, ten (10) copies of the preliminary plan
and plat at least ten (10) days prior to the regularly scheduled Plan
Commission meeting. Such application shall include the following:
      1.   Requested Information: A written request to the Plan Commission for
preliminary review of such subdivision and a general description of the
location and size of the tract to be platted; the intent as to character type
and use of the property and structures to be developed; the deed restrictions
proposed, if any; a statement of mineral rights; the extent and character of
the improvements to be made by the subdivider; the zone district classification
(s) of the territory and compliance of the proposed subdivision thereto. If
appropriate, a description of any unique hardship or difficulty limiting the
physical development of the property under consideration and a description of
any past history of the property under consideration which is pertinent
thereto.
      2.   Documentation: The necessary documentation in accordance with the
requirements of this title.
      3.   Filing Fee: A filing fee sufficient to cover the engineering
inspection fees to be incurred by the Village.
(1990 Code § 34-2-4.1)
   B.   Procedure:
      1.   Distribute Copies: The Zoning Administrator shall immediately
distribute a copy to the Village Board's Water and Sewer Committee; a copy to
the School Superintendent(s); a copy to the Soil and Water Conservation
Service; a copy to the Village Engineer; a copy to the Mayor; two (2) copies to
the Plan Commission; and a copy to the Fire Chief.
      2.   Time Constraints: The commission shall review the preliminary plat
within sixty (60) days from the date of application, or the filing by the
subdivider of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is
later, unless such time is extended by written mutual consent, and shall
determine whether the preliminary plat shall be approved as submitted; shall be
approved subject to certain conditions or modifications; or shall be
disapproved.
      3.   Plan Commission Review: The action of the Plan Commission shall be
noted in writing, and if such preliminary plat is disapproved or is
conditionally approved, the commission shall furnish written notice of such
action to the applicant setting forth the reasons for disapproval or
conditional approval and specifying with particularity the aspects in which the
preliminary plat fails to conform to the Village Code.
      4.   Village Board Review: The Village Board shall accept or reject the
preliminary plat within thirty (30) days after its next regularly scheduled
meeting following the action granting approval of the preliminary plat by the
commission, unless such time is extended by written mutual agreement of the
Village Board and the applicant, or such preliminary plat will be deemed as
approved. The Village Board shall indicate by letter whether the preliminary
plat is approved or disapproved as submitted. If the preliminary plat is
disapproved, the letter shall state the reasons for disapproval.
      5.   Official Approval Or Disapproval: A certified copy of the letter of
approval or disapproval by the Village Board shall be attached to the
preliminary plat and shall be filed with the Village Clerk. One such copy shall
be filed with the Zoning Administrator, and one copy shall be returned to the
subdivider. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not qualify the preliminary
plat for recording with the County Recorder of Deeds.
      6.   Rights And Privileges Of Subdivider: Preliminary plat approval shall
confer upon the subdivider the following rights and privileges:
         a.   That the preliminary plat approval will remain in effect for a
one year period. The applicant may, during this period, submit all of or part
or parts of said preliminary plat for final approval. In the event that the
subdivision is being developed in stages, the applicant may, by written mutual
agreement with the Plan Commission, have final approval of the last part of the
plat delayed for a period not to exceed three (3) years from the date of the
preliminary plat approval. Any part of a subdivision which is being developed
in stages shall contain a tract of land at least one block in length.
         b.   That the general terms and conditions under which the preliminary
plat approval was granted will not be changed.
(1990 Code § 34-2-4.2)
13-4-4: SPECIFICATIONS AND SUPPORTING DATA:
Every preliminary plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered in the
State of Illinois. The preliminary plat to be provided by the subdivider shall
meet and include the following specifications and supporting data:
   A.   Proposed name of the subdivision and location.
   B.   Small key map showing the relation of the proposed subdivision to
section or U.S. survey lines and to platted subdivisions and dedicated streets
within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed subdivision.
   C.   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, land planning consultant
and Illinois registered land surveyor who prepared the preliminary plat.
   D.   Existing and proposed streets or alleys and rights-of-way on and
adjoining the site of the proposed subdivision, showing the names and including
street roadway and right-of-way widths, approximate gradients, types of widths
of pavement, curbs, sidewalks, crosswalks, planting strips and other pertinent
data, including classification of all streets as to function as established
herein.
   E.   All lot lines adjacent to and abutting the subdivision.
   F.   Layout of lots, showing approximate dimensions, numbers, lot area, and
zone district classification(s).
   G.   Parcels of land, if any, proposed to be dedicated or reserved for
schools, parks, playgrounds or other public, semipublic or community purposes
and use(s) of the area to be subdivided.
   H.   Easements, existing and proposed, showing locations, widths and
purposes.
   I.   Building setback line and dimensions.
   J.   Location and size of existing public utilities and drainageways or
facilities within or adjoining the proposed subdivision and the location and
size of nearest water trunk mains, interceptor sewer lines and other pertinent
utilities.
   K.   Location, type and approximate size of utility improvements to be
installed.
   L.   Tract boundary lines showing dimension bearings, angles and references
to known land lines.
   M.   The gross area and net area acreage of the proposed subdivision, the
acreage of streets and of any areas reserved for the common use of the property
owners within the subdivision and/or for public use.
   N.   Where the topography has a significant bearing upon the street grades,
the plan of public utilities and drainageways or facilities in the proposed
subdivision, and when it would be difficult for the Plan Commission or the
Village Board to understand the relation of the plan to the existing
topographic conditions, contour lines at not greater than two foot (2')
intervals shall be shown. Contour lines shall be shown for all hillside areas
and other areas of significant slope.
   O.   Location of major watercourses, ponding areas, natural drainageways and
flood hazard areas.
   P.   The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of not greater than one
hundred feet to one inch (100' = 1"); provided, however, that if the resulting
drawing would be over forty two inches (42") square, a scale of up to two
hundred feet to one inch (200' = 1") may be used.
   Q.   North arrow and date.
   R.   Whenever a large tract is intended to be developed in stages, and only
part of that tract is to be submitted for final plat approval, a preliminary
plat for subdivision of the entire tract shall be submitted.
(1990 Code § 34-2-6)
13-4-5: MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN:
   A.   Compliance Required: The subdivider shall conform to the following
principles and standards of land subdivision in the design of each subdivision
or portion hereof. No preliminary plat shall be approved unless it conforms to
the minimum standards of design set out in this section.
(1990 Code § 34-2-9)
   B.   Streets And Alleys:
      1.   The street and alley arrangement shall be such as to not impose
undue hardship upon the owners of adjoining property when they plat their own
land and seek to provide for convenient access thereto. Reserve strips
controlling access to streets are prohibited, except where their control is
placed with the Village Board.
      2.   The arrangement of rights-of-way in a subdivision shall provide for
the continuation of the existing streets or rights-of-way in adjoining areas,
unless the Plan Commission deems such continuation undesirable for reasons of
topography or design. Where subdivision streets or rights-of- way are
continuations or extensions of existing streets or rights-of-way, the width
thereof shall be of the same or greater width as the existing street or right-
of-way; except, that in no case shall the street or right-of-way in the
subdivision be of less width than hereinafter provided.
      3.   Where, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, it is desirable to
provide future street access to adjoining areas, the streets and rights-of-way
in the subdivision shall be extended to the property line. If deemed necessary
by the Plan Commission, any temporary dead-end street shall be provided with a
temporary turn-around. In no case shall access be denied to any parcel or part
of a parcel of ground by the subdividing of land.
      4.   Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles.
      5.   Local street curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of at
least fifteen feet (15'). Intersections involving collector or arterial streets
shall have radii of not less than twenty five feet (25').
      6.   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty
five feet (125') are prohibited.
      7.   Unless topography indicates a need for a greater length, dead-end
streets designed to be so permanently shall be no longer than five hundred feet
(500') and shall terminate in a circular open space having a radius at the
outside of the pavement of at least forty feet (40') and a diameter at the
outside of the right-of-way of at least one hundred feet (100').
      8.   Local streets shall be designed so as to discourage through traffic.
      9.   No local street grade shall be in excess of ten percent (10%) and no
collector street or arterial street grade shall be in excess of seven percent
(7%), except as otherwise approved by the Plan Commission due to adverse
topographic conditions. For adequate drainage, the minimum grade of any new
street shall not be less than one-half of one percent (½%).
      10.   The Plan Commission shall not approve streets which will be subject
to frequent inundation or flooding.
      11.   Alleys shall be avoided in a single-family and two-family district,
except as required by this subsection; however, they may be required in
multiple-family districts and commercial or industrial districts, unless other
definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street
loading, unloading and parking consistent and adequate for the use proposed.
      12.   Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted, except where provided with
adequate turn-around facilities at the dead end, or where such dead-end alleys
provide the only access to off-street parking.
      13.    Alleys, where provided, shall have a right-of-way of not less than
twenty feet (20').
      14.   The minimum right-of-way of local streets, including marginal
access streets and cul-de-sacs, shall be fifty feet (50').
      15.   The minimum right-of-way of secondary or collector streets shall be
sixty feet (60').
      16.   The minimum right-of-way of arterial or primary streets shall be
eighty feet (80').
      17.   Intersections of more than two (2) streets at one point shall be
avoided.
      18.   Where the subdivision abuts in or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the Plan Commission may require that marginal access streets
be provided in order that no lots front on such existing or proposed arterial
street.
      19.   Dedication of half-streets shall be discouraged, but may be
permitted whenever there is no other logical method of platting. However,
wherever there exists a dedicated or platted half-street or alley adjacent to
the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street or alley shall be
platted, unless otherwise permitted by the Plan Commission.
(1990 Code § 34-2-10)
   C.   Drainage:
      1.   No plat shall be approved for any subdivision which is subject to
flooding unless the plat conforms to the applicable requirements of this title.
      2.   No plat shall be approved for any subdivision or part thereof which
is subject to periodic flooding or which contains inadequate drainage
facilities or which makes adequate drainage of streets impossible. However, if
the subdivider agrees in writing to make improvements at his expense which
will, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, make the area safe for human
occupancy and use and further provide adequate drainage for streets, then the
preliminary and final plat may be approved.
      3.   Stormwater drainage shall be discharged to marshlands, swamps,
retention basins, or other treatment facilities. Diversion of stormwater to
marshlands or swamps shall be considered by the Plan Commission for existing or
planned surface drainage. Marshlands and swamps used for stormwater shall
provide for natural or artificial water level control.
      4.   No existing ditch, stream, drain or drainage canal shall be
deepened, widened, rerouted or filled without written permission from the
Village.
      5.   Where artificial channels must be constructed to augment the natural
drainage system, such channels, as well as the natural drainageways, may be
planned as part of a recreation trail system. Channels shall be designed to be
aesthetically compatible for recreational trail use.
      6.   The drainage system shall be constructed and operational during
construction or as approved by the Village.
      7.   The natural drainage system shall be used as far as is feasible for
the storage and flow of runoff.
      8.   No plat shall be recorded for any subdivision situated within five
hundred feet (500') of any surface drain or watercourse serving a tributary
area of six hundred forty (640) acres or more, until such plat or map has been
reviewed by the Department of Transportation, either independently or in
cooperation with Federal, State or local agencies, for the purpose of
determining, for the protection of persons and property, the flood hazards
involved, and a report thereon filed by that Department with the County
Recorder.
(1990 Code § 34-2-11)
   D.   Erosion And Sediment Control: The following standards shall be applied
in the subdivision and construction of land areas:
      1.   The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented
by topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil erosion.
      2.   Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected so far as is
consistent with development of the site.
      3.   When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest
feasible period of time.
      4.   Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that
adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction
progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one
period of time.
      5.   Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with the
different stages of development. Appropriate control measures shall be
installed prior to development when necessary to control erosion.
      6.   Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development.
      7.   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps
shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters
undergoing development.
      8.   Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other
nonviable cover shall be used to protect areas exposed during development.
      9.   Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set
aside for respreading over the developed area. The soil shall be restored to a
depth of four inches (4") and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil
quality prior to development.
      10.   Permanent final plant covering or structures shall be installed as
soon as possible.
(1990 Code § 34-2-12)
   E.   Easements:
      1.   Easements of not less than seven and one-half feet (71/2') in width
shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines and alongside lot lines
where necessary for storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water, and other mains, and
for electric and telephone lines or for other public utilities. Easements of
greater width may be required along or across lots when necessary for the
extension of main sewers or other utilities or where both water and sewer lines
are located in the same easement. A two foot (2') easement shall be required on
one side of and adjacent to an alley to accommodate pole lines.
      2.   Adequate easements for stormwater drainage shall be established
along any natural drainage channel and in such other locations as may be
necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of stormwater from streets, alleys
and all other portions of the subdivision. The location and minimum widths of
such easements shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
      3.   No tree, shrub or building shall be placed or erected in any
easement for utility or drainage purposes or within the right-of-way of any
street, except at the owner's risk as to all costs for demolition, removal or
reconstruction, and the proper authorities may have free access to and use of
the easements at any time.
(1990 Code § 34-2-13)
   F.   Blocks; Crosswalks:
      1.   No block shall be longer than one thousand eight hundred feet
(1,800') or less than five hundred feet (500') in length, except where the
continuity of the existing neighborhood would be disrupted.
      2.   All blocks, whenever it is deemed essential to provide access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other community facilities, shall
have a crosswalk with a right-of-way of at least ten feet (10') in width near
the center of the block.
      3.   The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to building sites, land use, zoning requirements, access, safety and
convenience.
      4.   Where a subdivision adjoins an arterial or collector, the greater
dimension of the block shall generally front or back upon such arterial or
collector to avoid unnecessary ingress or egress.
(1990 Code § 34-2-14)
   G.   Parks And Other Public Areas:
      1.   Where any area is specifically designated on the Comprehensive Plan
of the Village for a public park, playground, school or other public use, and
is owned by the subdivider, such area shall be reserved for such use on all
subdivision plans and plats, and the acquisition of such area may then be
secured by the Village Board or arrangements made for its acquisition within a
period not to exceed one year from the date of approval of the final plan. The
value of such lands shall be established by three (3) qualified appraisers, one
of whom shall be appointed by the Plan Commission, one appointed by the
subdivider, and one mutually agreed upon by the other two (2).
      2.   Should the Village Board decide to take such premises, then and in
that case, it shall make arrangements to pay the subdivider the appraised value
therefor as determined by the appraisers described in subsection G1 of this
section, or a sum that is mutually agreed upon. The Village Board may accept
any donation of land as described in subsection G1 of this section should the
subdivider desire to contribute the same to the Village.
(1990 Code § 34-2-15)
   H.   Utilities:
      1.   Source of domestic water supply and type of sewage disposal.
      2.   Stormwater drainage.
         a.   Complete storm sewer system, including pipe sizes, inlets and
inverts.
         b.   A proposed surface water drainage pattern for each individual
lot, block and street.
      3.   All easements as required shall be indicated.
      4.   An outline of all proposed protective covenants shall accompany the
preliminary plan and shall include protection against the obstruction of any
surface water drainage easement.
(1990 Code § 34-2-16)
   I.   Lots:
      1.   Minimum Size: All lots in a subdivision shall conform to the minimum
lot area and dimensions requirements of the zoning district in which the
subdivision is located. Land that is under water or reserved for street
improvements shall not be counted in determining compliance with requirements.
      2.   The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will
provide satisfactory and desirable building sites, property related to
topography and the character of surrounding development.
      3.   All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street
right-of-way lines and radial to curved street right-of-way lines, except where
a variation of this rule will provide a better street and lot design.
      4.   All remnants of lots below minimum lot area size left over after
subdividing of a larger tract shall be added to adjacent lots rather than
allowing to remain as unusable land, except when designated for utility
purposes or accepted for public space for park or other public uses.
      5.   Lots which cannot be served by either a public or private sanitary
sewer and/or a public water system shall comply with the applicable provisions
of the zoning regulations or shall be not less than one acre in size per lot or
household unit, whichever is greater. Such lots shall have a width of not less
than one hundred twenty five feet (125') or a depth in excess of three (3)
times its width, unless otherwise permitted and approved by the Plan
Commission.
      6.   Lots with double frontage should be avoided where possible. Corner
lots and lots with double frontage shall have extra dimension sufficient to
permit the establishment of front building setback lines on the adjoining
streets.
      7.   The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot
with satisfactory access to public streets. The Plan Commission may require
additional reservation of land to ensure adequate access to prevent land
locking of the adjoining territory.
(1990 Code § 34-2-17)
13-4-6: APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN:
   A.   Checklist Completed: In order to qualify for approval, the preliminary
plan shall be accompanied by a properly executed checklist as shown in section
13-7-1 of this title.
(1990 Code § 34-2-20)
   B.   Changes Or Revisions: The Plan Commission and/or Zoning Administrator
may recommend, or the Village Beard may require, such changes or revisions as
are deemed necessary in the interests and needs of the community.
(1990 Code § 34-2-21)
   C.   Tentative Approval: The approval of a preliminary plan by the Plan
Commission and the Village Board is tentative only, involving merely the
general acceptability of the layout as submitted.
(1990 Code § 34-2-22)
   D.   Certificate: Approval shall consist of a certificate to that effect on
the preliminary plan signed by the Chair of the Plan Commission and by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 34-2-23)
13-4-7: MINOR SUBDIVISIONS EXEMPT:
Minor subdivisions, as defined in section
13-2-2 of this title as "subdivision, minor", may be exempted from the
procedures and requirements for preliminary plats, and the subdivider may
proceed to filing of the final plat for review. Final plat procedures and
requirements shall be as specified in sections
13-6-1 and 13-6-2 of this title.
(1990 Code § 34-2-3)
CHAPTER 5: ENGINEERING PLANS; REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Section
13-5-1: Engineering Plan Procedure
13-5-2: Minimum Standards Of Improvement
13-5-3: Approval Of Design Plans
13-5-4: Maintenance Of Improvements; Bond Requirements
13-5-1: ENGINEERING PLAN PROCEDURE:
Within twelve (12) months after receiving approval of the preliminary plan by
the Village Board, there shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator by the
subdivider, four (4) copies of the engineering plans and specifications as
required in section
13-5-2 of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall immediately refer two
(2) copies to the Mayor and shall notify the Village Board of this action at
the next regular Village Board meeting. In the event of a special problem, the
Plan Commission shall notify the owner or subdivider of the time and place at
which he shall be afforded an opportunity of being heard. The Plan Commission
shall make its recommendation to the Village Board, within forty five (45) days
after receipt of engineering drawings and specifications. In the event of
disapproval of the engineering plans and specifications by the Plan Commission,
the same shall be immediately returned so marked to the Zoning Administrator
for return to the subdivider, and may be re-filed with the Zoning Administrator
after necessary revisions are made.
(1990 Code § 34-3-1)
13-5-2: MINIMUM STANDARDS OF IMPROVEMENT:
   A.   Improvements And Compliance Required: Utility and street improvements
shall be provided by the subdivider in each new subdivision in accordance with
the standards and requirements described in this section. The requirements set
forth herein shall be considered as minimum requirements and nothing contained
herein shall be construed to mean that the subdivider cannot construct or
provide improvements of a higher type.
(1990 Code § 34-3-4)
   B.   Reference Monuments:
      1.   Permanent monuments shall be of concrete four inches by four inches
by thirty inches (4" x 4" x 30") with a one-half-inch (½") iron pin cast in the
center, set in such a manner that they will not be moved by frost and shall be
placed in the field as required by Illinois Compiled Statutes.
      2.   All lot corners shall be marked by one-half inch (½") iron pins, not
less than thirty inches (30") in length and driven into the ground and shall
not protrude above the ground surface more than one and one-half inches (11/
2").
      3.   These monuments must be placed at all corners, at the end of all
curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points
along a meander line, the points to be not less than twenty feet (20') back
from the normal water elevation of a lake or from the bank of a stream; except,
that when such corners or points fall within a street or proposed future
street, the monuments must be placed in the right-of-way line of the street.
All internal boundaries, corners and points must be monumented in the filed by
like monuments as defined above.
(1990 Code § 34-3-5)
Please clarify the bolded sentence above.
   C.   Street Improvements:
      1.   Grading: All streets shall be graded as hereinafter provided:
         a.   All new streets, which are created and dedicated for use within a
subdivision shall be graded, drained, and surfaced in accordance with the
minimum requirements hereinbelow set forth and in a manner which will provide
complete and adequate drainage of all the streets, alleys, and public grounds
which may be necessary in order to provide adequate and satisfactory drainage
along the side of any existing public street which lies adjacent to the
subdivision.
         b.   In general, all such new streets within the subdivision; and all
work to be undertaken thereon shall be designed and constructed according to
the specifications adopted by the State of Illinois, Department of
Transportation; as the same are in effect at the time the preliminary plat and
plans for such improvement work are submitted for approval.
      2.   Grading Roadway And Side Slopes: The roadway shall be considered to
be that part of the improvement which lies between the right-of-way lines, and
which roadway shall of be less than fifty feet (50') in width on local streets
and sixty feet (60') on collector streets.
      3.   Combination Concrete Curb And Gutter: Combination concrete curb and
gutter shall be built in accordance with Village standards. The minimum
distance from back to back of curbs shall be thirty six feet (36') on local
streets and forty feet (40') on collector streets. The Plan Commission may
specify which type of curb and gutter shall be used.
      4.   Street Construction Standards: All streets within the jurisdictional
authority of the Village other than State highways shall be improved with
pavements bounded, by integral concrete curbs and gutter, in accordance with
the following criteria:
         a.   Specifications:
 
Street Type           Dedicated Street Pavement Width  Pavement Type
                      Width
Arterial (primary)    80 feet          50 feet         Bituminous surface
                                                       treatment or concrete
Collector (secondary) 60 feet          36 feet (1-side Bituminous surface
                                       parking)        treatment or concrete
Local (minor)         50 feet          32 feet (1-side Bituminous surface
                                       parking)        treatment or concrete
Cul-de-sac            50 feet          27 feet         Bituminous surface
                                                       treatment or concrete
 
         b.   Collector street pavements shall be provided with a bituminous
surface of one and one-half inches (11/2") of bituminous concrete binder and
one and one-half inches (11/2") of bituminous concrete surface course Class 1
placed upon a crush stone base course of CA #6, having a minimum thickness of
six inches (6") compacted. The center forty feet (40') of the base course shall
have a crown of three inches (3").
         c.   Local street pavements shall be provided with a CA #6 crushed
stone base course, having a minimum thickness of seven inches (7") compacted.
An A-2 surface treatment shall be applied in accordance with the "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the State of Illinois,
Department of Transportation".
         d.   The crushed stone base course shall be permitted to remain
throughout one winter season before the bituminous surface is placed thereon.
Following inspection of the base and sub-base as to compaction and thickness of
the base by the administrative officer, he may, by authority in writing to the
subdivider, waive the winter season waiting period. Compaction based on percent
of optimum density.
         e.   The subdivider shall be required to improve arterial or primary
streets only to the width required by the current and immediate needs of his
subdivision consistent to the standards and specifications herein contained.
      5.   Alleys: Alleys where permitted or required shall be constructed as
specified for local streets.
      6.   Utility Lines: Underground utilities in streets or rights-of-way or
in easements shall be installed prior to the construction of such streets and/
or alleys. Wherever possible, utilities will be placed in rear lot easements
with street placement permitted in only the most unusual circumstances (see
subsection I of this section).
(1990 Code § 34-3-6)
   D.   Storm Sewers And Other Drainage Appurtenances: In addition to the
installation of curbs or gutters along the streets, as required by subsection C
of this section, storm sewer systems shall be constructed throughout the entire
subdivision to carry off water from all inlets and catch basins, and shall be
connected to an adequate outfall. Such sewers shall provide for an extension to
land lying within the upland drainage area, whether such land is within the
subdivision or not. Storm sewers shall be designed by the rational method; and
copies of the design computations shall be submitted with the plans. Inlets
shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any
intersection, nor for a distance of more than six hundred feet (600') in the
gutter. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent of the
sanitary sewer system. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each
and every individual dual lot and block.
(1990 Code § 34-3-7)
   E.   Public Utility Engineering Requirements: All proposed water and
sanitary sewer facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements and
recommendations of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency of the State of
Illinois and the Zoning Administrator. When a proposed subdivision is
reasonably accessible to a public sewer system and/or distribution system, the
subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system
and/or water distribution system to be connected to the proper public system
(s).
(1990 Code § 34-3-8)
   F.   Sanitary Sewers:
      1.   All sewer plans and installations shall conform to the standards and
specifications set forth in “The Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois”, as established by the Illinois Society of
Professional Engineers.
      2.   Sanitary sewer lines shall be installed to serve all properties in
the subdivision, except subdivisions where individual sewage disposal systems
are permitted by the Village Board.
      3.   Where sanitary sewer mains of larger capacity than necessary to
serve the subdivision as delineated in the Preliminary Plan are required to
serve the future growth in the vicinity of the subdivision, as determined by
the Village Board, the Village shall then reimburse the subdivider for the
difference in cost of the smaller size pipe and the larger size pipe; said
larger size to be determined by the Village Board.
      4.   Each lot in the subdivision shall be provided at the property line
with a connection to the public sanitary sewer system. The construction of the
sewer system shall conform to the approved plans and specifications and all
work should be properly inspected and approved by the Zoning Administrator.
This prevents the street from being torn up after construction.
(1990 Code § 34-3-9)
   G.   Water System:
      1.   All water main plans and installations, including all appurtenances
thereto, shall conform to "The Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois", as established by the Illinois Society of
Professional Engineers.
      2.   Water distribution facilities including all pipe, fittings,
hydrants, valves, vaults, etc., shall be installed to serve all properties
within the subdivision.
      3.   Where water mains of larger capacity than necessary to serve the
subdivision as delineated in the preliminary plan are required to serve the
future growth in the vicinity of the subdivision, as determined by the Village
Board, the Village shall then reimburse the difference in cost of the smaller
size and the larger size pipe; said larger size to be determined by the Village
Board.
      4.   The construction of the water system shall conform to the approved
plans and specifications and all work shall be properly inspected and approved
by the Village Engineer. Water service line shall be extended to each lot in
the subdivision prior to the Village accepting the streets for maintenance.
      5.   Fire hydrants shall be located and installed by the subdivider with
the approval of the Fire Chief, as part of the water distribution system.
Installation of hydrants shall be accomplished in such a manner that each lot
is within four hundred feet (400') of the fire hydrant when measured along the
centerline of the right-of-way. No fire hydrant shall be placed on a main
smaller than six inches (6") in diameter. Hydrants installed shall be of the
type approved by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(1990 Code § 34-3-10)
   H.   Street Names And Signs:
      1.   Street Names: The names of new streets shall be sufficiently
different in sound and spelling from the names of existing streets in the
Village to avoid confusion. A street which is planned as a continuation of an
existing street shall bear the same name as the existing street.
      2.   Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be erected by the
developer at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision with the
approval of the Street Superintendent. Signs shall be embossed steel U.S.
Standard Street Signs (or the equivalent thereof) measuring six inches by
twenty four inches (6" x 24"), with the lettering at least four inches (4")
high. All street name signs shall be mounted on two inch (2") diameter
galvanized pipe set in concrete to a depth of a least three feet (3') and
extending above the surface to a height of at least seven feet (7').
(1990 Code § 34-3-11)
   I.   Underground Public Utilities: All utility lines located in rear line or
lot easements, including telephone and electric service, shall be located
underground. (1990 Code § 34-3-12)
   J.   Sidewalks:
      1.   Concrete sidewalks not less than four inches (4") in thickness and
four feet (4') in width may be constructed within the street right-of-way and
adjacent to the property line.
      2.   In the event a crosswalk is required in accordance with subsection
13-4-5F of this title, a concrete sidewalk not less than four inches (4") in
thickness and four feet (4') in width shall be constructed and at a grade no
steeper than fifteen percent (15%) unless steps of adequate design are
provided.
(1990 Code § 34-3-13)
13-5-3: APPROVAL OF DESIGN PLANS:
   A.   Checklist: In order to qualify for approval, the engineering plans
shall be accompanied by a properly executed checklist as shown in section
13-7-2, Schedule B, of this title.
(1990 Code § 34-3-16)
   B.   Changes Or Revisions: The Plan Commission may recommend or the Village
Board may require such changes or revisions as are deemed necessary in the
interests and needs of the community.
(1990 Code § 34-3-17)
   C.   Tentative Approval: The Plan Commission may grant approval of the total
required engineering plans by approval of plans covering only a portion of the
land improvements (e.g., sanitary sewers and water) so as to facilitate
immediate installations. This partial approval shall consist of a certificate
on the plans covering each of the required improvements signed by the Plan
Commission.
(1990 Code § 34-3-18)
   D.   Letter Of Approval: Final approval of the complete set of engineering
plans shall consist of a letter of approval from the Plan Commission, listing
thereon:
      1.   Type of improvement(s) covered by the plan.
      2.   Name of designing engineer.
      3.   Date of preparation and revision, if any.
(1990 Code § 34-3-19)
13-5-4: MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS; BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Maintenance Required: The subdivider/developer shall maintain all the
improvements in the subdivision until they have been accepted by and dedicated
to the Village or other appropriate entity.
   B.   Bond Requirements:
      1.   Prior to dedication, the subdivider/developer shall post a
maintenance bond with the Village Clerk in the form approved by the Village
Attorney.
      2.   The bond shall be in the amount determined by the Village Engineer
to be sufficient to guarantee the satisfactory condition of the required
improvements for a period of two (2) years from the date of their acceptance
and dedication. If, at any time during the two-year period, the improvements
are found to be defective, they shall be repaired/replaced at the subdivider's/
developer's expense. If the subdivider/developer fails or refuses to pay such
costs within ninety (90) days after demand is made by the Zoning Administrator,
the Village shall use the maintenance bond to make the necessary repairs/
replacements.
      3.   If the cost of the repairs/replacements exceeds the bond amount, the
subdivider/developer shall be liable for the excess. At the end of the two-year
period, the maintenance bond shall be released.
(1990 Code § 34-5-8)
CHAPTER 6: FINAL PLAT
Section
13-6-1: Procedure
13-6-2: Specifications And Information
13-6-3: Required Certificates
13-6-4: Approval Of Final Plat
13-6-5: Guarantees
13-6-6: Recording Final Plat
13-6-1: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Submission: Within six (6) months after receiving approval of the
engineering plans and specifications by the Plan Commission, or a period of
time beyond six (6) months that may be granted by the Village Board, there
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator by the subdivider the original
drawing, one transparency print and four (4) copies of the final plat, which
shall also contain all required signed certifications, other than signed
certificates of approval by the Plan Commission, the Village Board, and the
Zoning Administrator. It shall contain the necessary documents as may be
necessary concerning the form of guarantees or performance bond to be used. The
final plat shall retain the overall characteristics of the preliminary plan and
may include all or part of the area shown on the preliminary plan. The Zoning
Administrator shall refer the original drawing and two (2) copies of the final
plat to the Plan Commission and one copy of the final plat to the
Superintendent of Utilities at least ten (10) days prior to their next
regularly scheduled meeting for recommendation as to final approval. In the
event of a special problem, the Plan Commission shall notify the owner or
subdivider as to the time and place of the Plan Commission meeting at which
time he will be afforded an opportunity of being heard.
   B.   Plan Commission Action: The Plan Commission shall review the final plat
and plans and transmit their report of findings and recommendations to the
Village Board within thirty (30) days of the filing date of the final plat. The
action of the Plan Commission, whether approval or disapproval of the final
plat, as well as the date of said action shall be noted in writing and attached
to the final plat. If the final plat is disapproved, the reasons why shall be
so stated.
   C.   Village Board Action: The Village Board shall take action on the final
plat within sixty (60) days from the date of the subdivider's filing of the
last required document or other paper or within sixty (60) days from the date
of the subdivider's filing application for approval of the final plat,
whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by written mutual
consent.
   D.   Disapproval: If the final plat is disapproved by the Village Board, the
reasons for such action shall be noted in writing by resolution, stating the
reasons for disapproval, specifying with particularity the aspects in which the
final plat fails to conform with the Village ordinances.
   E.   Posting Performance Bond:
      1.   If the final plat is approved by the Village Board, the final plat
shall be held by the Village Clerk until such time the subdivider posts a
performance guarantee bond as required by section
13-6-5 of this chapter.
      2.   Upon receipt of said performance guarantee or bond, the Mayor shall
affix his signature to the final plat and attach thereto a notation that the
final plat has received final approval of the Village Board, the Clerk shall
attest the signature of the Mayor and affix the Seal and attach a certified
copy of the Village Board's resolution of approval to the approved final plat.
If such performance guarantee or bond is not posted by the subdivider within
sixty (60) days from the date of approval of the final plat by the Village
Board, approval of such final plat shall expire and become null and void.
(1990 Code § 34-4-1)
13-6-2: SPECIFICATIONS AND INFORMATION:
The final plat to be provided by the subdivider shall meet the following
specifications:
   A.   The final plat may include all or only a part of the preliminary plat
which has received approval.
   B.   The final plat shall be drawn on new linen tracing cloth, Mylar or a
polyester-base film with waterproof black ink to a scale of not greater than
one hundred feet to one inch (100' = 1"); provided, however, that if the
resulting drawing would be over forty two inches (42") square, a scale of up to
two hundred feet to one inch (200' = 1") may be used.
   C.   1. Four (4) black or blue line prints shall be submitted with the
original tracing of the final plat, or in order to conform to modern drafting
and reproductive methods, four (4) black or blue line prints and reproducible
cloth or film positives of the final plat shall be submitted.
      2.   Prints filed with the Village shall include one black or blue line
print made after recording the final plat and bearing the official stamp
attesting the fact of the recording, and one reproducible print or film
positive of the final plat, as approved.
   D.   All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot and/or
meters.
   E.   All surveys for a final plat shall be made under the active and
personal direction of an Illinois registered land surveyor, and the following
basic information shall be shown:
      1.   Accurate boundary lines with dimensions and bearings or angles which
provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure of not more
than one foot (1') in five thousand feet (5,000').
      2.   Accurate distances and directions to the nearest established
official monument. Reference corners shall be accurately described on the final
plat.
      3.   All elevations shall be referenced to the established datum, and the
said reference shall be clearly stated on any plans or drawings showing such
datum; provided, that bench marks are located within a reasonable distance.
      4.   Accurate metes and bounds description of the boundary and the
included area of the subdivision to the nearest one-hundredth (0.01) of an
acre.
      5.   Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets intersecting
the boundaries of the tract, shown by heavy solid lines.
      6.   Right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way and
property lines and areas of lots and other tracts, with accurate dimensions,
bearings and curve data, including radii, arcs and chords, points of tangency,
and central angles.
      7.   Name and right-of-way width for each street or other right-of-way.
      8.   Location, dimensions and purposes of any easement, shown by light,
dashed lines.
      9.   Number to identify each lot or site.
      10.   Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots are dedicated
or reserved.
      11.   Lot dimensions and areas of each lot and building setback lines and
dimensions.
      12.   Location, type, material and size of all monuments and lot markers.
      13.   Names of owners and mortgages accepting said plat with owner or
owners personally signing all plans.
      14.   Names of owners of record of adjoining unplatted lands.
      15.   Reference to recorded subdivision plats within three hundred feet
(300') of adjoining platted land by record name, date and number.
      16.   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds for lots. Restriction lines should be shown by medium,
dashed lines.
      17.   Title or name of subdivision; section, township and range numbers
in which the subdivision is located; and north arrow, scale and date.
      18.   Certification as required by section
13-6-3 of this chapter.
(1990 Code § 34-4-3)
13-6-3: REQUIRED CERTIFICATES:
The following certificates are on file in the Office of the City Clerk and
shall be completed as required by this title:
Owner’s Certificate.
Notary Public’s Certificate.
Surveyor’s Certificate.
County Clerk’s Certificate.
Certificate of the Village Board.
Flood Hazard Certificate.
Plan Commission Certificate.
Superintendents of Water, Sewer And Streets Certificates.
(1990 Code § 34-4-4; amd. 2019 Code)
13-6-4: APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
In order to qualify for approval, the final plat shall be accompanied by the
following:
   A.   A properly executed checklist as shown in Schedule C, section
13-7-3 of this title.
   B.   Detailed specifications for all required land improvements other than
those specifications submitted and approved with the engineering plans.
   C.   A copy of the Illinois Environmental Agency’s permit for the sanitary
sewer installation.
   D.   A copy of the Illinois Environmental Agency’s approval for the water
main installation.
   E.   An affidavit executed by the owner and/or subdivider accepting the
responsibility for the installation of the improvements as shown on the
approved engineering plans and covered by the specifications and permits
required in this section. This affidavit shall include a stipulation by the
subdivider of the installation of all land improvements in the person of a
registered engineer.
   F.   A certified estimate of cost of all required land improvements prepared
by a registered engineer.
   G.   A description of the bond or guarantee collateral intended to be
submitted as required in section
13-6-5 of this chapter.
(1990 Code § 34-4-6)
13-6-5: GUARANTEES:
   A.   Guarantees To Village: After the Village Board has approved the final
plat with respect to the qualifications in this chapter, the subdivider shall
be so notified by the Zoning Administrator. Final approval and signature by the
Mayor and the Zoning Administrator shall be contingent upon the receipt by the
Village of guarantee by the owner and/or subdivider to the Village for the
completion of all land improvements yet remaining to be installed within sixty
(60) days of the approval of the final plat.
      1.   Deposit with the Village a subdivider’s bond in the amount of the
estimated cost of the and improvements. Said bond need never exceed one and
one-half (11/2) times the estimated cost of the improvements remaining to be
completed.
      2.   Deposit with the Village cash in the amount of the estimated cost of
the land improvements. Said amount of cash need never exceed one and one-half
(11/2) times the estimated cost of the improvements remaining to be completed.
The subdivider shall execute an undertaking in lieu of a bond provided in
section
13-7-5 of this title and an irrevocable commitment from a financial institution
as provided in section
13-7-5 of this title.
      3.   Deposit with the Village a lien to be recorded in the County
Recorder’s Office on all property being subdivided, with the provision that
partial release may be obtained when the loaning company executes with the
Village an agreement to withhold one and one-half (11/2) times the estimated
cost of the land improvements yet remaining to be installed, in escrow, until
such time as all land improvements have been completed and accepted by the
Village. All expenses incurred in determining the amounts apportioned against
the land and the cost of releasing each lot or tract shall be paid by the
subdivider.
      4.   Deposit with the Village other collateral equivalent to one and one-
half (11/2) times the estimated cost of and improvements yet remaining to be
installed, such collateral to be approved by the Village Board.
(1990 Code § 34-4-9)
   B.   Construction Time Constraints: All required land improvements shall be
installed and completed within a period of two (2) years after the recording of
the final plat. Failure of the subdivider to complete all of the improvements
within this two-year period shall result in forfeiture of the guarantee
collateral unless an extension of time is requested by the subdivider and
granted by the Village Board. In the event of failure to complete the
improvements in the required period, as stated above, the Village Board may
direct that no further building permits be issued for property in such
subdivision pending satisfaction of the Village Board in regard to the status
of the required land improvements.
(1990 Code § 34-4-10)
   C.   Inspection:
      1.   All required land improvements to be installed under the provisions
of this title shall be checked during the course of construction, by or at the
direction of the Zoning Administrator or his designated representative.
      2.   The cost of any reinspection of any required land improvement found
to be faulty or not in accordance with the approved plans and specifications
shall be paid by the subdivider to the Village. The testing of any concrete,
asphalt, soil, or other materials and workmanship shall be done at the
direction of the Village and at the expense of the subdivider.
(1990 Code § 34-4-11)
   D.   Release Of Bond: The subdivider’s bond or guarantee collateral shall be
released only upon fulfillment of the following conditions:
      1.   The completion of all required land improvements.
      2.   The submission of four (4) copies of acceptable as-built drawings of
all land improvements.
      3.   An affidavit to the effect that:
         a.   All materials, labor and other costs have been paid, or
arrangements have been made for payment so as to hold the Village free from any
obligations for payment of any costs of the land improvements; and
         b.   That the subdivider accepts responsibility for the maintenance
and repair of all land improvements for one year after the date of the
acceptance resolution by the Village Board.
      4.   Final acceptance, by resolution by the Village Board, of all land
improvements.
(1990 Code § 34-4-12)
13-6-6: RECORDING FINAL PLAT:
   A.   The Village Clerk shall not accept a final plat for filing with the
County Recorder of Deeds unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The final plat conforms to all requirements specified by the Village
Board as conditions of approval.
      2.   The final plat meets the design standards and engineering
specifications set forth herein.
      3.   The final plat meets all requirements of the laws of the State of
Illinois.
      4.   The subdivider or applicant establishes sufficient proof of his
intent and ability to post a guarantee or performance bond or bonds with the
Village equal to the estimated construction cost of all improvements intended
to be dedicated to the Village for maintenance and operation.
   B.   No subdivision plat or re-plat of land within the jurisdiction of the
Village shall be filed for record, or recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder of Deeds, unless and until the approval of the Village Board is
endorsed therein by the Village Clerk.
   C.   No lot shall be sold for such subdivision plat or re-plat until it has
been approved by the Village Board and filed for record in the Office of the
County Recorder of Deeds as herein provided.
   D.   The Village Clerk shall file the approved final plat and ordinance with
the County Recorder of Deeds not more than thirty (30) days from the date of
posting of and not prior to the posting of the performance guarantee or bond as
required by section
13-6-5 of this title. Two (2) copies of such final plat and ordinance shall be
kept on file by the Village Clerk, one such copy filed with the Zoning
Administrator, and one copy returned to the subdivider.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for the County Recorder to accept for recording
any plat of a subdivision within the incorporated area of the Village or
unincorporated lands lying within the area of jurisdiction of the Village until
the plat has been approved as required herein and such approval has been
endorsed in writing on the plat.
   F.   The Village Board shall not permit any public improvements under its
jurisdiction to be constructed or maintained within an area that has been
subdivided after the effective date hereof unless such subdivision has been
approved in accordance with the requirements contained herein.
   G.   No building and zoning occupancy permit shall be issued by the Zoning
Administrator, Village or County for the construction of any building,
structure or improvement to the land or any lot within the SUBDIVISION, as
defined herein, until there has been compliance with all requirements herein.
(1990 Code § 34-5-6)
CHAPTER 7: SCHEDULES AND BONDS
Section
13-7-1: Schedule A, Checklist For Preliminary Plan
13-7-2: Schedule B, Checklist For Engineering Plans
13-7-3: Schedule C, Checklist For Final Plat
13-7-4: Surety Bond For Improvements
13-7-5: Cash Bond
13-7-1: SCHEDULE A, CHECKLIST FOR PRELIMINARY PLAN:
    (Name of Subdivision)
    (Date of Submission)
    (Due Date of Recommendation - 60 Days)
(NOTE): To properly execute this checklist, the subdivider or his engineer shall:
(A)     Insert the required information.
(B)     Denote compliance with applicable ordinances by placing his initials in all spaces where
        applicable.
(C)     Denote those items which the subdivider considers “Not Applicable” to this particular
        subdivision by the abbreviation “N.A.”).
  1.  Six (6) copies of preliminary plan submitted.
  2.  Plans conform to Section 13-4-4.
  3.  Plan scale is not less than 1" to 100'.
  4.  Minimum profile scale is 1" to 100' horizontal and 1" to 10' vertical.
  5.  A title sheet is included with each set of preliminary plans.
  6.  Name of proposed subdivision shown.
  7.  Location given by town, range, section or other legal description.
  8.  Name and address of owner, trust, corporation, or subdivider having control of project is
        shown.
  9.  Name and seal of registered engineer or surveyor who prepared topographic survey is s own.
  10. Name and address of the designer of the plan is shown.
  11. North direction is shown.
  12. Date of preparation and date of revision, if any, is shown.
  13. A location map is included indicating:
          a. A scale of not less than 1" to 1,000'.
          b. Boundary lines of adjoining land within an area bounded by the nearest arterial streets
               or other natural boundaries.
          c. Use of surrounding land.
          d. Ownership of the surrounding land.
          e. Alignment of existing streets.
          f. Section and corporate lines.
  14. Boundary lines of proposed subdivision is clearly shown.
  15. Total approximate acreage is shown.
  16. Existing zoning classification is indicated.
  17. The following existing items, if within the boundaries of the subdivision, or located 100' or
        less outside the boundaries are shown:
          a. Previously platted streets and other rights-of-way with improvements, if any,
               indicating:
                 1.  location
                 2.  widths
                 3.  names
          b. Railroad rights-of-way indicating:
                 1.  location
                 2.  dimensions
          c. Utility rights-of-way, indicating:
                 1.  location
                 2.  widths
                 3.  type
                             a.   sewer
                             b.   water
                             c.   electric
                             d.   other
          d. Parks and other open spaces, indicating:
                 1.  location
                 2.  area
          e. Easements, indicating:
                 1.  location
                 2.  width
                 3.  purpose
          f. Permanent buildings and structures, indicating:
                 1.  location
                 2.  setback lines
                 3.  names of owners
          g. Section and corporate lines
          h. Sanitary sewers, indicting:
                 1.  location
                 2.  size
                 3.  manholes
                 4.  invert elevations at manholes
          i. Water Mains, indicating:
                 1.  location
                 2.  size
                 3.  valves, indicating:
                             a.   valve manhole, or
                             b.   valve box
                 4.  fire hydrants and auxiliary valves
          j. Culverts, indicating:
                 1.  type
                 2.  location
                 3.  size
                 4.  invert elevation
          k. Storm sewers, indicating:
                 1.  location
                 2.  size
                 3.  catch basin
                 4.  invert elevations
          l. Watercourses, indicating:
                 1.  type
                 2.  high water width and elevation
                 3.  width of easement
                 4.  location of easement
          m. Marshes, indicating:
                 1.  location
                 2.  dimensions
                 3.  soil bearing capacity
          n. Rock outcrops, indicating:
                 1.  location
                 2.  dimensions
          o. Monuments and survey markers, indicating:
                 1.  location
                 2.  type
  18. Topographic data is given in feet above mean sea level within the tract and to a distance of
        100' beyond, indicating:
          a. Existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than 2'.
          b. Proposed contours at vertical intervals of not more than 2'.
          c. Bench mark, indicating:
                 1.  location
                 2.  description
                 3.  elevation
  19. Soil bearing data is given, if required by the Superintendent of Streets, indicating:
          a. Location of tests
          b. Depth of tests
          c. Soil bearing capacity
          d. Moisture content
  20. The following proposed items, if within the boundaries of the subdivision or located 100' or
        less outside of the boundaries, are shown:
          a. Layout of streets, indicating:
                 1.  Arterial (primary) streets, indicating:
                             a.   80' right-of-way width
                             b.   50' roadway width
                 2.  Collector (secondary) streets, indicating:
                             a.   60' right-of-way width
                             b.   40' roadway width, back-to-back
                 3.  Local (minor) streets, indicating:
                             a.   50' right-of-way width
                             b.   36' roadway width, back-to-back of curbs
                 4.  Cul-de-sac streets, indicating:
                             a.   50' right-of-way width
                             b.   27' roadway width, back-to-back of curbs
                             c.   The length does not exceed 800' unless there are 16 lots abutting the
                       cul-de-sac street
                             d.   Terminus is circular, or nearly so, and right-of-way is at least 120'
                       in diameter
                             e.   Terminus roadway width is 80' in diameter.
                 5.  Through street shown extended to boundaries of subdivision.
                 6.  Stormwater runoff pattern on paving.
          b. Names of streets:
                       Not duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the Village or its
                 1.  environs, unless the street is an extension of an already existing street, in
                       which case, the name shall be used.
               Street improvement plan showing location of all new street improvements, including those
          c. to the centerline of previously dedicating rights-of-way, abutting the subdivision, in
               accordance with present standards of the Village.
          d. Utility easements:
                 1.  Located at the rear of each lot and other necessary locations.
                 2.  Not less than 10' in width on each lot.
                 3.  Purpose is indicated.
                 4.  Stormwater runoff is indicated.
          e. Centerline profiles of all streets showing gradients not less than 0.4% and not more
               than:
                 1.  5.0% on collector streets
                 2.  7.0% on minor streets
          f. Pedestrianways, when required, indicating: (See subsection
               13-4-5F)
                 1.  Location at approximately the center of the blocks in excess of 900' in length.
                 2.  Width not less than 10'
                 3.  Shrub or tree hedge at side boundary lines.
          g. Block layout, indicating: (See subsection
               13-4-5F)
                 1.  Blocks do not exceed 1,800' in length.
                 2.  Additional access ways to parks, schools, etc., are shown in accordance with the
                       Plan Commission's requirements.
                 3.  Blocks fit readily into the overall plan of the subdivision, with due
                       consideration given to:
                             a.   topographical conditions
                             b.   lot planning
                             c.   traffic flow pattern
                             d.   public open space areas
                 4.  Block numbers
                 5.  Blocks intended for commercial, industrial or institutional use are so
                       designated.
          h. Lot layout, indicating:
                 1.  Lot dimensions
                 2.  Lot areas, not less than those stipulated in the appropriated district
                       regulations of the Zoning Code. (Areas may be listed by Schedule)
                 3.  Building setback lines shown and properly dimensioned.
                 4.  Proposed land use.
                 5.  Lot number.
                       Corner lots are sufficiently larger than interior lots to allow maintenance of
                 6.  building setback lines on both street frontages and still allow a buildable
                       width equal to that of the smallest interior lot in the block.
                 7.  All lots abut a publicly dedicated street for a distance of not less than the
                       minimum width of the lot.
                 8.  Lots are as nearly rectangular in shape as is practicable.
                 9.  Lots are not less than the provision of the Zoning Code.
                 10. Lot lines are substantially at right angles to the street lines and radial to
                       curved street lines.
                 11. Double frontage lots only where:
                             a.   lots back upon an arterial street and front on an access street
                             b.   topographic or other conditions make subdividing otherwise
                       unreasonable
                             c.   lots can be made an additional 20' deeper than average
                             d.   a protective screen planting is indicated on one frontage
                 12. Lots abutting or traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel way, channel
                       or stream, indicating:
                             a.   additional width and depth to provide an acceptable building site
                             b.   width of easement is at least 15' wider on each side of water at high
                       water level
                 13. Due regard for natural features, such as:
                             a.   trees
                             b.   watercourses
                             c.   historic items
                             d.   other similar conditions
          i. Areas intended to be dedicated for public use, indicating:
                 1.  Plan conforms to general development plan of the Village
                 2.  Purpose
                 3.  Acreage
          j. Source of domestic water supply indicating:
                 1.  Connection to existing water mains
                 2.  Location of site for community water plant
          k. Provision for sewage disposal, indicating:
                 1.  Connection to existing sanitary sewer mains
                 2.  Location of site for community sewage disposal plant
          l. School sites, indicating:
                 1.  Location
                 2.  Dimensions
                 3.  Acreage
          m. Topographic information, indicating:
                 1.  Proposed changes in elevation of land showing that any flooding would be
                       relieved
                 2.  Adequate installation of storm sewers would remove the possibility of flooding
          n. Sanitary sewer layout indicating:
                 1.  Location
                 2.  Size
                 3.  Invert elevations at manholes
                 4.  Manhole locations
          o. Watermain layout, indicating:
                 1.  Location
                 2.  Size
                 3.  Looped pattern where practicable
                 4.  Fire hydrants, spaced apart not more than 400'
          p. Storm sewer layout, indicating:
                 1.  Location
                 2.  Catch basins not more than 600' intervals
                 3.  Stormwater is not carried across or around any intersection
                 4.  Surface water drainage pattern for individual lot and block
          q. Street light layout, indicating:
                 1.  Locations and typical street light detail, or
                 2.  Statement by subdivider that street lights will be installed in accordance with
                       standards of the Village
  21. An outline of proposed covenants accompanies the plans, indicating the intention of the
        subdivider to have the covenants recorded with the final plat.
          a. Protective against obstruction drainage easements.
  22. Typical street cross-section showing base construction, surfacing, concrete curb and sidewalk
        in accordance with the land improvements code.
  23. Indication that sidewalks will be installed along all lot lines coincidental with street
        rights- of-way.
  24. Indication on drawing or by certificate that subdivider is aware of his responsibility for
        installation of street signs and for seeding and tree planting in all parkways.
Completed by:     (Name)
    (Address)
    (Date)
Reviewed by:     (Zoning Administrator)
    (Date)
Considered by Plan Commission On:     (Date)
    (Chairman)
 
(1990 Code § 34-6-1)
13-7-2: SCHEDULE B, CHECKLIST FOR ENGINEERING PLANS:
    (Name of Subdivision)
    (Date of Submission)
    (Due Date of Recommendation - 45 Days)
(NOTE): To properly execute this checklist, the subdivider or his engineer
shall:
(A) Insert the required information.
(B) Denote compliance with applicable ordinance by placing his initials in all
    spaces where applicable.
(C) Denote those items which the subdivider considers “Not Applicable” to this
    particular subdivision by the abbreviation, “N.A.”.
  1.  Plans have been submitted within 12 months of the date of approval by
        the Village Board of the Preliminary Plan.
  2.  Four (4) copies of engineering plans have been submitted.
  3.  Plans conform to Section 13-6-2.
  4.  A title sheet is included with each set of plans and includes:
          a. Name of subdivision and unit number
          b. Type of work covered
          c. Location map showing relation of area to be improved to existing
               streets
          d. An index of sheets
          e. A summary of quantities
          f. Name, address, and seal of registered engineer preparing the
               plans.
          g. Date of preparation and revisions, if any, is shown
  5.  Plan and profiles are on Federal Aid Sheets, Plate I or II, or equal.
          a. Horizontal scale is not less than 1" to 50'
          b. Vertical scale is not less than 1" to 5'
  6.  Cross sections are plotted on Federal Aid Sheets, Plate III.
  7.  North direction is shown for each separate plan view.
  8.  An adequate number of bench marks are shown with elevations referenced
        to mean sea level to facilitate checking of elevations.
        Delineation is shown of all easements necessary to serve all lots with
  9.  underground and overhead utilities, and to allow for perpetual
        maintenance to these facilities.
  10. An application for State Environmental Protection Agency permit for the
        sanitary sewer extension accompanies the plans.
        Sanitary sewer plans and specifications are complete and conform to the
  11. standards and requirements of the Codes applicable thereto and denote
        all of the following:
          a. All properties in the subdivision are served and house service
               connections are provided.
          b. The minimum size main is 8" I.D.
          c. The plan conforms to the overall municipal plan for any trunk
               sewers traversing the subdivision.
          d. The distance between manholes does not exceed 400'.
          e. The invert elevation of each manhole is shown.
          f. The grade of each section of sewer is shown by percentage in
               accordance with accepted engineering practice.
               Extra strength pipe and extra strength manhole wall construction
          g. is specified and shown on the plans and in the estimates of
               quantities where the depth of installation exceeds 8'.
          h. Profile of existing and proposed ground surfaces.
          i. Risers are shown for individual house service laterals where
               depths of main exceeds 12'.
          j. Pipe joints are of permitted type.
                 1. 540 pounds in collector streets
                 2. 400 pounds in minor and cul-de-sac streets
                 3. 335 pounds in rear-lot easements.
  12. An application for State Environmental Protection Agency approval of
        the water main installation accompanies the plans.
  13. Water distribution plans and specifications are complete and conform to
        the codes applicable thereto and include all of the following:
          a. All properties in the subdivision are served
          b. The minimum size main is 8" I.D.
          c. The plan conforms to the Village's overall plan for any trunk
               lines which might traverse the subdivision.
          d. Valve and hydrant spacing and location conform to the approved
               preliminary plan.
          e. Materials and joint specifications comply with the Village's
               standards
          f. Specifications include provisions for testing and sterilization
               of all new water distribution facilities.
                 1. Valve cover
                 2. Standard cover
                 3. Standard hydrant installation
  14. Street plans, including storm sewers, are complete and conform to the
        codes applicable thereto and include all of the following:
          a. The location of streets and width of pavements conform to those
               indicated on the approved preliminary plan.
          b. Plan shows curb, gutter and sidewalk locations, and includes the
               following information:
                 1. Corner curb radius is not less than 16'.
                 2. Curve data, for all horizontal curves.
                 3. Direction of flow along all curbs.
                 4. No surface water is carried across or around any street
                      intersection, nor for a distance greater than 600'.
               Cross-sections are submitted as necessary to indicate
          c. feasibility of proposed street elevations in relation to
               adjacent lot elevations and include sidewalk location.
          d. Profiles are submitted for all paving centerlines and storm
               sewers and indicate:
                 1. Catch basin invert elevations
                 2. Minimum pipe size is 12" I.D.; except, that a lead from a
                      single inlet may be 10" I.D.
                 3. The grade of each section of sewer shown by percentage in
                      accordance with accepted engineering practice.
                 4. Storm sewer elevations do not conflict with any other
                      underground utilities.
                 5. Storm sewer is connected with an adequate outfall.
                 6. Curve data is given for vertical road curves.
               The storm sewer system is designed to provide sufficient
          e. capacity for the drainage of upland areas contributing to the
               stormwater runoff on the street.
                 1. Storm sewer design computations are submitted with plans.
          f. A surface water drainage pattern is shown for each block.
          g. Material specifications comply with standards of the Village and
               include:
                 1. paving base materials
                 2. paving surface materials
                 3. concrete
                 4. pipe materials
          h. Typical cross-sections and details include the following:
                 1. Collector street
                 2. Minor or cul-de-sac street
                 3. Concrete curb and gutter
                 4. Concrete sidewalk
                 5. Standard manhole
                 6. Standard cover
                 7. Catch basin
  15. Street light plans are complete and include the following:
          a. Pole locations
          b. Spacing
          c. Average maintained footcandle illumination (calculated).
                 1. type of base and pole
                 2. bracket or arm
                 3. luminaire, indicating type of lamp and wattage
                 4. mounting height
  16. Parkway improvement specifications are complete and include provisions
        for:
          a. Removal of stumps an trees that cannot be saved, boulders and al
               other similar items.
          b. Grading, installation of topsoil and seeding or sodding.
  17. Street signs are shown to be installed at all street intersections not
        previously marked.
Completed by:     (Name)
    (Address)
    (Date)
Reviewed by:     (Engineer)
    (Date)
Considered by Plan Commission On:     (Date)
    (Chairman)
 
(1990 Code § 34-6-2)
13-7-3: SCHEDULE C, CHECKLIST FOR FINAL PLAT:
    (Name of Subdivision)
    (Date of Submission)
    (Due Date of Recommendation 30 Days)
(NOTE): To properly execute this checklist, the subdivider or his engineer
shall:
(A) Insert the required information.
(B) Denote compliance with applicable ordinances by placing his initials in all
    spaces where applicable.
(C) Denote those items which the subdivider considers “Not Applicable” to this
    particular subdivision by the abbreviation “N.A.”).
  1.  Plat has been submitted within 6 months after the approval of the
        engineering plan.
        Plat has been submitted within 3 years after the approval of the
  2.  preliminary plan (unless an extension of time has been requested of and
        granted by the Village Board).
  3.  One (1) original drawing of the final plat has been submitted.
  4.  One (1) transparency print of the final plat has been submitted.
  5.  Four (4) copies of the final plat have been submitted.
  6.  Plat is drawn with black or blue ink on heavy linen tracing cloth or
        polyester film.
  7.  North direction is shown.
  8.  Scale is shown (minimum 1" equals 100').
  9.  Section corners and section lines are accurately tied into subdivision
        by distances and angles.
  10. Official survey monuments are shown as required.
  11. All necessary easements are shown and dimensioned.
  12. Building setback lines are shown and dimensioned in accordance with the
        Zoning Code.
  13. Lot areas are in accordance with the applicable Zoning Regulations.
  14. Street names are shown.
  15. Areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are shown and
        described and the purpose is designated.
  16. Protective covenants are lettered on the plat or are appropriately
        referenced.
  17. Required certificates are shown and signed:
          a. Surveyor's Certificate (including legal description).
          b. Owner’s Certificate.
          c. Notary Certificate.
          d. County Clerk's Certificate.
          e. Flood Hazard Certificate.
          f. Plan Commission Certificate.
          g. Village Board Certificate.
          h. Superintendents of Water, Sewer and Streets Certificate.
    18. The following items have been submitted with the final plat:
          a. Detailed specification for all required land improvements not
               previously submitted and approved with the engineering plans.
          b. A copy of the State Sanitary Water Board permit for the sanitary
               sewer installation.
          c. A copy of the State Department of Public Health approval of the
               water main installation.
          d. An affidavit by the subdivider acknowledging responsibility for
               the proper installation of all required land improvements.
          e. A certified estimate of cost of all required land improvements
               prepared by a registered engineer.
          f. A description of the bond or guarantee collateral intended to be
               submitted after contingent approval is granted by the Village.
Completed by:     (Name)
    (Address)
    (Date)
Reviewed by:     (Zoning Administrator)
    (Date)
Considered by Plan Commission On:     (Date)
    (Chairman)
 
(1990 Code § 34-6-3)
13-7-4: SURETY BOND FOR IMPROVEMENTS:
   “KNOW all men by these presents that we,                          , (name of
individual, corporation, etc.), as principal, and the                          
(name of bonding company), a corporation authorized to do business in the State
of                 as surety, are held and firmly bound unto this Village of
               , in the Penal sum of                 Dollars, lawful money of
the United States for the payment of which we and each of us bind ourselves,
our heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns jointly by these
presents:
   'The condition of this obligation is such that whereas, the
                          (name of individual, corporation or principal) has
agreed to construct and/or install at its expense the following improvements:
   Street base and paving.
   Concrete curb and gutters.
   Water mains, appurtenances, and house services.
   Storm sewers, appurtenances, and house services.
   Sanitary sewers, appurtenances and house services.
   Concrete sidewalks   ) Optional
   Street lights      ) Optional
   Site improvements   ) Optional
all in accordance with the specifications and codes of the Village and
contained in plans and specifications prepared by                          
(named engineer), and approved by the Village Board, at the following location:
   
   (DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY)
   'And has agreed to maintain such improvements constructed under this bond
for a period of one (1) year from the date of acceptance of the same by the
Village Board.
   'NOW, THEREFORE, if the said principal shall well and truly perform in all
respects in strict accordance with the requirements, and shall save the Village
harmless from all loss, cost or damage, by reason of their failure to complete
said work, or maintain said improvements, relating to the above described work,
then this obligation to be void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect.”
(1990 Code § 34-6-4)
13-7-5: CASH BOND:
The Plan Commission may permit a developer to file in lieu of the surety bond
called for in subsection
13-6-5A of this title, a cash bond guaranteeing that the improvements will be
completed as follows:
   (A) Undertaking in Lieu of Completion Bond.
   WHEREAS, the statutes of the State of Illinois grant to a municipal
corporation the right to require that a developer constructing certain
improvements within that community guarantee the construction of such
improvements by a completion bond or other security acceptable to the
community; and WHEREAS,                 desires to construct a residential
development within the                 of                , and that said
municipality is willing to accept an undertaking from a financial institution
in the nature of an irrevocable commitment in lieu of such completion bond.
   NOW, THEREFORE, are the following representations made by the owner and/or
developer to the                        of                        as follows:
      1.   THAT                         is the owner and/or developer of the
property legally described in Clause 2 of this undertaking, and shall
hereinafter be referred to as “OWNER”; and, THAT the                 of
                shall hereinafter be referred to as “MUNICIPALITY”.
      2.   THAT THE OWNER is the legal title holder of the following described
property:
         [LEGAL DESCRIPTION]
      3.   THAT THE OWNER shall be required to install and guarantee the
installation of streets, sidewalks, street lights, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, water line s, recreational facilities (including structures), and
common landscaping. In order to guarantee that such facilities shall be
installed, the OWNER shall submit to the municipal engineer such specifications
and estimated engineering costs as shall be required to meet with his approval.
In aiding the municipal engineer in determining the amount of reasonably
anticipated costs for the construction of such improvements, the OWNER may
submit to the engineer signed contracts for the construction of such
improvements. The municipal engineer, upon being satisfied that the design of
the required improvements are in accordance with the ordinances of the Village
and in accordance with good engineering practices, shall estimate and certify
an amount which shall represent one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
reasonably estimated cost of completing the required improvements for which the
Village is requiring a completion guarantee.
      4.   THAT [except for the issuance of building permits for a reasonable
number of models], the OWNER shall not be entitled to the issuance of [further]
building permits until and unless said owner shall submit to the Village an
irrevocable financial commitment from a bank, savings and loan, or mortgage
company approved by the Village in the amount certified by the municipal
engineer.
      5.   THAT the written irrevocable financial commitment shall be furnished
by the Village from a banking or lending institution in the form marked
Appendix “A” and appended to this agreement.
      6.   THAT THE OWNER guarantees the workmanship of the public improvements
to be installed upon the site for a period of one (1) year after their donation
to the Village. Upon final completion of the streets, sidewalks, street lights,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water mains the OWNER shall execute a Bill
of Sale for those items which are personal property. For a period of one (1)
year after the granting of the Bill of Sale in the case of personal property
and the acceptance for maintenance in the case of streets and sidewalks, all
necessary repairs to such facilities shall be the responsibility of the OWNER.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF          
has hereunto set his hand and seal this           , day of 20     .
                     
         (OWNER)
   APPROVED by the            of            this            day of            ,
20     .
   BY:               
            (MUNICIPALITY)
   (B) [Letterhead of Bank, Savings and Loan or Mortgage House]
                             , 20   
GENTLEMEN:
   We hereby establish our irrevocable credit in favor of  [developer] , or the
Village of,                     , in the amount of                 Dollars
($               ). We understand that this irrevocable credit is to be used to
construct the following improvements in the residential development known as
                     to be constructed with the                   , Illinois:
streets; sidewalks; street lights; the portion of sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, and water mains to become municipality-owned; recreational facilities
(including a recreational building and a swimming pool and appurtenances
thereof); and landscaping in common areas.
   The development is legally described as follows:
   (Legal Description)
   We shall make payouts from this irrevocable commitment as follows:
   If we have not been notified by the Village of a default by the owner and/or
developer, we shall disburse the funds for labor and materials furnished by
contractors in accordance with the sworn statement on order of the owner, the
submission of proper lien waivers from the contractors engaged in such work,
and the certificate by the Municipal Engineer,  (his name) , that such work has
been properly completed, however, that we shall withhold from each payment made
under such sworn statement(s) or order(s) an amount equal to 10% thereof until
all improvements have been completed except final surfacing of the streets and
sidewalks, at which time the 10% sum withheld shall be disbursed less sum equal
to 125% of the cost of the final surfacing of the streets, which sum shall be
finally disbursed when the work has been completed and the requirements of
certification and lien waivers as has been hereinabove set out.
   The required improvements shall be completed in accordance with the
following schedule:
   (Insert Schedule)
   If we receive a resolution of the corporate authorities of the Village
indicating that the owner and/or developer has failed to satisfactorily
complete or carry on the work of the installation and construction of the
required improvements, and such resolution indicates that the owner and/or
developer has been notified that the Village finds that a breach of the owner's
and/or developer's obligations has occurred and have not been cured within a
period of 30 days, that in such case, we shall make payments for materials and
labor to such contractor(s) or subcontractor(s) retained by the Village who
have completed the improvements in substantial accordance with the plans and
specifications of the owner and/or developer; such payments shall be made upon
the certification of the municipal engineer that the work has been completed
and the submission of proper waiver of liens from the contractor(s) or
subcontractor(s). The amount of the payouts shall be in accordance with the
retention provisions as previously set out.
   The irrevocable credit established by us shall be in force for a period of
                years, and shall remain in effect without regard to any default
in payments of sums owed by us, by the owner and/or developer and without
regard to other claims which we may have against the owner and/or developer.
Sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of this irrevocable credit we shall
notify the corporate authorities of the Village, by registered letter return
receipt requested, of the impending expiration date. This commitment shall not
terminate without such notice. If the work covered by this commitment has not
been completed within the time set forth in this agreement, the Village may, at
its option, continue drawing funds as otherwise provided for an additional
period of 1 year. It is recognized that the Village is according to the owner
and/or developer the permission to proceed with the development project
expressly upon the guarantee of the irrevocable nature of this commitment. It
is further acknowledged that the consideration for this irrevocable commitment
is provided by agreements between this financial institution and the developer.
The sum of this credit shall, however, be reduced in the amount of
disbursements made from time to time in accordance with the terms under which
this credit is extended as set out above.
(1990 Code § 34-6-5)
