CITY CODE
of
SPRING VALLEY, ILLINOIS
1972
Code current through:
Ord. 1921, passed 8-4-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Spring Valley, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 1921, passed August 4, 2025. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 188
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE OFFICIAL CODE OF THE CITY OF
SPRING VALLEY; PROVIDING FOR THE CONTINUANCE IN EFFECT OF ALL GENERAL LAWS IN
EFFECT ON THE DATE OF SUCH ADOPTION; PROVIDING FOR THE CONTINUATION OF ALL
SPECIAL ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED IN THE OFFICIAL CODE AND PROVIDING FOR THE
REGULAR SUPPLEMENTATION OF THE OFFICIAL CITY CODE.
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Spring Valley,
Illinois:
   Section 1. Pursuant to the provisions of section
1-2-3 of the Illinois municipal code and from and after the date of passage of
this ordinance, this city code of the city of Spring Valley, Illinois, prepared
by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., under the direction of the governing body of the
city of Spring Valley, is hereby approved and accepted and declared to be the
official city code containing all ordinances of a general nature in effect at
the time of such codification. Said code shall be accepted in all courts
without question as the official code and law of the city as enacted by the
mayor and city council of the city of Spring Valley.
   Section 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose leaf type of binding, together with continuous supplement service
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding to or deleting
provisions of the official code is identified by the proper catchline and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such new
provision shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance. Insertion
of the proper replacement pages shall be made in the copies of the code, three
(3) copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the clerk, certified
as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said
office is regularly open.
   Section 3. All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provisions and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, as set forth in the savings clause (title 1, chapter 2) of said code
shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed and
amended by provisions of the city code. Such ordinances are not intended to be
included in the official city code.
   Section 4. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately upon
its passage, approval and publication in book or pamphlet form as provided by
section 1-2-4 of the Illinois municipal code.
PASSED AND APPROVED THIS 20th day of December 1972.
            CITY OF SPRING VALLEY
            s/ Joseph Ruva  Mayor
ATTEST:
s/ Beverly West   
City Clerk
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Construction Of Words
1-1-5: Interpretations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the governing body this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official code of the city of Spring Valley. Any
reference made to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate chapter
and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well
as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any
legal document. (1972 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect 1 . (1972
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-3, 5/1-2-6.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to Sterling
Codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code
within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage. (1972 Code)
1-1-4: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used, in describing or referring to any matters, parties, or persons, any
single matter, party, or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words
importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties, or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be
deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be
repugnant thereto. (1972 Code)
1-1-5: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order
to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
   (B)   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section
of this code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person
shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.
(1972 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVINGS CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following section), from which are excluded
the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (1972 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue
of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect of such provisions only. (1972 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this or the preceding section shall be construed as
abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinances of
the city herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering
any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person,
firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or
provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this code. (1972
Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Definitions, General
1-3-1: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have the
meaning herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The city of Spring Valley.
CODE: Unless otherwise specifically stated shall mean this code.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Spring Valley".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act
or omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code
which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law.
NEGLIGENT, NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such
attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as a
prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of, another person or to the
community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Spring Valley".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON: Shall include the singular and the plural and shall also mean and
include any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or any other
form of association or organization.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the
whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalty
1-4-1-1: Settlement
1-4-2: Default; Labor (Rep. by Ord. 1889, 5-6-2024)
1-4-3: License
1-4-4: Application
1-4-5: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code shall be fined
in a sum not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any one
offense, excepting any specific section of this Code wherein the maximum fine
is limited to a lesser amount. (Ord. 1400, 11-10-2008)
1-4-1-1: SETTLEMENT:
   (A)   For any defendant charged for either the first or second time with the
offense listed below, the City of Spring Valley offers an opportunity for the
defendant to avoid a court appearance and settle the City ordinance violation
complaint by paying the City of Spring Valley the sum of seventy five dollars
($75.00) within fourteen (14) days from the date of the offense as charged in
the City ordinance violation ticket.
Violation Section Of Code
Violation                                              Section Of Code
Property maintenance code violations                   Title 3, chapter 9
Residential rental property violations                 Title 3, chapter 11
Vacant buildings and property violations               Title 3, chapter 12
Open burning                                           4-3-2
Drunkenness                                            6-2-5
Unnecessary noise/mufflers                             6-2-15
Tobacco possession by minors                           6-2-27
Curfew                                                 6-4-1
Failure to obtain dog license                          6-5-1
Failure to obtain dog tags                             6-5-2
Allowing a dog to run at large                         6-5-3
Disorderly conduct                                     6-6-1
Disorderly crowds                                      6-6-2
Abandoned vehicle nuisance                             6-7-2
Truancy                                                Title 6, chapter 13
Possession of cannabis and possession of cannabis      Title 6, chapter 15
paraphernalia
Failure to have a suitable trash receptacle            7-4-2
Allowing weeds to grow in excess of 8 inches in height 7-7-1
 
   (B)   Any defendant wishing to accept the City of Spring Valley's offer to
settle the City ordinance violation complaint pursuant to Illinois Supreme
Court Rule 574 must make the seventy five dollar ($75.00) payment to the Spring
Valley City Clerk's Office either in cash, certified check, money order, or
cashier's check made payable to the City of Spring Valley.
   (C)   If a defendant does not exercise the opportunity to settle the dispute
pursuant to Illinois Supreme Court Rule 574 and the terms of this section, the
fine provisions set forth in this Code for the offenses enumerated herein shall
remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1540, 8-5-2013; amd. Ord. 1649, 11-7-
2016; Ord. 1855, 8-15-2022; Ord. 1884, 11-6-2023)
1-4-2: DEFAULT; LABOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 1889, 5-6-2024)
1-4-3: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this Code any
license previously issued to him by the City may be revoked by the court or by
the Governing Body. (1972 Code)
1-4-4: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing
nature is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such
duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this Code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Code the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1972 Code)
1-4-5: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the Governing Body to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee
is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1972
Code)
CHAPTER 5
WARDS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Boundaries
1-5-1: BOUNDARIES:
The city is hereby divided into four (4) wards with boundaries as follows:
First ward, which shall include that part of the city lying south of the
centerline of Dakota Street as extended easterly on U.S. Route 6 to the east
city limits and lying east of the centerline of Hennessey Street extended
southerly to the south city limits.
Second ward, which shall include that part of the city lying south of the
centerline of Dakota Street as extended westerly to the west city limits and
lying west of the centerline of Hennessey Street as extended southerly to the
south city limits.
Third ward, which shall include that part of the city lying north of the
centerline of Dakota Street as extended westerly to the west city limits and
west of the centerline of Hennessey Street as extended northerly to the north
city limits.
Fourth ward, which shall include that part of the city lying north of the
centerline of Dakota Street as extended easterly to the east city limits on
Route 6 and lying east of the centerline of Hennessey Street extended northerly
to the north city limits. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election
1-6-2: Duties
1-6-3: Appointment Of Officers
1-6-4: Designation Of Officers' Duties
1-6-5: Mayor Pro Tem
1-6-6: Acting Mayor
1-6-7: Formal Occasions
1-6-8: Bond
1-6-1: ELECTION:
The mayor shall be elected for a four (4) year term, and shall serve until his
successor is elected and qualified as is provided by statute. (1972 Code)
1-6-2: DUTIES:
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city, shall preside over
the meetings of the council, and shall perform such duties as may be required
of him by statute or ordinance. He shall have supervision over all of the
executive officers and employees of the city, and shall have the power and
authority to inspect all books and records pertaining to city affairs and kept
by any officer or employee of the city at any reasonable time. (1972 Code)
1-6-3: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
The mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the city
council, all officers of the city whose election or appointment is not
otherwise provided for. Any vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall
be filled in the same manner. (1972 Code)
1-6-4: DESIGNATION OF OFFICERS' DUTIES:
Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any
appointed officer of the city this dispute shall be settled by the mayor after
consultation with the city attorney; and the mayor shall have the power to
delegate to any appointed officer any duty which is to be performed when no
specific officer has been directed to perform that duty. (1972 Code)
1-6-5: MAYOR PRO TEM:
During a temporary absence or disability of the mayor, the city council shall
elect one of its number to act as mayor pro tem, who during such absence or
disability shall possess the powers of mayor, as is provided by statute. (1972
Code)
1-6-6: ACTING MAYOR:
In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the council may appoint one
of its members as acting mayor to serve until the vacancy is filled at a
regular or special election as provided by law. (1972 Code)
1-6-7: FORMAL OCCASIONS:
The mayor shall act for and on behalf of the city on formal occasions and
receptions; but in his absence or inability to attend any such function, the
council may select any other city officer to so act. (1972 Code)
1-6-8: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the mayor shall execute a bond
in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by the council,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office, provided
the amount of such bond shall not be less than three thousand dollars
($3,000.00). (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 7
COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-7-1: Council Members
1-7-2: Qualifications
1-7-3: Regular Meetings
1-7-4: Special Meetings
1-7-5: Quorum
1-7-6: Members Required To Vote
1-7-7: Passage Of Ordinance Over Veto
1-7-8: Standing Committees
1-7-9: Duties Of Standing Committees
1-7-10: Attachment Of Documents To Reports
1-7-11: Deferment Of Committee Reports
1-7-12: Adoption Of "Robert's Rules Of Order Revised"
1-7-13: Ordinances, Resolutions, Petitions And Communications
1-7-14: Public Comment At Council And Committee Meetings
1-7-1: COUNCIL MEMBERS:
The council shall consist of the mayor and two (2) aldermen from each ward; it
shall be judge of the election and qualification of its own members, and in
case any vacancy shall occur in the office of alderman, by death, resignation,
removal or any other cause, such vacancy shall be filled as provided by
statute. (1972 Code)
1-7-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be eligible to the office of alderman unless he shall be a
qualified elector and reside within the ward for which he was elected, nor
shall he be eligible if he is in arrears in the payment of tax or any other
liability due to the city; nor shall he be directly or indirectly interested in
any contract whatever to which the city is a party; nor shall he be eligible if
he shall have been convicted of malfeasance, bribery or corrupt practices or
crime; nor shall he be eligible to any office the salary of which is payable
out of the city treasury, if at the time of his appointment he shall be a
member of the council; nor shall any member of the council at the same time
hold any other office under the city government; nor shall he be, either
directly or indirectly, individually or as a member of a firm, engaged in any
business transaction with the city, through its mayor or any of its authorized
boards, agents or attorney, whereby any money is to be paid, directly or
indirectly, out of the city treasury to such member of firms; nor shall any
member of the council sign any bond in any case wherein the city is interested.
(1972 Code)
1-7-3: REGULAR MEETINGS:
The regular stated meetings of the council shall be held in the council rooms
in the city hall at the hour of seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. on the first and
third Mondays of each month commencing with the meeting on Monday, June 7,
2021, except when any such day shall happen to be a legal holiday, in which
case the meetings shall be held on the day next following at the same hour.
(Ord. 1336, 5-21-2007; amd. Ord. 1812, 5-17-2021)
1-7-4: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor or by any three (3)
aldermen, whenever in their discretion they deem it necessary, in which event
such meeting shall be called in the following manner: The mayor, or the three
(3) aldermen, as the case may be, shall file in the clerk's office a statement
in writing, setting forth the object and purpose of the special meeting and
directing the clerk to forthwith give notice of the same. Upon the filing of
such statement the clerk shall cause to be served personally upon each member
of the council or left at his usual place of business or abode, at least twenty
four (24) hours before the time of such meeting, a notice of the special
meeting, setting forth the object and purposes thereof, and the time of holding
the same, which notices shall be served by some member of the police force.
Said notice may be served by the clerk by mail if said notice is deposited in
the U.S. mail at least forty eight (48) hours before time of said meeting. No
business other than that mentioned in the call shall be transacted at a special
meeting. The clerk shall give such other and further notice of such meeting as
required by law. (1972 Code)
1-7-5: QUORUM:
A majority of the aldermen shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a
smaller number may adjourn from time to time, and may compel the attendance of
absentees. (1972 Code)
1-7-6: MEMBERS REQUIRED TO VOTE:
Every member of the council shall vote on all questions in which he is not
directly or personally interested, which may be brought before the council for
its action in such a manner as to require a vote to be taken thereon.
The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances, and on all
propositions to create any liability against the city, or for the expenditure
or appropriation of its money, and in all other cases at the request of any
member, which shall be entered on the journal of the proceedings; and the
concurrence of a majority of all the members elected in the council shall be
necessary to the passage of any such ordinance or proposition, except where
greater than a majority vote is required by statute. (1972 Code)
1-7-7: PASSAGE OF ORDINANCE OVER VETO:
In case the mayor shall veto any ordinance or any part of an ordinance and
return the same to the council, together with his objections thereto, the vote
by which the same was passed shall be reconsidered by the council; and, if
after such consideration, two-thirds (2/3) of all the members elected to the
council shall agree by ayes and nays to pass the same, it shall go into effect,
notwithstanding the disapproval of the mayor. The vote to pass the same over
the mayor's veto shall be taken by ayes and nays, and entered on the journal.
No vote of the council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at any special
meeting thereof, unless at such special meeting there shall be present as many
aldermen as were present when such vote was taken. (1972 Code)
1-7-8: STANDING COMMITTEES:
It shall be the duty of the mayor at the first regular meeting of the council
in the month of May each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, to appoint
a chairman of the following five (5) standing committees of the council:
Finance committee.
Legislative committee.
Public health and safety committee.
Public streets and property committee.
Public utilities committee.
All council members shall be members of each standing committee. (1972 Code;
amd. Ord. 1813, 5-17-2021; Ord. 1913, 4-7-2025)
1-7-9: DUTIES OF STANDING COMMITTEES:
It shall be the duty of the standing committees of the council to keep a close
watch over the affairs of their respective departments of the city government.
They shall have the general management, control and supervision of all works
and things ordered to be made or done by the council in their respective
departments, and they shall make reports to the council of whatever facts may
be deemed of importance.
Each committee whether standing or special shall properly inspect and report in
writing upon all matters referred to it by the council and do and perform such
other and further duties as the council may from time to time prescribe.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
1-7-10: ATTACHMENT OF DOCUMENTS TO REPORTS:
The City Clerk, in reporting upon any subject referred to it, shall attach to
their report all papers or documents in its possessions relative to matters so
referred.
(amd. Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
1-7-11: DEFERMENT OF COMMITTEE REPORTS:
Any report of a committee of the council shall be deferred, for final action
thereon, to the next regular meeting of the council after the report is made,
upon the request of two (2) aldermen present. (1972 Code)
1-7-12: ADOPTION OF "ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER REVISED":
The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published edition
of "Robert's Rules Of Order Revised" shall govern the council in all cases to
which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the
special rules of the city council and are not inconsistent with statutes of the
state of Illinois. (1972 Code)
1-7-13: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, PETITIONS AND COMMUNICATIONS:
Copies of ordinances, resolutions, petitions and communications shall be sent
to each member of the council forty-eight (48) hours prior to any regular or
special meeting wherein such resolution or ordinance is to be brought up for
consideration unless the council moves by a two-thirds (2/3) vote to suspend
the rules at any regular or special meeting.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
1-7-14: PUBLIC COMMENT AT COUNCIL AND COMMITTEE MEETINGS:
   (A)   On all Spring Valley city council agendas the public should be given
two (2) opportunities to address the council. The first opportunity to address
the council will be after the roll call of the members. This opportunity to
address the city council will be limited to matters on the agenda for
consideration by the city council at the meeting. Individuals commenting on
agenda items shall be limited to two (2) minutes in length, unless the mayor
grants the individual wishing to address the council additional time.
   (B)   Prior to the adjournment of the Spring Valley city council meeting,
the agenda shall also allow for public comments on any matters not covered by
the agenda for the meeting. Individuals making public comments at the end of
the meeting shall be limited to two (2) minutes in length, unless the mayor
grants the individual making the public comment additional time.
   (C)   The rules established for meetings of the Spring Valley city council
are also made applicable to all Spring Valley committee meetings. (Ord. 1586,
10-13-2014)
CHAPTER 8
CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-8-1: Election; Term
1-8-2: Bond And Oath
1-8-3: Office Hours
1-8-4: Signatures
1-8-5: Money Collected
1-8-6: Accounts
1-8-7: Records
1-8-8: Seal
1-8-9: Documents
1-8-10: Indices
1-8-11: Ex Officio Collector
1-8-12: Additional Duties
1-8-13: Vacancies
1-8-14: Deputy Clerk
1-8-1: ELECTION; TERM:
The city clerk shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and until
his successor is elected and qualified, as provided by statute. (1972 Code)
1-8-2: BOND AND OATH:
Before entering upon his duties of office, the city clerk shall execute a bond
in such amount as is provided by statute, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his duties, and shall take oath as prescribed for other city
officers. (1972 Code)
1-8-3: OFFICE HOURS:
The clerk shall keep the office of the city clerk located in the city hall open
from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. until five o'clock (5:00) P.M. Monday through
Friday. (Ord. 542, 6-7-1982; amd. Ord. 1779, 5-19-2020)
1-8-4: SIGNATURES:
The city clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of the city and all
licenses, permits and such other documents as shall require this formality.
(1972 Code)
1-8-5: MONEY COLLECTED:
The clerk shall turn over all money received by him on behalf of the city to
the city treasurer promptly upon receipt of the same; and with such money he
shall give a statement as to the source thereof. (1972 Code)
1-8-6: ACCOUNTS:
The clerk shall keep accounts showing all money received by him and the source
and disposition thereof, and such other accounts as may be required by statute
or ordinance. (1972 Code)
1-8-7: RECORDS:
In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the clerk is
required by statute to keep, he shall keep a register of all licenses and
permits issued and the payments thereon; a record showing all of the officers
and regular employees of the city; and such other records as may be required by
the city council. (1972 Code)
1-8-8: SEAL:
The clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal, and shall affix its
impression on documents whenever this is required. (1972 Code)
1-8-9: DOCUMENTS:
The clerk shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the city which
are not assigned to the custody of some other officer. (1972 Code)
1-8-10: INDICES:
The clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records
kept by him, so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had. (1972
Code)
1-8-11: EX OFFICIO COLLECTOR:
The clerk shall act as and perform all the duties of collector unless and until
a separate collector is appointed. (1972 Code)
1-8-12: ADDITIONAL DUTIES:
In addition to the duties herein provided, the clerk shall perform such other
duties and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance. (1972 Code)
1-8-13: VACANCIES:
In case the office of city clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the mayor
and council shall appoint a successor as provided by statute. (1972 Code)
1-8-14: DEPUTY CLERK:
There is hereby created the office of deputy clerk. The city clerk is
authorized to appoint a deputy clerk who shall have the power and duty to
execute all documents required by any law or ordinance to be executed by the
clerk, and affix the seal of the city thereto whenever required.
When signing any documents the deputy clerk shall sign the name of the city
clerk followed by the word "by" and the deputy clerk's own name and the words
"deputy clerk".
The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised by such deputy clerk
only in the absence of the city clerk from his office in the city hall, and
only when either written direction has been given by the city clerk to exercise
such power, or the city council has determined by resolution that the city
clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such function.
Such deputy clerk shall have the authority and power herein described, and such
further power and authority as may be provided by statute. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 9
CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-9-1: Election
1-9-2: Oath And Bond
1-9-3: Duties
1-9-4: Deposit Of Funds
1-9-5: Records
1-9-6: Accounts
1-9-7: Reports
1-9-8: Register Of Warrants
1-9-1: ELECTION:
The city treasurer shall be elected as provided by statute and shall serve
until his successor is elected and qualified. (1972 Code)
1-9-2: OATH AND BOND:
The treasurer, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the
oath prescribed for city officers and shall give bond in such sum as may be
required by the council, but the bond shall not be less than the amount of the
estimated revenues and special assessments of the city for the current year,
with sureties to be approved by the council. The bond shall be conditioned upon
the faithful performance by the treasurer of his duties of office, and to
indemnify the city for any loss due to any neglect of duty or wrongful act on
the part of the treasurer. (1972 Code)
1-9-3: DUTIES:
The treasurer shall perform such duties as may be prescribed for him by statute
or ordinance. He shall receive all money paid to the city, either directly from
the person paying it or from the hands of such other officer as may receive it,
and he shall pay out only on vouchers or orders properly signed by the city
clerk and the mayor. (1972 Code)
1-9-4: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
He shall deposit the city funds in such depositories as may be selected from
time to time as is provided by statute, and he shall keep the city money
separate and distinct from his own money with it or make private or personal
use of city funds. (1972 Code)
1-9-5: RECORDS:
The treasurer shall keep such records showing all money received by him, the
source from which it was received, and the purpose for which it was paid out;
and he shall keep a record showing at all times the financial status of the
city. (1972 Code)
1-9-6: ACCOUNTS:
The treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be required by the
council, and shall keep them in the manner required by law. (1972 Code)
1-9-7: REPORTS:
The treasurer shall make monthly reports to the council showing the state of
the finances of the city, and the amounts received and spent during the month,
which reports shall be filed. He shall make an annual report at the close of
the fiscal year with the total amount of all receipts and expenditures of the
city and his transactions during the preceding year. (1972 Code)
1-9-8: REGISTER OF WARRANTS:
The treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants, bonds or orders filed with
him or paid by him, and all vouchers, as is required by statute. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 10
CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-10-1: Appointment
1-10-2: Oath And Bond
1-10-3: Duties
1-10-4: Other Legal Matters
1-10-5: Assistant City Attorney
1-10-1: APPOINTMENT:
The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent
of the city council. (1972 Code)
1-10-2: OATH AND BOND:
The city attorney shall take the oath prescribed by law and execute a bond to
the city in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with sureties,
conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office. (1972
Code)
1-10-3: DUTIES:
The city attorney shall attend all regular meetings of the city council,
represent the city in hearings in circuit court relating to ordinance
violations, and draft the annual appropriation ordinance and tax levy
ordinance. (1972 Code)
1-10-4: OTHER LEGAL MATTERS:
The attorney shall be the legal advisor for the city and represent the city in
all other legal matters. The city council may, at the request of the city
attorney, retain or authorize additional counsel to assist the city attorney in
legal matters. (1972 Code)
1-10-5: ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEY:
The mayor may upon the request and recommendation of the city attorney, and
with the advice and consent of the city council, appoint one or more assistants
who shall, upon taking the oath prescribed by law, be authorized to perform the
duties of the city attorney without additional compensation therefor. (Ord., 9-
21-1981)
CHAPTER 11
INDEMNIFICATION
SECTION:
1-11-1: Findings
1-11-2: City Action
1-11-3: Actions Not Covered
1-11-1: FINDINGS:
The City Council finds that it is the public policy of the State of Illinois
that members of governmental bodies shall not be liable in damages for the
exercise of discretion in determining policies. This public policy is set forth
in 745 Illinois Compiled Statutes 10/2-201 which provides as follows:
Except as otherwise provided by Statute, a public employee serving in a
position involving the determination of policy or the exercise of discretion is
not liable for any injury resulting from his act or omission in determining
policy when acting in the exercise of such discretion even though abused.
(Ord. 1658, 12-19-2016)
1-11-2: CITY ACTION:
In light of section
1-11-1 of this chapter, if any claim or action not covered by insurance is
instituted against any elected or appointed City official, employee or
authorized volunteer in connection with any act or omission in determining
policy, the City shall, to the fullest extent allowed by the law:
   (A)   Appear and defend against the claim or actions;
   (B)   Indemnify the elected or appointed City official, employee or
authorized volunteer for his or her court costs and attorney's fees incurred in
the defense of such claim or action;
   (C)   Pay or indemnify the elected or appointed City official, employee or
authorized volunteer for a judgment based on such claim or action; and
   (D)   Pay or indemnify the elected or appointed City official, employee or
authorized volunteer for a compromise or settlement of such claim or action,
provided that the settlement is approved by a majority of the members of the
City Council. The term "elected or appointed City official" shall mean any
former or current Mayor, Alderman or member of any City board, committee and
commission. (Ord. 1658, 12-19-2016)
1-11-3: ACTIONS NOT COVERED:
The foregoing indemnity shall not extend to any of the following:
   (A)   Any liability, attorney's fees or costs with respect to any matter in
which the elected or appointed City official, employee or authorized volunteer
is finally adjudged to be guilty of a criminal act; to the extent that any
criminal proceeding shall be pending at the time of indemnification or any
criminal proceeding shall thereafter be instituted, any indemnification paid or
promised shall be conditioned upon the termination of the criminal proceeding
without a finding of guilt;
   (B)   Any liability or judgment against an elected or appointed City
official, employee or authorized volunteer which is payable to the City itself
or where the City was injured and the elected or appointed City official,
employee or authorized volunteer either obtained personal benefit or financial
gain as a result of his or her wrongful conduct;
   (C)   Any liability, attorney's fees or costs incurred as a result of a City
initiated or approved investigation into the misconduct of the elected or
appointed City official, employee or authorized volunteer;
   (D)   Any liability, attorney's fees or costs incurred as a result of the
elected or appointed City official's, employee's or authorized volunteer's
failure to reasonably cooperate or participate in the defense of any claim,
action, suit or proceeding with any person, party or entity; or
   (E)   Any liability excluded by a written waiver from the elected or
appointed City official, employee or authorized volunteer. (Ord. 1658, 12-19-
2016)
CHAPTER 12
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
SECTION:
1-12-1: Creation Of Office
1-12-2: Streets
1-12-3: Waterworks
1-12-4: Sewers
1-12-5: Employees
1-12-6: Property
1-12-7: Union Membership
1-12-8: Assistant
1-12-1: CREATION OF OFFICE:
There is hereby created the office of superintendent of public works, an
executive office of the city. The said superintendent shall be appointed by the
mayor and with the advice and consent of the city council. (1972 Code)
1-12-2: STREETS:
The superintendent of public works shall have charge of the construction and
care of all public streets, alleys and driveways in the city, and with the
keeping of the same clean. He shall see to it that all gutters and drains
therein function properly and that the same are kept free from defects. (1972
Code)
1-12-3: WATERWORKS:
The superintendent of public works shall have charge of the operation and
maintenance of the municipal water distribution system. (1972 Code)
1-12-4: SEWERS:
In the absence of provisions to the contrary, the superintendent of public
works shall have charge of the construction and maintenance of all public
sanitary and stormwater sewers in the city. (1972 Code)
1-12-5: EMPLOYEES:
All officers or employees assigned to the department of public works shall
perform their duties subject to the orders and under the supervision of
superintendent of public works. (1972 Code)
1-12-6: PROPERTY:
The superintendent of public works shall be the custodian of all property of
the city which is not assigned to the care or custody of any other officer.
(1972 Code)
1-12-7: UNION MEMBERSHIP:
If the individual appointed to the office of superintendent of public works is,
immediately prior to his appointment, an employee of the city, covered under a
collective bargaining agreement with the city and if the individual does not
wish to relinquish his union membership, the office of superintendent of public
works may be filled by said individual and the salary established for the
superintendent of public works shall be recomputed to an hourly wage which
shall, as near as possible, reflect the salary established for the
superintendent of public works, taking into account the fact that said
superintendent will receive overtime wages under the terms of the city's
collective bargaining agreement. Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed as in any way limiting the right of the mayor to remove the
superintendent of public works without cause and to reappoint a new
superintendent of public works with the advice and consent of the city council.
If the superintendent of public works resigns his position or is removed from
office by the mayor, his union seniority shall have continued to accrue
unabated during the time he has served as superintendent of public works. In
the event that a superintendent of public works, who elects to maintain his
union membership, is removed or resigns from office, the individual may remain
a city employee, if said individual has sufficient seniority to entitle him to
such a position on the city work force. (Ord., 5-6-1985)
1-12-8: ASSISTANT:
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may employ an
assistant to the superintendent of public works. Said assistant shall have the
same union rights as are provided for the superintendent, if the individual
shall choose to maintain his union membership. (Ord., 5-6-1985)
CHAPTER 13
REGISTRAR OF VITAL STATISTICS
SECTION:
1-13-1: Registrar Of Vital Statistics
1-13-2: Report Of Stillbirths And Deaths
1-13-3: Record Of Stillbirths And Deaths
1-13-1: REGISTRAR OF VITAL STATISTICS:
The city clerk shall be registrar of vital statistics for the city. (1972 Code)
1-13-2: REPORT OF STILLBIRTHS AND DEATHS:
A report of all stillbirths and deaths shall be made to the local registrar of
vital statistics, which report shall contain all information required by state
law. (1972 Code)
1-13-3: RECORD OF STILLBIRTHS AND DEATHS:
The local registrar shall keep a record showing all stillbirths and deaths
occurring within the city, which record shall include all information required
to be kept by state law. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 14
REVENUE AND FINANCE
SECTION:
1-14-1: Fiscal Year
1-14-2: Borrowing Money; Limitation
1-14-3: Annual Appropriations
1-14-4: Limitation Of Expenditures
1-14-5: No Contract Without Appropriation
1-14-6: Annual Tax Levy
1-14-7: Tax Rates
1-14-8: Manner Of Collecting Taxes
1-14-9: Special Tax Levy
1-14-10: Uniformity Of Taxation
1-14-11: Contracts And Purchases
1-14-12: Bidding Requirements
1-14-13: Petitions, Fee Established
1-14-14: Photocopying Of Public Records
1-14-15: Municipal Utility Tax
1-14-16: Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax And A Municipal Grocery
Service Occupation Tax
1-14-17: Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax And Non-Home Rule
Municipal Service Occupation Tax
1-14-1: FISCAL YEAR:
The current fiscal year and municipal year of the city is hereby extended to
April 30, 1982. The fiscal year and municipal year of the city shall,
thereafter, commence on May 1 of each year. (Ord. 513, 7-6-1981)
1-14-2: BORROWING MONEY; LIMITATION:
The council may, whenever the interests of the city require it, borrow money on
the credit of the city for corporate purposes, and issue bonds therefor, in
such amounts and forms, and on such conditions as it shall prescribe, but shall
not become indebted in any manner or for any purpose to an amount, including
existing indebtedness, in the aggregate to exceed five percent (5%) on the
value of the taxable property therein, to be ascertained by the last assessment
for state and county taxes previous to the incurring of such indebtedness; and
before or at the time of incurring any indebtedness, shall provide for the
collection of a direct annual tax sufficient to pay the interest on such debt
as it falls due, and also to pay and discharge the principal thereof within
twenty (20) years after contracting the same; provided, however, that the five
percent (5%) debt limitation shall not be applicable at any time hereafter
should the constitution of the state and applicable statutes of the state
remove said limitation. (1972 Code)
1-14-3: ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS:
The council shall, as soon as practicable, after the commencement of each
fiscal year, and within the first quarter of each fiscal year, pass an
ordinance to be termed the annual appropriation bill; it shall appropriate such
sums of money as may be deemed to be necessary to defray all necessary expenses
and liabilities of the city for the current year; and in such ordinance shall
specify the objects and purposes for which such appropriations are made, and
the amount appropriated for each object or purpose. No further appropriations
shall be made at any other time within such fiscal year, unless the proposition
to make each appropriation has been first sanctioned by a majority of the legal
voters of the city, either by a petition signed by them, or at a general or
special election called therefor, or otherwise authorized by statute. (1972
Code)
1-14-4: LIMITATION OF EXPENDITURES:
Neither the council, nor any department or officer of the city, shall add to
the corporate expenditures in any one year anything over and above the amount
provided for in the annual appropriation bill of that year except as herein
otherwise specially provided; and no expenditure for an improvement to be paid
for out of the general fund of the city shall exceed, in any one year, the
amount provided for such improvement in the annual appropriation bill;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the council from
ordering, by a two- thirds (2/3) vote, any improvement, the necessity of which
is caused by any casualty or accident happening after such annual appropriation
is made. The council may, by a like vote, order the mayor and the finance
committee to borrow a sufficient amount to provide for the expense necessary to
be incurred in making any improvements, the necessity for which has arisen, as
is herein mentioned, for a space of time not exceeding the close of the next
fiscal year; which sum, and the interest, shall be added to the amount
authorized to be raised in the next general tax levy, and embraced therein.
Should any judgment be obtained against the city, the mayor and finance
committee, under the sanction of the council, may borrow a sufficient amount to
pay the same, for a space of time not exceeding the close of the next fiscal
year, which sum and interest shall, in like manner, be added to the amount
authorized to be raised in the general tax levy of the next year and embraced
therein. (1972 Code)
1-14-5: NO CONTRACT WITHOUT APPROPRIATION:
No contract shall be hereafter made by the council, or any committee or member
thereof, and no expense shall be incurred by any of the officers or departments
of the city, whether the object of the expenditure shall have been ordered by
the council or not, unless an appropriation shall have been previously made
concerning such expense, except as herein otherwise expressly provided. (1972
Code)
1-14-6: ANNUAL TAX LEVY:
The council shall annually, on or before the first Tuesday in September in each
year, ascertain the total amount of appropriations for all corporate purposes
legally made, and to be collected from the tax levy of that fiscal year; and by
an ordinance specifying in detail the purposes for which such appropriations
are made and the sum or amount appropriated for each purpose, respectively,
levy the amount so ascertained upon all the property subject to taxation within
the city, as the same is assessed and equalized for state and county purposes
for the current year. A certified copy of such ordinance shall be filed with
the county clerk, whose duty it shall be to ascertain the rate percent, which,
upon the total valuation of all the property subject to taxation within the
city, as the same is assessed and equalized for state and county purposes, will
produce a net amount not less than the amount so directed to be levied; and it
shall be the duty of the county clerk to extend such tax in a separate column
upon the books of the collector of the state and county taxes, within the city;
provided, the aggregate amount of taxes levied for any one year, exclusive of
the amount levied for the payment of bonded indebtedness or the interest
thereon, shall not exceed the rate of two percent (2%) upon the aggregate
valuation of all the property within the city subject to taxation, as the same
was equalized for state and county taxes of the preceding year. (1972 Code)
1-14-7: TAX RATES:
The city will file tax levy ordinances each year for those levies to which it
chooses to levy and to which is entitled by law in an amount not to exceed the
maximum rate allowable by law.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
1-14-8: MANNER OF COLLECTING TAXES:
The tax so assessed shall be collected and enforced in the same manner and by
the same officers as state and county taxes, and shall be paid over by the
officers collecting the same to the treasurer. (1972 Code)
1-14-9: SPECIAL TAX LEVY:
Whenever the city is required to levy a tax for the payment of any particular
debt, appropriation or liability, the tax for such purpose shall be included in
the total amount assessed by the council, and certified to the county clerk as
aforesaid; but the council shall determine, in the ordinance making such
assessment, what proportion of such total amount shall be applicable to the
payment of the particular debt, appropriation or liability; and the treasurer
shall set apart such proportion of the tax collected and paid to him for the
payment of such particular debt, appropriation or liability, and shall not
disburse the same for any other purpose until such debt, appropriation or
liability shall have been discharged. (1972 Code)
1-14-10: UNIFORMITY OF TAXATION:
All taxes levied or assessed by the city, except special assessment for local
improvements, shall be uniform upon all taxable property and persons within the
limits of the city, and no property shall be exempt therefrom, other than such
property as may be exempt from taxation under the constitution and the general
laws of the state. (1972 Code)
1-14-11: CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES:
No contract or purchase of any item or supply involving the expenditure of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, shall be made by, for, or in the name of
the City of Spring Valley, except upon the prior approval of the Spring Valley
City Council in a regular or special meeting considering said contract or
purchase; provided, however, that the provisions hereof shall not be held or
construed to limit in any way any requirement of law as to the making of
contracts in excess of certain amounts based upon specifications and public
advertisement for bids pursuant to section
8-9-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code 1 ; further provided that the Spring
Valley City Council will expect supervisory employees of any department seeking
authorization for purchases of more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to
report to the Spring Valley City Council the method used by the supervisory
employee to obtain bids or quotes from vendors for any item or supply unless an
emergency situation occurs or where in the opinion of the Spring Valley City
Council obtaining bids or quotes for the items of supply would be
impracticable, and in the case of emergency or impractibility, the purchase may
be approved by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the Spring Valley City Council. (Ord.
1718, 3-26-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-9-1.
1-14-12: BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
The City’s bidding requirements shall be controlled by 65 ILCS 5/8-9-1 as now
in effect or hereinafter amended.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
1-14-13: PETITIONS, FEE ESTABLISHED:
   (A)   A fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) is hereby established for any
petitions or requests which are referred to the Spring Valley Planning
Commission or the Spring Valley Board of Zoning Appeals by the Spring Valley
City Council and which require a hearing of the Spring Valley Planning
Commission or the Spring Valley Board of Zoning Appeals. The fee set forth
herein shall be paid by the petitioner when the petitioner submits their
petition to the Spring Valley City Clerk.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall govern petitions for changes in
zoning, petitions for variances from the requirements of the Land Development
Code, petitions for approval of new subdivision plats or variances from the
subdivision regulations of the City, and any other matters requiring a hearing
before the Spring Valley Planning Commission or the Spring Valley Board of
Zoning Appeals. (Ord. 704, 9-19-1989; amd. Ord. 1197, - -2006; Ord. 1379, 6-9-
2008)
1-14-14: PHOTOCOPYING OF PUBLIC RECORDS:
There is hereby established the following fees for providing records pursuant
to the Illinois Freedom of Information Act 1 :
   (A)   A copying fee of fifteen cents ($0.15) per page for each copy prepared
in conjunction with a Freedom of Information Act request; and
   (B)   A fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per hour for clerical time involved
in compiling the records requested pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act
request.
Clerical time shall include the clerical time of any Spring Valley City
employee or any employee of any firm doing business with the City of Spring
Valley, if said firm has in its possession records which must be disclosed
pursuant to a Freedom of Information Act request. (Ord. 968, 4-3-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/6.
1-14-15: MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purpose of this section:
    GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas, or electricity for use or consumption and not for
resale, and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and
property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith,
and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the
service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or
service cost, or any expenses whatsoever.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this State, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PERSON DELIVERING GAS AND/OR ELECTRICITY: Illinois Power Company or any
successor utility company.
   TAXPAYER: Illinois Power Company or any successor utility company. (Ord.
1116, 10-20-2003; amd. Ord. 1625, 12-21-2015)
   (B)   Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following
occupations or privileges:
      1.   Persons engaged in distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling
gas for use or consumption within the city of Spring Valley and not for resale,
excluding all sales of gas billed to the city of Spring Valley, all sales of
gas billed to Hall Township high school district 502, all sales of gas billed
to Spring Valley community consolidated school district 99, and all sales of
gas billed to St. Bede Abbey and St. Bede Academy, at the rate of five percent
(5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
      2.   The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a
purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the
municipality, excluding all sales of electricity billed to the city of Spring
Valley, all sales of electricity billed to Hall Township high school district
502, all sales of electricity billed to Spring Valley community consolidated
school district 99 and all sales of electricity billed to St. Bede Abbey and
St. Bede Academy, at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for
each purchaser:
         (a)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.5541 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (b)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.3633 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (c)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.3270 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (d)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.3179 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (e)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.3088 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (f)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.2907 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (g)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.2861 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (h)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.2816 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (i)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.2770 cents per kilowatt hour; and
         (j)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt hours in a month: 0.2725 cents per kilowatt hour.
The tax rates set forth in the preceding table will be used at least through
December 31, 2008, are proportional to the rates enumerated in 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2 (as modified by Public Act 90-561), and do not
exceed the revenue that could have been collected during 1997 using the rates
enumerated in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2 (as modified by Public Act
90-561).
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, the rates set forth in this
subsection (B) shall be effective upon approval by the Illinois commerce
commission. (Ord. 1625, 12-21-2015)
   (C)   Exceptions: None of the taxes authorized by this section may be
imposed with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to
the extent to which the business or privilege may not, under the constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this
state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in
the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting
gas, water, or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting
messages, or using or consuming gas or electricity acquired in a purchase at
retail, be subject to taxation under the provisions of this section for those
transactions that are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the "municipal retailers' occupation tax act" authorized by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1; nor shall any tax authorized by this section be
imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any privilege unless the
tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in
businesses of the same class in the municipality, whether privately or
municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege within the
municipality.
   (D)   Additional Taxes: Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied
upon the taxpayer or its business.
   (E)   Collection: The tax authorized by this section shall be collected from
the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who
delivers the electricity and/or gas to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute
a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity and/or gas
to the purchaser and if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the
original charge for delivering the electricity and/or gas. Any such tax
collected by a person delivering electricity and/or gas shall constitute a debt
owed to the municipality by such person delivering the electricity and/or gas.
Persons delivering electricity and/or gas shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity
and/or gas. Persons delivering electricity and/or gas shall also be authorized
to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to
reimburse the person delivering electricity and/or gas for the expense incurred
in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting
the tax and supplying data to the municipality upon request. If the person
delivering electricity and/or gas fails to collect the tax from the purchaser,
then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
municipality in the manner prescribed by the municipality. Persons delivering
electricity and/or gas who file returns pursuant to this subsection shall, at
the time of filing such return, pay the municipality the amount of the tax
collected pursuant to this section.
   (F)   Reports To Municipality: On or before the last day of each month, each
taxpayer shall make a return to the city for the preceding month stating:
      1.   His name.
      2.   His principal place of business.
      3.   His gross receipts and/or kilowatt hour usage during the month upon
the basis of which the tax is imposed.
      4.   Amount of tax.
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making
such return, pay to the city of Spring Valley, the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he
so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of
any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any differences between such billings, and the taxable gross receipts.
   (G)   Credit For Overpayment: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has
been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as
the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be
so credited.
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this section
shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
   (H)   Penalty: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a
fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine in an amount not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense, and in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of
tax due. Each and every day on which an offense is committed or continues,
shall be deemed a separate offense. Nothing in this section shall be construed
as limiting any additional or further remedies that the city may have for
enforcement of this section. (Ord. 1116, 10-20-2003)
1-14-16: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND A MUNICIPAL GROCERY
SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, provides that the
corporate authorities of each municipality may pass all ordinances and make all
rules and regulations proper or necessary, to carry into effect the powers
granted to municipalities, with such fines or penalties as may be deemed
proper;
   (B)   The City of Spring Valley is a non-home rule Illinois municipality
pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, as amended;
   (C)   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
provides that, beginning on January 1, 2026, all Illinois municipalities may
impose a tax "upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at
retail in the municipality" (the "Municipal Grocery Tax") (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   (D)   The Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax may be imposed "at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from these sales" (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24);
   (E)   Any Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   (F)   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
requires any municipality imposing a Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation
Tax under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24) to
also impose a Service Occupation Tax at the same rate, “upon all persons
engaged, in the municipality, in the business of making sales of service, who,
as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer groceries” as “an
incident to a sale of service” (the “Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax”)
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   (G)   Any Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   (H)   The City Council believes that it is appropriate, necessary and in the
best interests of the City of Spring Valley and its residents, that the City of
Spring Valley levy a Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax as permitted
by Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   (I)   The City Council believe that it is appropriate, necessary and in the
best interests of the City of Spring Valley and its residents, that the City of
Spring Valley levy a Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax as permitted by
Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   (J)   Incorporation of Recitals. The foregoing recitals shall be and are
hereby incorporated as findings of fact as if said recitals were fully set
forth herein.
   (K)   Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax Imposed. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail
in this municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business while this chapter is in effect.
The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions
of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (L)   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax. A tax is hereby imposed upon
all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of
service, who, as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer
groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of this tax shall be
the same rate identified in Section B., above. The imposition of this tax is in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (M)   Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer Both Taxes. The taxes
hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (N)   Clerk to file Ordinance with Illinois Department of Revenue. As
required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this chapter with
the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before October 1, 2025.
   (O)   Effective Date. The taxes imposed by this chapter shall take effect on
the first day of January next following the adoption and filing of this chapter
with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding October 1.
   (P)   Repeal of Conflicting Provisions. All ordinances, resolutions and
policies or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this chapter are,
to the extent of the conflict, expressly repealed on the effective date of this
chapter.
   (Q)   Severability. If any provision of this chapter or application thereof
to any person or circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this
chapter that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision,
and each invalid provision or invalid application of this chapter is severable.
   (R)   Headings/Captions. The headings/captions identifying the various
sections and subsections of this chapter are for reference only and do not
define, modify, expand or limit any of the terms or provisions of the chapter.
   (S)   Publication. The Clerk is directed by the corporate authorities to
publish this chapter in pamphlet form. This chapter shall be in full force and
effect after its passage and publication in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4.
(Ord. 1907, 1-20-2025)
1-14-17: NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND NON-HOME RULE
MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, provides that the
corporate authorities of each municipality may pass all ordinances and make all
rules and regulations proper or necessary, to carry into effect the powers
granted to municipalities, with such fines or penalties as may be deemed
proper;
   (B)   The City of Spring Valley is a non-home rule Illinois municipality
pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, as amended;
   (C)   Section 8-11-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.1)
empowers non-home rule Illinois municipalities to impose certain Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Taxes as outlined at Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3) (the “Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax”);
   (D)   Section 8-11-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.1)
empowers non-home rule Illinois municipalities to impose certain Municipal
Service Occupation Taxes as outlined at Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4) (the “Non-Home Rule Municipal Service
Occupation Tax”);
   (E)   Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3)
empowers a non-home rule municipality to “impose a tax upon all persons engaged
in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than on an item of
tangible personal property which is titled and registered by an agency of this
State's Government, at retail in the municipality” based upon the “gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business” for “expenditure
on public infrastructure or for property tax relief or both” as defined in
Section 8-11-1.2 (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.2);
   (F)   Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4)
empowers a non-home rule municipality to “impose a tax upon all persons
engaged, in such municipality, in the business of making sales of service . . .
of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such
servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to a sale of service;”
   (G)   Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3)
and Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4)
empower the City of Spring Valley to impose the Non-Home Rule Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Tax and the Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation
Tax in 1/4% increments up to one percent (1%);
   (H)   Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3)
requires any municipality imposing a Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax under Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-1.3) to impose a Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax under
Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4) at “the
same rate” as the rate imposed as the Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax being imposed;
   (I)   Any Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax imposed by the
City of Spring Valley under Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-1.3) shall be administered, collected and enforced by the Illinois
Department of Revenue;
   (J)   Any Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax imposed by the City
of Spring Valley under Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-1.4) shall be administered, collected and enforced by the Illinois
Department of Revenue;
   (K)   Proceeds generated from the imposition of any Non-Home Rule Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Tax or Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax by
the City of Spring Valley must be used for “public infrastructure” or “property
tax relief,” as those terms are defined at Section 8-11-1.2 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.2); and
   (L)   The City Council believes that it is appropriate, necessary, and in
the best interests of the City of Spring Valley and its residents, that the
City of Spring Valley to amend its previously imposed Non-Home Rule Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Tax pursuant to Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3) and Non-Home Rule Municipal Service
Occupation Tax pursuant to Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-1.4) so that the City of Spring Valley can provide property tax
relief and invest in public infrastructure, as those terms are defined at
Section 8-11-1.2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.2), and to
clarify the portion of the new rate that represents the amount imposed under
referendum authority in order to preserve the right to impose an additional one
percent (1%).
   (M)   Incorporation of Recitals. The foregoing recitals shall be and are
hereby incorporated as findings of fact as if said recitals were fully set
forth herein.
   (N)   Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Imposed. A tax is
hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or
registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail in this
municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) (0.5% approved by referendum and
0.5% approved by ordinance only) of the gross receipts from such sales made in
the course of such business while this section is in effect. The imposition of
this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-
1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3).
   (O)   Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax Imposed. A tax is
hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of
making sales of service, of the selling price of all tangible personal property
transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in division (N), above. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4).
   (P)   Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer Both Taxes. The taxes
hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
   (Q)   Clerk to file Ordinance with Illinois Department of Revenue. As
required under Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
1.3), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this section
with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before April 1, 2025.
   (R)   Effective Date. This section shall take effect on the first day of
July next following the adoption and filing of this section with the Department
of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding April 1.
   (S)   Limitation on Use of Proceeds. The City of Spring Valley shall only
expend the proceeds generated from any tax imposed by virtue of this section
on:
      1.   Expenditures related to “municipal roads and streets, access roads,
bridges, and sidewalks; waste disposal systems; and water and sewer line
extensions, water distribution and purification facilities, storm water
drainage and retention facilities, and sewage treatment facilities[;]”
      2.   Efforts to “reduce the levy for real estate taxes or avoid an
increase in the levy for real estate taxes that would otherwise have been
required” by the City of Spring Valley; or
      3.   Any other or further permitted uses under Section 8-11-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1) as may now or hereafter be
authorized therein.
   (T)   Qualified Exemption of Aviation Fuel from Both Taxes. No provision of
this Ordinance shall be interpreted to impose any tax on aviation fuel, as
defined in Section P. of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/3),
unless the proceeds of said tax are expended for airport-related purposes, as
that term is defined in Section 6z-20.2 of the State Finance Act (30 ILCS 105/
6z-20.2), and said expenditures are made in compliance with the certification
requirements for airport-related purposes under Section 2-22 of the Retailers'
Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/2-22).
   (U)   Repeal of Conflicting Provisions. All ordinances, resolutions and
policies or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this chapter are,
to the extent of the conflict, expressly repealed on the effective date of this
chapter.
   (V)   Severability. If any provision of this chapter or application thereof
to any person or circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this
chapter that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision,
and each invalid provision or invalid application of this chapter is severable.
   (W)   Headings/Captions. The headings/captions identifying the various
sections and subsections of this chapter are for reference only and do not
define, modify, expand or limit any of the terms or provisions of the chapter.
   (X)   Publication. The Clerk is directed by the corporate authorities to
publish this chapter in pamphlet form. This chapter shall be in full force and
effect after its passage and publication in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4.
(Ord. 1908, 1-20-2025; amd. Ord. 1909, 2-18-2025)
CHAPTER 15
SALARIES
SECTION:
1-15-1: Officials And Employees Salaries
1-15-2: Benefits; Police Department
1-15-3: Benefits; City Clerk's Office
1-15-4: Benefits; Other Clerical Employees
1-15-5: Benefits; All Full Time City Employees
1-15-6: School Crossing Guards
1-15-7: Janitors
1-15-8: Dogcatchers (Rep. by Ord. 1690, 8-14-2017)
1-15-9: General Sick Leave Benefits
1-15-10: Vacations, General
1-15-11: Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund Participation
1-15-12: Longevity Payments
1-15-13: Employee Educational Increase
1-15-14: Employee Personal Days
1-15-15: Health Insurance For Part Time Employees
1-15-16: Employee Reimbursement For Insurance Benefits
1-15-17: Conflicts
1-15-1: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES SALARIES:
The salaries of the appointed and elected officials and employees shall be
subject to constitutional prohibition of changing salaries of elected officials
during the incumbents' terms thereof as follows:
   (A)   The compensation of the Mayor shall be the sum of fifteen thousand
dollars ($15,000.00) annually, payable monthly, and the Mayor shall also be
paid the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) annually, payable monthly, for
their duties as Liquor Commissioner, both salaries to take effect upon the
beginning of the Mayoral term after the general Municipal elections in April
2025. Additionally, the Mayor may elect in lieu of salary to be covered under
the health insurance policy of the City of Spring Valley as a full time
employee of the City of Spring Valley. If the Mayor elects health insurance
coverage, the Mayoral salary and the salary for Liquor Commissioner shall be
reduced to reflect the payments made by the City of Spring Valley to cover the
Mayor on the Spring Valley health insurance policy.
   (B)   The compensation of the City Clerk and the ex officio Collector shall
be payable in equal biweekly installments as follows:
 
Effective   Annual Salary
May 1, 2025 $70,000.00
May 1, 2026 $73,000.00
May 1, 2027 $76,000.00
May 1, 2028 $79,000.00
 
   (C)   If the City Clerk elects to decline health insurance coverage for
either the City Clerk individually, the City Clerk’s spouse or the City Clerk’s
family provided by the City of Spring Valley to all full time employees of the
City of Spring Valley, the City Clerk’s salary shall be increased by fifty
percent (50%) of the cost which the City of Spring Valley would otherwise pay
in health insurance premiums if the Clerk elected health insurance coverage for
the Clerk individually, the Clerk’s spouse or the Clerk’s family under the
terms of the health insurance policy of the City of Spring Valley.
   (D)   The compensation of each Alderman elected at the Municipal election of
April 2021, at any election or any appointment subsequent thereto, shall be
five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month. No additional compensation will be
provided for attendance as committee meetings. Each Alderman may be allowed
three (3) absences from a regularly scheduled City Council meeting and three
(3) absences from a committee meeting in any calendar year. If an Alderman has
more than three (3) absences from regularly scheduled City Council meetings,
the Alderman's salary shall be reduced by one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
each regular City Council meeting the Alderman fails to attend within a
calendar year. If an Alderman has more than three (3) absences from a scheduled
committee meeting, the Alderman's salary shall be reduced by fifty dollars
($50.00) for each committee meeting the Alderman fails to attend within a
calendar year.
   (E)   The compensation of Liquor Commissioner is included in the
compensation of the Mayor provided in subsection (A) of this section.
   (F)   The compensation of the City Attorney shall be seven thousand two
hundred dollars ($7,200.00) per annum, payable monthly, as a retainer for
attendance at regular City Council meetings. Compensation for additional
services shall be paid at a reasonable hourly rate to be set by the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of the City Council, in conjunction with the City
Attorney. The compensation paid to the City Attorney under the provisions of
this subsection shall not be considered a salary and the relationship between
the City and the City Attorney shall be a relationship of attorney-client and
principal-agent, not employer-employee. The City Attorney shall be responsible
for exercising independent legal judgment, advising the City Council of its
legal rights and responsibilities and performing any other legal services
directed by the Mayor or the City Council in an independent, professional
manner.
   (G)   Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, the compensation for
Superintendent of Public Works shall be:
 
$30.26 per hour for the first year
$31.02 per hour for the second year
$31.80 per hour for the third year
$32.60 per hour for the fourth year
 
This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly.
The compensation for the Assistant Superintendent of Public Works shall be:
 
$25.66 per hour for the first year
$26.30 per hour for the second year
$26.96 per hour for the third year
$27.63 per hour for the fourth year
 
This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly.
In addition to said compensation, the Superintendent and Assistant
Superintendent of Public Works shall be entitled to all other benefits,
including, but not limited to, sick benefits, vacations, and insurance
benefits, afforded to maintenance employees under the provisions of the
agreement with the local union organization as may be entered into from time to
time. The Superintendent of Public Works shall receive One Dollar and Fifty
Cents ($1.50) per hour above the highest paid bargaining unit employee.
   (H)   The compensation of the building inspector shall be the sum of twelve
thousand dollars ($12,000.00) per annum, payable monthly, retroactive to June
1, 2005.
   (I)   Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, the compensation for the Chief
of Police shall be:
 
$92,315.57 for the first year
$94,623.46 for the second year
$96,989.05 for the third year
$99,413.77 for the fourth year
 
This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly.
   (J)    Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, the compensation for the
Assistant Chief of Police shall be:
 
$69,897.00 for the first year
$71,644.43 for the second year
$73,435.54 for the third year
$75,271.42 for the fourth year
 
This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly.
   (K)   Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, the compensation for the
Lieutenant of the Police shall be:
 
$67,858.94 for the first year
$69,555.41 for the second year
$71,294.30 for the third year
$73,076.66 for the fourth year
 
This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly.
Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, the compensation for the Sergeant of the
Police shall be:
 
$65,820.92 for the first year
$67,466.44 for the second year
$69,153.10 for the third year
$70,881.93 for the fourth year
 
This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly.
   (L)   Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, the compensation for the
Investigator of the Police shall be:
 
$63,971.06 for the first year
$65,570.34 for the second year
$67,209.60 for the third year
$68,889.84 for the fourth year
 
This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly.
   (M)   Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, the compensation for of each of
all patrolmen shall be as hereinafter set forth:
 
                   First Year Second Year Third Year Fourth Year
Start to 6 Months  $50,123.27 $51,376.35  $52,660.76 $53,977.28
6 Months to 1 Year $51,908.39 $53,206.10  $54,536.25 $55,899.66
1 Year to 4 Years  $59,130.13 $60,608.38  $62,123.59 $63,676.68
4 Years to 8 Years $60,677.44 $62,194.38  $63,749.24 $65,342.97
Over 8 Years       $62,612.36 $64,177.67  $65,782.11 $67,426.66
 
This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly.
Shift Differential: Officers shall be paid shift differential as follows:
 
6:00 P.M. to 6:00 A.M. $0.75 per hour
 
Officer in Charge: The Officer in Charge shall be paid an additional $0.50 per
hour.
The salary for a part-time police officer of the City shall be determined by
the Chief of Police with the approval of the Mayor in an amount not to exceed:
 
$22.71 per hour for the first year
$23.28 per hour for the second year
$23.86 per hour for the third year
$24.46 per hour for the fourth year
 
This is payable bi-weekly.
   (N)   The classification of employees for miscellaneous duties is hereby
abolished.
   (O)   The compensation for the Fire Chief shall be the sum of twelve
thousand Dollars ($12,000.00) per year payable at the rate of one thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) per month, commencing in June 2021 (Ordinance 1818 - June
21, 2021).
Effective retroactive to July 31, 2021, the compensation for Spring Valley
Volunteer Fireman shall be as set forth below:
Members of the Spring Valley Volunteer Fire Department shall receive
compensation for their services as members of the Spring Valley Volunteer Fire
Department based upon a point system allocation adopted by and agreed upon by
the members of the Spring Valley Volunteer Fire Department. On July 31 of each
year, the members of the Spring Valley Volunteer Fire Department shall
calculate each members' total points and the total cumulative points of all
members of the Spring Valley Volunteer Fire Department from the period of
August 1 of the preceding year through July 31 of the year of calculation. The
point totals accumulated by each volunteer fireman shall be divided into the
Compensation Pool as appropriated by the City of Spring Valley to reimburse
Spring Valley volunteer firemen for their time and service to the City. Each
point shall be assigned its weighted relative value. Each member of the Spring
Valley Volunteer Fire Department shall receive benefits from the Compensation
Pool in an amount equal to the number of points earned by each volunteer
fireman multiplied by the point value total for each point as determined by the
members of the Spring Valley Volunteer Fire Department. After calculating the
points earned by each member of the Spring Valley Volunteer Fire Department,
the Spring Valley Fire Chief shall submit to the Spring Valley City Clerk each
respective Spring Valley volunteer fireman's share of the Compensation Pool on
or before August 10 of each year and the City of Spring Valley shall pay each
volunteer fireman the amounts owed to the volunteer fireman pursuant to the
provisions of this subsection on or before August 31 of each year.
The Compensation Pool for the Spring Valley Volunteer Fire Department shall be
as follows:
 
$30,750.00 for the first year (2021)
$31,519.00 for the second year (2022)
$32,307.00 for the third year (2023)
$33,115.00 for the fourth year (2024)
 
Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, the compensation for Spring Valley Part-
Time hourly Firemen shall be:
 
$17.00 per hour for the first year
$17.43 per hour for the second year
$17.86 per hour for the third year
$18.31 per hour for the fourth year
 
   (P)   Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, the compensation for clerical
employees and for employees in the City Clerk's Office shall be:
 
$13.10 - $20.89 per hour for the first year
$13.43 - $21.41 per hour for the second year
$13.76 - $21.94 per hour for the third year
$14.11 - $22.50 per hour for the fourth year
 
The rate of pay withing the above range shall be determined by the Spring
Valley City Clerk for employees in the Spring Valley City Clerk's Office and by
the Mayor for all other Spring Valley clerical employees.
This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly.
   (Q)   Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, clerical employees for City
Officials and Administrative Board shall receive wages as may from time to time
be determined by the Mayor with Council approval at a rate of:
 
$13.10 - $20.89 per hour for the first year
$13.43 - $21.41 per hour for the second year
$13.76 - $21.94 per hour for the third year
$14.11 - $22.50 per hour for the fourth year
 
This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly.
   (R)   Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, compensation for all
maintenance employees of the City of Spring Valley employed through local union
organizations shall be based on contracts entered into with such local union
organizations as provided by law. The compensation for the City maintenance
workers shall be as hereinafter set for, payable in bi-weekly installments for
the following classes of maintenance employees:
 
                   2021   2022   2023   2024
Maintenance Worker $23.71 $24.30 $24.91 $25.53
New Hire
   To Start     $18.50 $18.87 $19.25 $19.73
   After 1 year $19.92 $20.42 $20.93 $21.45
 
Full scale after two (2) years; provided, however, that new hires with
experience may be placed at full scale or at any step of the pay schedule in
the discretion of the City.
In addition to said compensation, the maintenance employees shall be entitled
to all other benefits, including, but not limited to, sick benefits, vacations
and insurance benefits, afforded under the provisions of the maintenance
agreement with the local union organization as may be entered into from time to
time.
Clothing Allowance: three hundred Dollars ($300.00) per year to be paid one-
half (1/2) on June 30 and one-half (1/2) on December 31 of each year for all
full times maintenance employees, but if said date falls on a Sunday or Holiday
the payment will be made on the preceding day. The clothing allowance provided
for herein shall be paid to the City maintenance employees upon presentation of
receipts by the employee to the maintenance supervisor evidencing purchases of
work clothing equal to or in excess of the amount to be reimbursed pursuant to
the provisions of this subsection before the provided herein shall occur.
The Mayor shall be, and is, hereby authorized to execute a maintenance
agreement between the City of Spring Valley and Laborers' Local Union 393,
Laborers' International Union of North America and the North Central Illinois
District Council AFL-CIO Affiliated Federation of Laborers to provide for the
payment of wages as set forth herein. Said maintenance agreement executed by
and between the City of Spring Valley and Laborers' Local Union 393 shall
govern the job classifications and other employee issues not otherwise
described by this Code.
   (S)   The Sewage Treatment Plant Operator is recognized to be a union job
governed by the maintenance agreement between the City and the Laborer's Local
Union #393, Laborers' International Union of North America and the North
Central Illinois District Council AFL-CIO Affiliated Federation of Laborers to
provide for the payment of wages set forth herein. Said employees shall be
under the supervision of, and report to, the City Superintendent. There shall
be four (4) classifications as hereinafter set forth, for one individual
holding the job classification, with the ability to reevaluate the need for
further classifications as the classifications may arise:
 
        First Year Second Year Third Year Fourth Year
Class 4 $24.41     $25.02      $25.64     $26.28
Class 3 $25.13     $25.76      $26.41     $27.07
Class 2 $25.91     $26.56      $27.22     $27.90
Class 1 $27.76     $28.45      $29.16     $29.89
 
In addition to said compensation, the Sewage Treatment Plant Operator shall be
entitled to all other benefits, including, but not limited to, sick benefits,
vacations and insurance benefits, afforded to maintenance employees under the
provisions of the maintenance agreement with the local union organization as
may be entered into from time to time.
The Water Treatment Plant Operator is recognized to be a union job governed by
the maintenance agreement between the City and the Laborer's Local Union #393,
Laborers' International Union of North America and the North Central Illinois
District Council AFL-CIO Affiliated Federation of Laborers to provide for the
payment of wages set forth herein. Said employee shall be under the supervision
of, and report to, the City Superintendent. This job may be held individually
or as a combination of the Sewer Treatment Plant Operator and Water Treatment
Plant Operator by the same individual. In the event that one individual holds
both jobs they will be entitled to the following hourly rate:
 
$27.88 per hour for the first year
$28.58 per hour for the second year
$29.29 per hour for the third year
$30.02 per hour for the fourth year
 
If the employee holding both jobs, Water and Sewer Treatment Plant Operator, is
reassigned by the City to one or the other position, they will remain at an
hourly rate of:
 
$27.88 per hour for the first year
$28.58 per hour for the second year
$29.29 per hour for the third year
$30.02 per hour for the fourth year
 
If the employee holding both jobs, Water and Sewer Treatment Plant Operator,
voluntarily opts to solely hold only one or the other position, they will be
paid at the prevailing classification wage. There shall be four (4)
classifications as hereinafter set forth, for one individual holding the job
classification only, with the ability to reevaluate the need for further
classifications as the classifications may arise:
 
            First Year Second Year Third Year Fourth Year
Class C & D $24.41     $25.02      $25.64     $26.28
Class B     $25.13     $25.76      $26.41     $27.07
Class A     $25.91     $26.56      $27.22     $27.90
 
In addition to said compensation, the Water Treatment Plant Operator shall be
entitled to all other benefits, including, but not limited to, sick benefits,
vacations and insurance benefits, afforded to maintenance employees under the
provisions of the maintenance agreement with the local union organization as
may be entered into from time to time.
   (T)   The compensation for the Coveny-Veterans Memorial Swimming Pool
employees shall be as follows:
 
                First Year      Second Year     Third Year      Fourth Year
Co-Pool         $15.00 per hour $16.00 per hour $17.00 per hour $18.00 per hour
Managers
Head Lifeguard  $12.00 per hour $13.00 per hour $14.00 per hour $15.00 per hour
Lifeguards      $11.00 per hour $12.00 per hour $13.00 per hour $14.00 per hour
Concession Help $11.00 per hour $12.00 per hour $13.00 per hour $14.00 per hour
 
This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly during the months when
the pool is operating.
The hours of the Co-Pool Managers shall not exceed forty (40) hours per week
and it shall be the responsibility of the Co-Pool Managers to manage their time
in such a manner as not to exceed working forty (40) hours per week.
   (U)   Effective retroactive to April 15, 2021, the compensation for the
Spring Valley Park Maintenance Supervisor shall be:
 
$16.50 per hour for the first year
$18.00 per hour for the second year
$18.45 per hour for the third year
$18.91 per hour for the fourth year
 
This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly.
Retroactive to May 1, 2021, the compensation for Spring Valley Park Helpers
shall be seventeen dollars ($17.00) per hour on saturdays and sundays only and
fifteen dollars to seventeen dollars ($15.00 - $17.00) per hour on all other
days, with the specific hourly rate to be established by the Spring Valley Park
Board.
   (V)   Park Helpers. The compensation for Spring Valley Park Helpers shall be
between Fifteen Dollars to Twenty-Four Dollars ($15.00 - $24.00) per hour, with
the specific hourly rate to be established by the Spring Valley Park Board. If
a Spring Valley Park Helper has to work on Saturdays or Sundays they shall be
given a additional Two Dollar ($2.00) per hour shift differential on top of
their base rate of pay.
      This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly.
   (W)   Part-time summer workers hired by the City of Spring Valley shall be
paid not less than the minimum wage nor more than Fifteen Dollars ($15.00) per
hour. Temporary employees hired by the City of Spring Valley for part-time
summer work may have their employment extended through November 30 of each
year, provided that the extended employment is approved by the Mayor and
authorized by the City Council. Any summer employees who have their employment
extended through November 30 of each year shall be entitled to receive a
salary, after their summer employment, in an amount not less than minimum wage
nor more than Seventeen Dollars ($17.00) per hour.
   (X)   The Economic Development Director and Project Manager of the City of
Spring Valley shall receive an annual salary of Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars
($25,000.00). Said salary shall be reviewed after six (6) months and adjusted
accordingly.
(1972 Code; amd. Ord. 506, 5-4-1981; Ord., 4-4-1983; Ord. 1150, 10-4-2004; Ord.
1170, 8-1-2005; Ord. 1276, 9-5-2006; Ord. 1300, 11-6-2006; Ord. 1389, 9-15-
2008; Ord. 1425, 7-20-2009; Ord. 1513, 9-10-2012; Ord. 1541, 8-19-2013, eff.
retroactive to 7-1-2013; Ord. 1598, 3-2-2015; Ord. 1662, 2-13-2017; Ord. 1680,
6-5-2017; Ord. 1690, 8-14-2017; Ord. 1696, 9-11-2017; Ord. 1690, 8-14-2018;
Ord. 1738, 1-28-2019; Ord. 1778, 5-19-2020; Ord. 1810, 4-19-2021; Ord. 1818, 6-
21-2021; Ord. 1829, 11-15-2021; Ord. 1865, 3-6-2023; Ord. 1870, 5-15-2023; Ord.
1886, 3-4-2024; Ord. 1891, 6-17-2024; Ord. 1900, 9-16-2024; Ord. 1901, 9-16-
2024)
1-15-2: BENEFITS; POLICE DEPARTMENT:
Benefits for members of the Police Department shall be as follows:
   (A)   Health Insurance: Health insurance shall be furnished with the premium
to be paid by the City, providing coverage for a semiprivate hospital room per
day.
   (B)   Vacation: Vacations for police officers shall be as provided in
section
1-15-10 of this chapter.
   (C)   Sick Leave: Sick leave for full time police officers shall be as
provided in section
1-15-9 of this chapter.
   (D)   Court Appearances: (Rep. by Ord. 982, 7-5-2000, eff. retroactive to 7-
2-2000)
   (E)   Holiday Pay: Police officers required to be on duty during the
following holidays shall be entitled to compensation of double time, based at
the rate of each officer's hourly rate, over and above their regular pay:
 
New Year's Eve  Labor Day
New Year's Day  Veterans Day
President's Day Thanksgiving Day
Easter          Day after Thanksgiving
Memorial Day    Christmas Eve
Fourth of July  Christmas
 
In addition, employees shall receive one (1) floating holiday in lieu of their
birthday.
For the purpose of salaries, the traditional holidays will be celebrated, the
City Clerk shall designate and furnish the police department a record of the
traditional holidays each year.
Any police officer not scheduled to work on a listed holiday shall receive
eight (8) hours holiday pay at the officer's regular hourly rate of pay.
   (F)   Clothing Allowance: Effective retroactive to July 1, 2009, all full
time police officers of the City are entitled to replenish their uniforms and
related equipment and are entitled to reimbursement from the City in an amount
not to exceed three hundred seventy five dollars ($375.00) per calendar year,
per police officer; provided, however, that all officers seeking to replenish
their uniforms and related equipment must obtain prior approval for their
purchases from the Chief of Police. When the Chief of Police approves a
purchase by an officer to replenish his or her uniforms and related equipment,
the bill for the purchase of the uniforms and related equipment can be directed
to the City for payment or, if the officer makes an individual purchase, the
officer must submit a receipt to the Chief of Police before being eligible for
reimbursement by the City.
All part time police officers of the City are entitled to replenish their
uniforms and related equipment and are entitled to reimbursement from the City
in an amount not to exceed one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00) per
calendar year, per police officer; provided, however, that all officers seeking
to replenish their uniforms and related equipment must obtain prior approval
for their purchases from the Chief of Police. When the Chief of Police approves
a purchase by an officer to replenish his or her uniforms and related
equipment, the bill for the purchase of the uniforms and related equipment can
be directed to the City for payment or, if the officer makes an individual
purchase, the officer must submit a receipt to the Chief of Police before being
eligible for reimbursement by the City. Any part time police officer who does
not remain in the employment of the City for at least one year must return to
the City, upon termination of his or her employment, an amount equal to any
uniform and related equipment allowance the officer received from the City.
All full time dispatchers of the City are entitled to replenish their uniforms
and are entitled to reimbursement from the City in an amount not to exceed two
hundred twenty five dollars ($225.00) per calendar year, per dispatcher;
provided, however, that all dispatchers seeking to replenish their uniforms
must obtain prior approval for their purchases from the Chief of Police. When
the Chief of Police approves a purchase by a dispatcher to replenish his or her
uniform, the bill for the purchase of the uniform can be directed to the City
for payment or, if the dispatcher makes an individual purchase, the dispatcher
must submit a receipt to the Chief of Police before being eligible for
reimbursement by the City.
   (G)   Police Dispatchers Rate of Pay: Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021,
police dispatchers shall be paid as follows:
 
           First Year     Second Year    Third Year     Fourth Year
Full-Time  $13.10/ $20.89 $13.43/ $21.41 $13.76/ $21.94 $14.11/ $22.50
Dispatcher
Part-Time  $13.00/ $18.56 $13.33/ $19.02 $13.67/ $19.50 $14.00/ $19.99
Dispatcher
 
The above rate of pay shall be determined by the Chief of Police with the
approval of the Mayor.
Vacations for Full-Time Dispatchers shall be as provided in Section
1-15-10 of this Chapter.
Sick leave for Full-Time Dispatchers shall be as provided in Section
1-15-9 of this Chapter.
Insurance shall be furnished to all full-time dispatchers with the full premium
to be paid by the City, subject to the terms and provisions as provided in this
Chapter.
If a dispatcher is called to work on their day off, or if a dispatcher is
called in to work other than his regular shift, or if a dispatcher works over
his regular shift, or if a dispatcher works over their eight (8) hour shift,
they shall receive time and one-half (1/2) based on his hourly rate of pay.
Dispatchers required to be on duty during the following holidays shall be
entitled to compensation of double time, based at the rate of each dispatcher's
hourly rate, over and above their regular pay:
 
New Year's Eve  Labor Day
New Year's Day  Veterans Day
President's Day Thanksgiving Day
Good Friday     Day after Thanksgiving
Memorial Day    Christmas Eve
Fourth of July  Christmas
 
In addition, employees shall receive one (1) floating holiday in lieu of their
birthday.
Any dispatcher not scheduled for work on a holiday shall receive eight (8)
hours holiday pay at the dispatcher's regular hourly rate of pay.
   (H)   Overtime: If an officer is called to work on his day off, or if an
officer is called out to work other than his regular shift, or if an officer
works over his eight (8) hour shift, he shall receive time and one-half (½)
based on the rate of work performed. All overtime submitted must be approved by
the Chief of Police.
   (I)   Vacation Selection: Vacation will be pursuant to departmental
regulations and in conformity with present departmental practices.
   (J)   New Employees: Employees with less than a year of seniority commence
earning their vacation upon completion of one month of seniority. However, such
employee may not use the vacation until he has satisfactorily completed his
first year of actual service.
   (K)   Pro Rata Vacation: Employees with at least one year of seniority
shall, upon retirement or separation from the department, be entitled to
vacation pay for leave earned but not used as of the date of separation.
   (L)   Bereavement Leaves Of Absence: Bereavement leaves of absence shall be
as provided in the bereavement section of the Spring Valley, Illinois Personnel
Manual in force at the time the employee requests a bereavement leave of
absence.
   (M)   Military Leave: Employees who are enrolled members of a reserve unit
of the Armed Forces of the United States, including the National Guard, shall
be granted a leave of absence not to exceed two (2) weeks for the purpose of
attending camps or schools.
   (N)   Life Insurance: The City shall furnish life insurance with a death
benefit of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
   (O)   Jury Service Leave: Employees who are called for jury service in any
court of the State shall be granted a leave of absence to serve as a juror. The
employee shall be entitled to the following: If fees paid for such jury
service, exclusive of transportation expenses and meals, are less than the
straight time salary paid by the City to the employee for a similar period of
time, the City shall reimburse the employee for the loss because of such
service.
   (P)   Police Officer Educational Increase: (Rep. by Ord. 1343, 6-18-2007)
   (Q)   Bulletproof Vests: (Rep. by Ord. 1113, 8-4-2003, eff. retroactive to
6-29-2003)
   (R)   Partial Leave Of Absence: Officers taking a partial leave of absence
approved by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be compensated on
a pro rata basis as to wages and insurance. Police pension benefits payable by
the City shall be in accord with State law. Such officer on a partial leave of
absence shall not receive vacation pay nor accrue sick leave while on said
partial leave of absence.
   (S)   Any reference to first year in the ordinance codified herein shall be
deemed to be the period from July 1, 2021, through June 30, 2022. Any reference
to the second year in this ordinance shall be deemed to be the period from July
1, 2022, through June 30, 2023. Any reference to the third year in this
ordinance shall be deemed to be the period from July 1, 2023, through June 30,
2024. Any reference to the fourth year in this ordinance shall be deemed to be
the period from July 1, 2024, through June 30, 2025. (Ord., 2-21-1977, eff.
retroactive to 1-1-1977; Ord. 1468, 2-4-1980; Ord. 539, 4-5-1982; Ord. 579, 3-
19-1984; Ord., 3-17-1986; Ord. 982, 7-5-2000, eff. retroactive to 7-2-2000;
Ord. 1039, 8-6-2001, eff. retroactive to 7-1-2001; Ord. 1113, 8-4-2003, eff.
retroactive to 6-29-2003; Ord. 1343, 6-18-2007; Ord. 1425, 7-20-2009; Ord.
1690, 8-14-2017; Ord. 1829, 12-6-2021)
1-15-3: BENEFITS; CITY CLERK'S OFFICE:
Benefits for employees of the City Clerk’s Office shall be as follows:
   (A)   Health insurance shall be furnished with the premium to be paid by the
City.
   (B)   Vacations for employees of the City Clerk’s Office shall be as
provided in section
1-15-10 of this chapter.
   (C)   Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, Spring Valley City Clerk's
Office employees shall receive the following holidays:
 
New Year's Eve  Labor Day
New Year's Day  Veterans Day
President's Day Thanksgiving Day
Good Friday     Day after Thanksgiving
Memorial Day    Christmas Eve
Fourth of July  Christmas
 
In addition, employees shall receive one (1) floating holiday in lieu of their
birthday. (1972 Code; amd. Ord. 426, 11-6-1978; Ord. 579, 3-19-1984; Ord. 1690,
8-14-2017; Ord. 1829, 11-15-2021)
1-15-4: BENEFITS; OTHER CLERICAL EMPLOYEES:
Benefits for other clerical employees shall be as follows:
   (A)   Health insurance shall be furnished and the premium therefor paid in
its entirety by the City.
   (B)   Vacations for other clerical employees shall be as provided in section
1-15-10 of this chapter.
   (C)   Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, other Clerical employees shall
receive the following holidays:
 
New Year's Eve  Labor Day
New Year's Day  Veterans Day
President's Day Thanksgiving Day
Good Friday     Day after Thanksgiving
Memorial Day    Christmas Eve
Fourth of July  Christmas
 
In addition, employees shall receive one (1) floating holiday in lieu of their
birthday. (1972 Code; amd. Ord. 539, 4-5-1982; Ord. 579, 3-19-1984; Ord. 1179,
9-6-2005, eff. retroactive to 9-1-2005; amd. Ord. 1589, 11-24-2014; Ord. 1829,
11-15-2021)
1-15-5: BENEFITS; ALL FULL TIME CITY EMPLOYEES:
Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) life insurance shall be furnished to all full
time City employees, the entire premium to be paid by the City. (Ord. 539, 4-5-
1982)
1-15-6: SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS:
The sum of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month shall be paid to all school
crossing guards. (Ord. 1690, 8-14-2017)
1-15-7: JANITORS:
Effective retroactive to July 1, 2021, the janitors shall receive an hourly
salary of:
 
$13.65 per hour for the first year
$13.99 per hour for the second year
$14.34 per hour for the third year
$14.70 per hour for the fourth year
 
This salary is payable in equal installments bi-weekly. (Ord. 1690, 8-14-2017;
amd. Ord. 1829, 11-15-2021)
1-15-8: DOGCATCHERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1690, 8-14-2017)
1-15-9: GENERAL SICK LEAVE BENEFITS:
The sick leave benefits for all full time employees of the City shall be:
   (A)   An employee may accrue seven and one-half (71/2) days of sick leave
for the first six (6) months' employment, and in turn accrue fifteen (15) days'
sick leave for one year of employment. Thereafter an employee shall accrue
fifteen (15) days' sick leave for each additional year of employment, with a
maximum of one hundred fifteen (115) days' sick leave and those employees that
are members of IMRF will be able to bank up to two hundred forty (240) days for
pension credit service. An IMRF employee having any accumulated sick leave
greater than one hundred fifteen (115) days for any year in the last ten (10)
years which were previously lost and not compensated for, will be allowed to
recover and bank these days for pension credit services. When an employee's
sick leave is used up, accrued sick leave must start over at the beginning of
the sick leave procedure.
   (B)   In the event an employee fails to report for work as required because
of illness or accident, the immediate supervisor of said employee shall be
authorized to make such inquiries as may be necessary to verify that the
employee is unable to perform the regular duties of employment. The employee
shall, if requested by a superior, procure and file with his said superior a
written statement from a qualified medical practitioner certifying that said
employee is unable to perform his regular duties because of illness or accident
after the first day of said illness or accident. (Ord. 1151, 10-18-2004)
1-15-10: VACATIONS, GENERAL:
   (A)   Vacations for full time employees of the City, not otherwise provided
for, shall be:
      1 to 5 years..........................................2 weeks
      6 to 10 years........................................3 weeks
      11 to 20 years......................................4 weeks
      21 to 25 years......................................1 additional vacation
day each year
      26 years and over................................5 weeks
   (B)    A "week's vacation" shall be defined as forty (40) work hours.
   (C)   All full time Spring Valley City employees are required to use all
vacation time allotted to the employee within three hundred sixty-five (365)
days of the date when the employee becomes entitled to receive vacation. By way
of example, an employee completing one year's service with the City of Spring
Valley is entitled to receive two (2) weeks of paid vacation. If an employee
completes one year of service with the City of spring Valley on May 1, the
employee must use their two (2) weeks' vacation prior to April 30 of the next
year. If an employee has vacation time left at the end three hundred sixty-five
(365) days after the date the employee becomes entitled to vacation time, the
employee will lose their unused vacation time. No employee will be paid for any
lost vacation time. No unused vacation may be carried over from year to year
and added to vacation time accruing in a subsequent year.
   (D)   In the event of a personal hardship or in the event that the
employee's work with the City of Spring Valley prevents the employee from using
all of his or her vacation time within the twelve (12) months from the date
when the employee first accrues vacation time, all employees shall have the
right to file a written request to carry over vacation time beyond the dates
provided for in this section. The request must be in writing and must state the
employee's reasons for the request. The request must be submitted to the
employee's supervisor and to the Mayor of the City of Spring Valley. If the
employee making the request is a supervisor, the written request should be
submitted to the Mayor of the City of Spring Valley. The Mayor of the City of
Spring Valley will have the sole discretion to grant or deny the employee's
vacation request and the Mayor of the City of Spring Valley will advise the
Spring Valley City Council as to whether the Mayor is granting or denying the
employee the right to carry over accrued vacation time.
   (E)   In order to allow those Spring Valley City employees who may have
accumulated more than one year's vacation time prior to the adoption of this
ordinance, any Spring Valley employee who has accumulated more than one year's
vacation time as of October 1, 2020 shall be allowed to use their accumulated
vacation time in excess of their regular vacation by no later than December 31,
2021. Any Spring Valley employee who has accumulated vacation time as of
December 31, 2021 in excess of their annual yearly vacation, will lose their
accumulated vacation time as of December 31, 2021. The provisions of this
paragraph shall apply only to employees who have accumulated vacation time in
excess of their annual yearly vacation time as of October 1, 2020.
   (F)   All full time employees who resign or are terminated will receive
payment for any unused vacation earned according to the Illinois Wage Payment
and Collection Act.
   (G)   In the event of any conflict between the City of Spring Valley
Personnel Manual and the amendments to Section
1-15-10 of the Spring Valley City Code as provided for in this ordinance and
the Labor Agreement entered into between the City of Spring Valley and Laborers
International Union Local # 393, the provisions of the Labor Agreement entered
into between the City of Spring Valley and Laborer's International Union Local
#393 shall control over any contrary provisions contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 1789, 9-21-2020)
1-15-11: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND PARTICIPATION:
The City hereby elects to participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement
Fund, effective January 1, 1990.
The standard for Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund participation shall be a
position normally requiring the performance of a duty for the City for six
hundred (600) hours per year for employees hired before April 19, 2021; for
employees hired after April 19, 2021, the standard for Illinois Municipal
Retirement Fund participation shall be a position normally requiring the
performance of a duty for the City for one thousand (1,000) hours per year.
The City Clerk shall and is hereby directed to promptly file a certified copy
of the resolution codified herein with the Board of Trustees of the Illinois
Municipal Retirement Fund. (Ord., 6-5-1989; amd. Ord. 1829, 11-15-2021)
1-15-12: LONGEVITY PAYMENTS:
   (A)   Nonelected employees of the City of Spring Valley shall receive, in
addition to the salaries set forth in this Chapter, and additional annual
payment of five hundred Dollars ($500.00) per year after completing five (5)
full years of service with the City and an additional annual payment totaling
one thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per year after completing ten (10) years of
service with the City and an additional annual payment of one thousand two
hundred and fifty Dollars ($1,250.00) after fifteen (15) years of service with
the City and an additional one thousand five hundred Dollars ($1,500.00) after
twenty (20) years of service with the City. The payments called for in this
section shall only be made to nonelected employees who have worked a minimum of
one thousand six hundred sixty-four (1,664) hours in the twelve (12) months
preceding the payment of this longevity bonus. The longevity bonus shall be
paid to the employees in a separate paycheck for each year that an employee is
entitled to said bonus by November 30 of each year; however, longevity pay
accrued and earned but not yet paid will be paid at the time of layoff,
retirement, disability, and discharge other than for just cause.
   (B)   Nonelected employees of the City of Spring Valley shall receive, in
addition to the salaries set forth in this chapter, and the longevity payment
set forth in the immediately preceding subsection, a five thousand dollar
($5,000.00) lump sum post-retirement payment if all of the following conditions
are met:
      1.   The employee has worked for the City of Spring Valley for twenty
(20) or more years;
      2.   The employee notifies the City of Spring Valley of his or her
intention to retire at least one year prior to the date on which the employee
intends to retire;
      3.   The employee works full time for the City of Spring Valley working
at least two thousand eighty (2,080) hours in the year preceding the date of
their retirement; and
      4.   The employee is eligible to begin receiving retirement benefits
under a pension plan sponsored and adopted by the City of Spring Valley upon
retirement from the City of Spring Valley.
In the case of an unexpected illness or disability, the City of Spring Valley
may, upon recommendation by the Mayor and approval by the Spring Valley City
Council, waive the one year notification provision contained in this section
and provide the retirement bonus set forth herein to any employee experiencing
an unexpected illness or disability. The City of Spring Valley intends that the
benefit conferred upon employees of the City of Spring Valley by this section
shall not apply to any part time employee of the City of Spring Valley or an
employee of the City of Spring Valley who does not work two thousand eighty
(2,080) hours for the City of Spring Valley in the year preceding their
retirement and shall not apply to any employee who is not old enough to begin
receiving retirement benefits under a retirement plan sponsored and adopted by
the City of Spring Valley upon termination of the employee's employment with
the City of Spring Valley. (Ord. 1368, 2-4-2008; amd. Ord. 1829, 11-15-2021)
1-15-13: EMPLOYEE EDUCATIONAL INCREASE:
Effective retroactive to July 1, 2009, each employee who has successfully
completed thirty (30) college hours shall receive an increase in wages of one
percent (1%). Each employee who has successfully obtained an associate degree
acquiring successful completion of at least sixty five (65) college hours shall
receive an increase in wages of two percent (2%). Each employee who has
successfully completed a bachelor's degree shall receive an increase of wages
of three percent (3%). The educational increase shall be in addition to the
salaries for all employees as set forth in this chapter, as amended from time
to time. (Ord. 1425, 7-20-2009)
1-15-14: EMPLOYEE PERSONAL DAYS:
All employees of the City of Spring Valley shall be entitled to receive two (2)
personal days off with pay during each calendar year. An employee desiring to
take a personal day must receive permission from his or her direct supervisor
to take a personal day and any employee requesting a personal day must
coordinate their request for a personal day so as not to result in an
unanticipated disruption in normal City services. The personal days provided
for in this section cannot be carried over from one calendar year to another
calendar year without prior approval of the head of the department and only for
good cause shown. In no event can an employee carry personal days for more than
one year and any employee who does not use his or her personal days within the
time period set forth herein shall lose this benefit. (Ord. 1179, 9-6-2005,
eff. 1-1-2006)
1-15-15: HEALTH INSURANCE FOR PART TIME EMPLOYEES:
   (A)   With the approval of the Mayor and the Spring Valley City Council,
part time employees of the City of Spring Valley who work thirty (30) or more
hours per week may obtain health insurance coverage through the group health
insurance plan offered by the City of Spring Valley to its full time employees.
(Ord. 1589, 11-24-2014)
   (B)   Any part time employee who desires to take advantage of this insurance
option must pay one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month to the City of Spring
Valley for this insurance coverage.
   (C)   Any part time employee desiring to obtain insurance coverage from the
City of Spring Valley must be able to establish, through his or her immediate
supervisor, that the employee is expected to work more than one thousand seven
hundred (1,700) hours for the City of Spring Valley in a calendar year.
   (D)   Any part time employee desiring to be covered under the provisions of
the health insurance policy of the City of Spring Valley shall be subject to
all copayments, deductibles, and other provisions provided for in the health
insurance policy which the City of Spring Valley has for its employees. (Ord.
1333, 5-7-2007)
1-15-16: EMPLOYEE REIMBURSEMENT FOR INSURANCE BENEFITS:
   (A)   The City of Spring Valley currently provides health insurance, dental
insurance, vision insurance and life/accidental death and dismemberment
insurance (hereinafter referred to as "insurance benefits") to all full time
employees of the City of Spring Valley and those part time employees receiving
insurance benefits pursuant to section
1-15-15 of this chapter. Each employee of the City of Spring Valley will
receive either individual insurance benefits, employee/children (dependents)
insurance benefits, employee/spouse insurance benefits, or employee/family
insurance benefits.
   (B)   Any Spring Valley employee or elected official receiving insurance
benefits from the City of Spring Valley who elects not to claim insurance
benefits under the employee/children (dependents) insurance coverage, the
employee/spouse insurance coverage, or the employee/family insurance coverage
under the City of Spring Valley's insurance benefits shall be entitled to an
increase in the employee's salary equal to fifty percent (50%) of the
difference between the amount which the City of Spring Valley would otherwise
pay in health insurance premiums, if the employee or elected official selected
insurance benefits under the employee/children (dependents) insurance coverage,
the employee/spouse insurance coverage, or the employee/family insurance
coverage under the City of Spring Valley's insurance benefits. (Ord. 1690, 8-
14-2017)
1-15-17: CONFLICTS:
The rules contained within the City of Spring Valley Personnel Manual shall
govern the provisions of holiday pay, vacations, and sick leave benefits. Any
conflict in this chapter with regard to holiday pay, vacations, and sick leaves
benefits shall be controlled by the City of Spring Valley Personnel Manual.
(Ord. 1854, 8-15-2022)
CHAPTER 16
DEPOSITORY
SECTION:
1-16-1: Depository Designated
1-16-2: Deposit Of Funds
1-16-3: Statement Of Resources And Liabilities Required
1-16-1: DEPOSITORY DESIGNATED:
The Spring Valley City Bank and Heartland Bank and Trust Company of Spring
Valley are hereby designated as depositories of city funds.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
1-16-2: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
The City Clerk is hereby directed to deposit all monies and funds from all
accounts in the Spring Valley City Bank and Heartland Bank and Trust Company of
Spring Valley unless authorized by the Spring Valley city council.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
1-16-3: STATEMENT OF RESOURCES AND LIABILITIES REQUIRED:
Banks while acting as depositories, shall furnish the corporate authorities of
the city with a copy of all statements of resources and liabilities, which is
required to be furnished to the auditor of public accounts or to the controller
of currency, as provided by law. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 17
OFFICIAL TIME
SECTION:
1-17-1: Official Time Designated
1-17-2: Transaction Of Business; Official Time
1-17-3: Setting Of City Clocks
1-17-1: OFFICIAL TIME DESIGNATED:
Central Standard Time shall be the official time within the city for the
transaction of all city business, except that from two o’clock (2:00) A.M. on
the second Sunday in March in each year, official time for the city shall be
advanced one hour. At two o’clock (2:00) A.M. on the first Sunday in November
in year such official time, by a set-back of one hour, shall be returned to
Central Standard Time.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
1-17-2: TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS; OFFICIAL TIME:
All legal or official proceedings of the council and all official business of
the city shall be regulated as to time in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. Whenever by ordinance, resolution or action of any municipal
officer or body an act must be performed at or within a prescribed time, it
shall be performed according to the official time as herein prescribed. When
the words "daylight saving" or "daylight saving time" or "summer time" are used
in any official document or contract, it shall be understood to have reference
to the time herein fixed for the period from the last Sunday in April to the
last Sunday in October. (1972 Code)
1-17-3: SETTING OF CITY CLOCKS:
All clocks or other timepieces in or upon public buildings or other premises
maintained at the expense of the city shall be set and run according to the
official time as provided for in this chapter. It is hereby made the duty of
the officer or other person having control and charge of such buildings and
premises to see that the clocks and other timepieces are set and run in
accordance with the official time. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 18
CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION:
1-18-1: Corporate Seal; Description
1-18-2: Custody Of Seal
1-18-3: Facsimile
1-18-1: CORPORATE SEAL; DESCRIPTION:
A seal in a circular form, with the words "City Of Spring Valley" shall be the
seal of the city, to be used in all cases that have been or shall hereafter be
provided by the laws of the United States, the laws of several respective
states of the United States, and the provisions of this code, and in all cases
in which by the laws and customs of nations, it is necessary to use a seal by a
corporation. (1972 Code)
1-18-2: CUSTODY OF SEAL:
The seal shall remain in the custody and control of the clerk, to be by him
used as required by the provisions of this code; provided however, that in all
cases where by the provisions of this code or any other law of the city, it
shall be necessary for the mayor to use the seal, the same shall be delivered
by the clerk to the mayor temporarily, to be used by him, and after its use it
shall be again returned to the custody of the clerk. (1972 Code)
1-18-3: FACSIMILE:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2454.gif]
 
(1972 Code)
CHAPTER 19
PURCHASING
SECTION:
1-19-1: Specifications
1-19-2: Bids
1-19-3: Responsible Bidder
1-19-1: SPECIFICATIONS:
All contracts concerning public improvements, maintenance or purchases of
equipment and supplies shall be made in accord with section
1-14-11 of this title. (Ord. 423; amd. Ord. 1738, 1-28-2019)
1-19-2: BIDS:
   (A)   Advertisements: Advertisements for bids shall be placed at least one
time in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the City,
and said last advertisement shall not be less than ten (10) days prior to the
date of receiving or opening such bids.
   (B)   Right To Reject: The Council shall determine the most advantageous bid
for the City, but shall always in every such advertisement reserve the right to
reject any and all bids.
   (C)   Specifications On File: During the pendency of advertisements of a
proposed contract, specifications therefor shall be on file in the Office of
the Mayor or the office of the department head for which the contract is to be
let, subject to the inspection of all parties desiring to bid.
   (D)   Contracts Of Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars Or Less: Nothing in
this chapter shall preclude the Council from directing advertisement on
contracts and specifications for bids in lesser amounts than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00), if in their opinion it would be advantageous to
the City to do so. (Ord. 423; amd. Ord. 1738, 1-28-2019)
1-19-3: RESPONSIBLE BIDDER:
A responsible bidder for construction contracts means a bidder as defined in
section 8-10-3 of the Illinois Municipal Code 1 . The City of Spring Valley
will also consider the following minimum qualifications in determining whether
a bidder is a responsible bidder:
   (A)   Certificate/proof to transact business within the State of Illinois.
   (B)   Evidence of compliance with:
      1.   Federal employer tax identification number or social security number
(for individuals).
      2.   "Equal Opportunity Employer" provisions.
   (C)   Certificates of insurance indicating the following coverages: general
liability, workers' compensation, automobile, hazardous occupation, product
liability and professional liability.
   (D)   Participation in apprenticeship and training programs applicable to
the work to be performed on the project which are approved and registered with
the United States Department of Labor's Office of Apprenticeship and Training.
The required evidence includes a copy of all applicable apprenticeship
standards and agreements for any apprentice(s) who will perform work on the
public works project.
   (E)   Compliance with all the provisions of the Illinois Prevailing Wage
Act, including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance and retirement for
those trades as covered in the Act.
   (F)   Disclosure of the names and address of each subcontractor from whom
the contractor has accepted a bid and/or intends to hire on any part of this
project.
   (G)   A copy of the written program for the prevention of substance abuse.
      1.   The bidder shall certify that only workers that are enrolled and
tested in company-based controlled substance and alcohol testing program will
be allowed to participate on the project.
   (H)   Statements as to past performances, which shall give an accurate and
complete record of all work projects completed in the last three (3) years by
the contractor.
   (I)   The contractor and officers of the contractor disclose any tax lien or
delinquency in the last five (5) years.
   (J)   Bidder shall certify that all employees expected to perform work on
the project have completed a 10-hour or greater OSHA safety program within the
last five (5) years. Only workers that have satisfactorily completed a 10-hour
or greater OSHA safety program will be allowed to participate on the project.
The bidder must have copies of employee OSHA cards on file, and the City may
request the bidder provide copies of an employee's OSHA card and if unable to
provide, it may result in a determination that the bidder is not a responsible
bidder.
The City of Spring Valley will require all bidders submitting bids for public
works projects paid for in whole, or in part, with public funds from the City
of Spring Valley for public works projects of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) or more to comply with the requirements of this Section by
providing proof of compliance with the requirements of this Section at the time
a bidder submits a bid to the City of Spring Valley in order to be considered a
responsible bidder under the Illinois Municipal Code. (Ord. 1650, 11-7-2016;
amd. Ord. 1738, 1-28-2019; Ord. 1921, 8-4-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-10-3.
CHAPTER 20
ANTINEPOTISM
SECTION:
1-20-1: Elected Officials, Relatives Disqualified
1-20-2: Full Time Employees, Relatives Disqualified
1-20-3: Relatives Affected By Regulations
1-20-4: Termination Of Relative Affected
1-20-5: Disqualification From Employment Provisions
1-20-1: ELECTED OFFICIALS, RELATIVES DISQUALIFIED:
In order to prevent the appearance of nepotism, the relatives of any elected
official of the city are disqualified from becoming full time employees of the
city during the term of the elected officer's tenure. The relatives who are
disqualified from being employed by the city under the terms of this chapter
shall be the spouse, child, grandchild or parent of any elected official. All
relationships shall include those relationships arising from adoption. (Ord.
734, 3-4-1991)
1-20-2: FULL TIME EMPLOYEES, RELATIVES DISQUALIFIED:
In order to prevent the appearance of nepotism, the relatives of any full time
employees of the city are disqualified from becoming full time employees of the
city in the same department as their relative as long as their relative is a
full time employee of the city. The relatives who are disqualified from being
employed by the city under the terms of this chapter shall be the spouse,
child, grandchild or parent of any full time city employee. All relationships
shall include those arising from adoption. (Ord. 836, 5-15-1995)
1-20-3: RELATIVES AFFECTED BY REGULATIONS:
This chapter shall apply only to the relatives of either city officials or full
time city employees who are seeking full time, permanent employment with the
city. For the purposes of this chapter, a "full time employee" shall be defined
as any employee of the city who works for the city more than twenty four (24)
hours per week for thirty (30) or more weeks within any twelve (12) month
period. This chapter shall not apply to any part time summer employees of the
city. A "part time summer employee" of the city is defined as a part time
employee working for the city between the months of May and September of each
year who, although working more than twenty four (24) hours per week, does not
work for more than eighteen (18) weeks for the city within any twelve (12)
month period. (Ord. 734, 3-4-1991)
1-20-4: TERMINATION OF RELATIVE AFFECTED:
Whenever an elected official or employee becomes related, either by marriage or
adoption, to another elected official or employee in one of the relationships
previously listed in this chapter, the affected official and/or employee shall
be allowed to remain in his or her position for a period of sixty (60) days
from the date on which the affected person became related. If one of the
affected persons has not resigned within the sixty (60) day period established
herein, where one of the affected persons is an elected official, and the
remaining affected person is an employee of the city, the mayor shall terminate
the employment of the employee; and where both of the affected persons are
employees of the city, the mayor shall terminate the employee with the shortest
length of employment with the city. (Ord. 734, 3-4-1991)
1-20-5: DISQUALIFICATION FROM EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to disqualify from
employment any individual who is currently a full time employee of the city.
For the purposes of determining full time employees of the city on the date
when this chapter becomes effective, a "full time employee" shall be defined as
any employee who worked more than one thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750)
hours for the city during the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding
the passage of this chapter. (Ord. 734, 3-4-1991)
CHAPTER 21
INVESTMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-21-1: Policy
1-21-2: Scope
1-21-3: Prudence
1-21-4: Objective
1-21-5: Delegation Of Authority
1-21-6: Ethics
1-21-7: Authorized Financial Dealers And Institutions
1-21-8: Authorized And Suitable Investments
1-21-9: Collateralization
1-21-10: Safekeeping And Custody
1-21-11: Diversification
1-21-12: Maximum Maturities
1-21-13: Internal Control
1-21-14: Performance Standards
1-21-15: Reporting
1-21-16: Statement Of Market Value
1-21-17: Adoption
1-21-1: POLICY:
It is the policy of the city of Spring Valley to invest public funds in a
manner which will provide the highest investment return with the maximum
security while meeting the daily cash flow demands of the city and conforming
to all state and local statutes governing the investment of public funds. (Ord.
927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-2: SCOPE:
This policy includes all funds governed by the Spring Valley city council.
(Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-3: PRUDENCE:
Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then
prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in
the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment,
considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the probable
income to be derived. The standard of prudence to be used by investment
officials shall be the "prudent person" standard and shall be applied in the
context of managing an overall portfolio. (Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-4: OBJECTIVE:
The primary objective, in order of priority, shall be:
Legality - conformance with federal, state and other legal requirements.
Safety - preservation of capital and protection of investment principal.
Liquidity - maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating requirements.
Yield - attainment of market rates of return.
The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its effectiveness in
meeting the city's needs for safety, liquidity, rate of return, diversification
and its general performance. (Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-5: DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY:
Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall report to the
chairman of the Spring Valley city council finance committee. The treasurer and
the Spring Valley city council finance committee shall meet on an ad hoc basis
as determined by the chairman of the Spring Valley finance committee to review
the operation of the investment program and to modify this investment policy in
any manner deemed appropriate by the city council of the city of Spring Valley.
(Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-6: ETHICS:
Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to
make impartial decisions. (Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-7: AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS:
The treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions authorized to
provide investment services. In addition, a list will also be maintained of
approved security brokers/dealers selected by creditworthiness. (Ord. 927, 4-5-
1999)
1-21-8: AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS:
Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in Illinois
statutes regarding the investment of public funds.
Investments shall be made that reflect the cash flow needs of the fund type
being invested. (Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-9: COLLATERALIZATION:
Funds on deposit (checking accounts, certificates of deposit, etc.) in excess
of FDIC limits must be secured by some form of collateral, witnessed by a
written agreement and held at an independent third party institution in the
name of the municipality. (Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-10: SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY:
All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements,
entered into by the city of Spring Valley, shall be conducted on a delivery
versus payment (DVP) basis. Securities will be held by an independent third
party custodian and by the treasurer and evidenced by safekeeping receipts and
a written custodial agreement. (Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-11: DIVERSIFICATION:
The city shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability based on
the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
Diversification can be by type of investment, number of institutions invested
in, and length of maturity. (Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-12: MAXIMUM MATURITIES:
To the extent possible, the city of Spring Valley shall attempt to match its
investments and anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a
specific cash flow, the city of Spring Valley will not directly invest in
securities maturing more than two (2) years from the date of purchase. Reserve
funds may be invested in securities exceeding two (2) years if the maturity of
such investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable with the
expected use of the funds. (Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-13: INTERNAL CONTROL:
The treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an internal
control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the city are protected
from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall be designed to
provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met. The internal
controls shall address the following points:
   (A)   Control of collusion.
   (B)   Separation of transaction authority from accounting.
   (C)   Custodial safekeeping.
   (D)   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and
wire transfers. (Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-14: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
This investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the parameters
specified within the policy. The portfolio should obtain a comparable rate of
return during a market/economic environment of stable interest rates. Portfolio
performance should be compared to bench marks with similar maturity, liquidity
and credit quality as the portfolio. Nothing in these performance standards
shall be deemed to require the treasurer to invest municipal funds in financial
institutions not having business locations within the corporate limits of the
city of Spring Valley. Funds may be invested in financial institutions not
having facilities within the city of Spring Valley upon the recommendation of
the city treasurer and the concurrence of the Spring Valley city council. The
city of Spring Valley is supported by local financial institutions and deems it
to be in the best interests of the city of Spring Valley to support those local
financial institutions having a physical presence in the city of Spring Valley.
(Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-15: REPORTING:
The treasurer shall prepare an investment report at least monthly. The report
shall be provided to the Spring Valley city council. The report should be in a
format suitable for review by the general public. An annual report should also
be provided to the city council. (Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-16: STATEMENT OF MARKET VALUE:
A statement of the market value of the portfolio shall be issued to the city
council quarterly. (Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
1-21-17: ADOPTION:
This investment policy shall be adopted by the Spring Valley city council. The
policy shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the treasurer and the chairman
of the Spring Valley finance committee and any modifications made thereto must
be approved by the Spring Valley city council. (Ord. 927, 4-5-1999)
CHAPTER 22
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-22-1: State Officials And Employees Ethics Act
1-22-1: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
   (A)   The regulations of section 5-15 1  and article 10 2  of the state
officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq. (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this section), are hereby adopted
by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to
the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the city, is hereby
prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the city under the act, is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by
any officer or employee of the city, is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall
be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the city.
   (I)   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the city if the act is found unconstitutional by
the Illinois supreme court.
   (J)   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act,
or does not address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the city. (Ord. 1133, 5-17-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 – 10-40.
CHAPTER 23
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR
SECTION:
1-23-1: Duties
1-23-1: DUTIES:
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Economic Development
Director and Project Manager for the City of Spring Valley. The duties of
Economic Development Director and Project Manager of the City of Spring Valley
shall be to work with local businesses on matters of economic development, work
with and help new businesses to locate within the City of Spring Valley, to
perform related economic development activities, and any other projects
assigned by the Mayor on behalf of the City of Spring Valley.
   (B)   The Economic Development Director and Project Manager of the City of
Spring Valley shall report his or her activities to the Spring Valley City
Council and provide the Spring Valley City Council with regular updates on his
or her activities and accomplishments. The Economic Development Director and
Project Manager of the City of Spring Valley shall report directly to the Mayor
of the City of Spring Valley and be supervised by the Mayor of the City of
Spring Valley with additional reporting to the Spring Valley City Council as
set forth in this section. (Ord. 1177, 9-6-2005; amd. Ord. 1870, 5-15-2023)
CHAPTER 24
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-24-1: Adoption
1-24-2: Requirements
1-24-1: ADOPTION:
The city of Spring Valley hereby adopts a residency requirement for all Spring
Valley city employees. (Ord. 1331, 4-16-2007)
1-24-2: REQUIREMENTS:
All Spring Valley Department Heads must reside within ten (10) miles from the
city limits of the city of Spring Valley. (Ord. 1331, 4-16-2007; amd. Ord.
1868, 4-17-2023)
CHAPTER 25
ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS
SECTION:
1-25-1: Rules Statement
1-25-2: Prerequisites
1-25-3: Authorization To Participate
1-25-4: Adequate Equipment Required
1-25-5: Minutes
1-25-6: Rights Of Remote Member
1-25-7: Committees, Boards And Commissions
1-25-1: RULES STATEMENT:
It is the decision of the city of Spring Valley that any member of the Spring
Valley city council, including the mayor, may attend any open or closed meeting
of the Spring Valley city council via electronic means (such as by telephone,
video or internet connection) provided that such attendance is in compliance
with this chapter and any applicable laws. (Ord. 1561, 3-17-2014, eff. 3-17-
2014)
1-25-2: PREREQUISITES:
A member of the Spring Valley city council, including the mayor, may attend a
meeting electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
   (A)   The member should notify the city clerk at least seventy two (72)
hours before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary communications
equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical
arrangements will result in denial of a request for remote attendance.
   (B)   The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why he
or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
      1.   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability;
or
      2.   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the city of Spring Valley; or
      3.   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
(Ord. 1561, 3-17-2014, eff. 3-17-2014)
1-25-3: AUTHORIZATION TO PARTICIPATE:
   (A)   The Spring Valley city clerk, after receiving the electronic
attendance request, shall inform the corporate authority of the request for
electronic attendance.
   (B)   After establishing that there is a quorum physically present at a
meeting where a member of the Spring Valley city council, including the mayor,
desires to attend electronically, the presiding officer shall state that: 1) a
notice was received by a member of the Spring Valley city council, including
the mayor, in accordance with this chapter, and 2) the member will be deemed
authorized to attend the meeting electronically unless a motion objecting to
the member's electronic attendance is made, seconded, and approved by two-
thirds (2/3) of the members of the Spring Valley city council, including the
mayor, if necessary to establish the two-thirds (2/3) super majority
requirement, physically present at the meeting. If no such motion is made and
seconded or if any such motion fails to achieve the required vote by the
members of the Spring Valley city council, including the mayor if necessary to
achieve the super majority requirement, physically present at the meeting, then
the request by the member to attend the meeting electronically shall be deemed
approved by the Spring Valley city council and the presiding officer shall
declare the requesting member present. After such declaration by the presiding
officer, the question of a member's electronic attendance may not be
reconsidered. (Ord. 1561, 3-17-2014, eff. 3-17-2014)
1-25-4: ADEQUATE EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:
The member participating electronically and other members of the Spring Valley
city council, including the mayor, must be able to communicate effectively, and
members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the meeting
site. Before allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the city of Spring
Valley shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the
meeting site. (Ord. 1561, 3-17-2014, eff. 3-17-2014)
1-25-5: MINUTES:
Any member attending electronically shall be considered an off site attendee
and counted as present electronically for that meeting if the member is allowed
to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state specifically
whether each member is physically present or present by electronic means. (Ord.
1561, 3-17-2014, eff. 3-17-2014)
1-25-6: RIGHTS OF REMOTE MEMBER:
A member permitted to attend electronically will be able to express his or her
comments during the meeting and participate in the same capacity as those
members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and
procedures previously adopted and adhered to. The member attending
electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken.
Accordingly, the name of any member attending electronically shall be called
during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded by the Spring
Valley city clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A
member attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case
of any member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his
or her leaving and returning. (Ord. 1561, 3-17-2014, eff. 3-17-2014)
1-25-7: COMMITTEES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS:
This chapter shall apply to all committees, boards and commissions established
by authority of the city of Spring Valley. (Ord. 1561, 3-17-2014, eff. 3-17-
2014)
CHAPTER 26
CITY EMPLOYEES PROHIBITED FROM CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS
SECTION:
1-26-1: Purpose
1-26-2: Definition
1-26-3: Prohibition To Bear Weapons
1-26-4: Safekeeping Of Weapon
1-26-5: Violation
1-26-6: Mandatory Signage
1-26-7: Dissemination Of Policy
1-26-1: PURPOSE:
In the interest of protecting the safety of employees and citizens of the city
of Spring Valley and in recognition of the Illinois firearm concealed carry act
1  provisions, the Spring Valley city council adopts this chapter to address
employees of the city of Spring Valley who may receive a permit to carry a
concealed weapon. (Ord. 1563, 3-17-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. 430 ILCS 66/1 et seq.
1-26-2: DEFINITION:
The word "employee" in this chapter shall mean classifications including, but
not limited to, classified employees, unclassified employees, contractual
employees, members of any boards or commissions approved by city officials or
functioning on city property, volunteers working on behalf of the county or any
elected or appointed Spring Valley city official. This definition shall not
include law enforcement officials specifically authorized to carry a firearm or
any other employee authorized by statute. (Ord. 1563, 3-17-2014)
1-26-3: PROHIBITION TO BEAR WEAPONS:
   (A)   Employees of the city of Spring Valley are prohibited from carrying
firearms in any city owned or leased building on any city premises, at any city
work location, in any city vehicle, at a city controlled site, or at any time
or in an area that is associated with city employment while the employee is
acting within the course and scope of his or her employment.
   (B)   Employees shall be aware of the following list of prohibited areas
described in the statute. Employees who bring a weapon into one of these
prohibited areas while acting within the course and scope of his or her
employment will be subject to disciplinary action including, but not limited
to, termination by the city.
Prohibited areas:
      1.   Any building, real property, and parking area under the control of a
public or private elementary or secondary school.
      2.   Any building, real property, and parking area under the control of a
preschool or childcare facility, including any room or portion of a building
under the control of a preschool or childcare facility. Nothing in this
paragraph shall prevent the operator of a childcare facility in a family home
from owning or possessing a firearm in the home or license under this act, if
no child under childcare at the home is present in the home or the firearm in
the home is stored in a locked container when a child under childcare at the
home is present in the home.
      3.   Any building, parking area, or portion of a building under the
control of an officer of the executive or legislative branch of government,
provided that nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit a licensee from carrying
a concealed firearm onto the real property, bikeway, or trail in a park
regulated by the department of natural resources or any other designated public
hunting area or building where firearm possession is permitted as established
by the department of natural resources under section 1.8 of the wildlife code.
      4.   Any building designated for matters before a circuit court,
appellate court, or the supreme court, or any building or portion of a building
under the control of the supreme court.
      5.   Any building or portion of a building under the control of a unit of
local government.
      6.   Any building, real property, and parking area under the control of
an adult or juvenile detention or correctional institution, prison, or jail.
      7.   Any building, real property, and parking area under the control of a
public or private hospital or hospital affiliate, mental health facility, or
nursing home.
      8.   Any bus, train, or form of transportation paid for in whole or in
part with public funds, and any building, real property, and parking area under
the control of a public transportation facility paid for in whole or in part
with public funds.
      9.   Any building, real property, and parking area under the control of
an establishment that serves alcohol on its premises, if more than fifty
percent (50%) of the establishment's gross receipts within the prior three (3)
months are from the sale of alcohol. The owner of an establishment who
knowingly fails to prohibit concealed firearms on its premises as provided in
this paragraph or who knowingly makes a false statement or record to avoid the
prohibition on concealed firearms under this paragraph is subject to the
penalty under subsection (c-5) of section 10-1 of the liquor control act of
1934.
      10.   Any public gathering or special event conducted on property open to
the public that requires the issuance of a permit from the unit of local
government, provided this prohibition shall not apply to a licensee who must
walk through a public gathering in order to access his or her residence, place
of business, or vehicle.
      11.   Any building or real property that has been issued a special event
retailer's license as defined in section 1-3.17.1 of the liquor control act
during the time designated for the sale of alcohol by the special event
retailer's license, or a special use permit license as defined in subsection
(1) of section 5-1 of the liquor control act during the time designated for the
sale of alcohol by the special use permit license.
      12.   Any public playground.
      13.   Any public park, athletic area, or athletic facility under the
control of a municipality or park district, provided nothing in this section
shall prohibit a licensee from carrying a concealed firearm while on a trail or
bikeway if only a portion of the trail or bikeway includes a public park.
      14.   Any real property under the control of Bureau County.
      15.   Any building, classroom, laboratory, medical clinic, hospital,
artistic venue, athletic venue, entertainment venue, officially recognized
university related organization property, whether owned or leased, and any real
property, including parking areas, sidewalks, and common areas under the
control of a public or private community college, college, or university.
      16.   Any building, real property, or parking area under the control of a
gaming facility licensed under the riverboat gambling act or the Illinois horse
racing act of 1975, including an intertrack wagering location licensee.
      17.   Any stadium, arena, or the real property or parking area under the
control of a stadium, arena, or any collegiate or professional sporting event.
      18.   Any building, real property, or parking area under the control of a
public library.
      19.   Any building, real property, or parking area under the control of
an airport.
      20.   Any building, real property, or parking area under the control of
an amusement park.
      21.   Any building, real property, or parking area under the control of a
zoo or museum.
      22.   Any street, driveway, parking area, property, building, or
facility, owned, leased, controlled, or used by a nuclear energy, storage,
weapons, or development site or facility regulated by the federal nuclear
regulatory commission. The licensee shall not under any circumstance store a
firearm or ammunition in his or her vehicle or in a compartment or container
within a vehicle located anywhere in or on the street, driveway, parking area,
property, building, or facility described in this paragraph.
      23.   Anywhere firearms are prohibited under federal law. (Ord. 1563, 3-
17-2014)
1-26-4: SAFEKEEPING OF WEAPON:
   (A)   Employees of the city of Spring Valley are prohibited from bringing a
firearm onto any city owned or leased parking lot, even if it is kept in his or
her own vehicle, except for employees who possess a valid license to carry a
concealed weapon.
   (B)   A city employee with a valid license to carry a concealed weapon who
chooses to carry a concealed weapon while driving to and from work and park in
a city owned or leased parking lot, must secure his or her weapon in his or her
own locked vehicle, either in a locked compartment within the vehicle or in the
trunk before he or she acts in the course and scope of his or her employment.
(Ord. 1563, 3-17-2014)
1-26-5: VIOLATION:
   (A)   Any city employee who violates this chapter shall be considered as
acting outside the course and scope of his or her duties and will be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including termination by the city.
   (B)   The city of Spring Valley will not defend or indemnify an employee who
carries or discharges personal weapons on the job. (Ord. 1563, 3-17-2014)
1-26-6: MANDATORY SIGNAGE:
The Illinois state police has approved the signage specification pursuant to
the firearm concealed carry act. The city, as an owner of the above statutorily
prohibited areas must clearly and conspicuously post the Illinois state police
approved sign, in accordance with 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 66/1, at the
entrance of the building, premises or real property. Signs must be the design
approved by the Illinois state police. The size shall be four inches by six
inches (4" x 6"). The city may post a larger sign if it feels it is necessary
or required. (Ord. 1563, 3-17-2014)
1-26-7: DISSEMINATION OF POLICY:
Each office or department of the city of Spring Valley shall be responsible for
reviewing this chapter with each employee. Each employee must sign an
acknowledgment form indicating the employee has reviewed a copy of this
chapter. This acknowledgment form shall be kept in the employee's personnel
file. All new hires will receive instruction on this chapter as part of his or
her orientation. (Ord. 1563, 3-17-2014)
CHAPTER 27
PERSONNEL MANUAL
SECTION:
1-27-1: Adopted
1-27-2: Conflict
1-27-3: Distribution
1-27-1: ADOPTED:
The City of Spring Valley hereby adopts the City of Spring Valley Personnel
Manual which is on file in the City, marked as exhibit A and incorporated by
reference as if set out in full herein. (Ord. 1645, 10-10-2016)
1-27-2: CONFLICT:
In the event that any conflict between the City of Spring Valley Personnel
Manual and the Labor Agreement entered into between the City of Spring Valley
and the Fraternal Order of Police or the provisions of section 10-2.1-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code establishing Boards of Fire and Police Commissioners,
the provisions of the Labor Agreement entered into between the City of Spring
Valley and the Fraternal Order of Police and the provisions of section 10-2.1-
1 of the Illinois Municipal Code establishing Boards of Fire and Police
Commissioners shall control over any contrary provisions in the Spring Valley
Personnel Manual.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
1-27-3: DISTRIBUTION:
The Spring Valley City Clerk shall be responsible for coordinating distribution
of the City of Spring Valley Personnel Manual to all City employees with the
Chief of the Spring Valley Police Department, who shall be responsible for
distributing the City of Spring Valley Personnel Manual to police officers and
dispatchers, the Spring Valley Superintendent of Public Works, who shall be
responsible for distributing the City of Spring Valley Personnel Manual to all
employees in the Street Department who are members of Laborer's International
Union Local #393, and the Spring Valley Fire Chief, who shall be responsible
for distributing the City of Spring Valley Personnel Manual to all volunteer
firemen who would be covered by this chapter. The Spring Valley Chief of
Police, the Spring Valley Superintendent of Public Works and the Spring Valley
Fire Chief shall be responsible for coordinating with the Spring Valley City
Clerk in order to determine that all employees of the City of Spring Valley
have received the City of Spring Valley Personnel Manual and signed the
appropriate documentation evidencing receipt of the manual. (Ord. 1645, 10-10-
2016)
CHAPTER 28
TRAVEL, MEAL, AND LODGING EXPENSES
SECTION:
1-28-1: Definitions
1-28-2: Reimbursement
1-28-3: Reimbursement Request Form
1-28-4: Approval
1-28-5: Entertainment Expenses
1-28-1: DEFINITIONS:
ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements, theaters,
circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
PUBLIC BUSINESS: Means expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose
which is required or useful for the benefit of the City of Spring Valley to
carry out the responsibilities of City of Spring Valley business.
TRAVEL: Means any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officers of the City of Spring Valley or by wards or charges of the City of
Spring Valley involving reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private
agencies providing transportation or related services. (Ord. 1654, 12-19-2016)
1-28-2: REIMBURSEMENT:
The City of Spring Valley shall only reimburse the following types of travel,
meal, and lodging expenses incurred by its employees and officers up to the
following maximum allowable amounts:
   (A)   Travel: Travel by motor vehicle shall be reimbursed at the rate
approved by the Internal Revenue Service for employee mileage reimbursement.
Any air travel shall be by commercial aircraft and the amount of the round trip
ticket shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Prior authorization
will be required for any round trip air tickets exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   (B)   Lodging: The maximum lodging expense will be three hundred dollars
($300.00) per evening. Parking at a rate not to exceed sixty dollars ($60.00)
per day is allowed in addition to the per diem lodging expense.
   (C)   Meals: A per diem allowance of not more than seventy five dollars
($75.00) per day shall be allowed. Employees or local government officials must
provide receipts evidencing meal payment. Meal payment shall be limited to the
employee or local government official only.
   (D)   Alcohol: Alcohol is specifically excluded from reimbursement. (Ord.
1654, 12-19-2016)
1-28-3: REIMBURSEMENT REQUEST FORM:
No reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses incurred by a City of
Spring Valley employee or officer shall be authorized unless the "Travel, Meal
and Lodging Expense Reimbursement Request Form", on file in the City and made a
part hereof by reference, has been submitted and approved. All documents and
information submitted with the form shall be subject to disclosure under the
Freedom of Information Act 1 . (Ord. 1654, 12-19-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
1-28-4: APPROVAL:
Expenses for travel, meals, and lodging of: a) any officer or employee that
exceeds the maximum reimbursement allowed under the regulations adopted under
section
1-28-2 of this chapter or b) any member of the Corporate Authorities of the
City of Spring Valley may only be approved by roll call vote at an open meeting
of the Corporate Authorities of the City of Spring Valley. However, in the
event of an emergency or other extraordinary circumstances, the Corporate
Authorities may approve more than the maximum allowable expenses set forth
above. (Ord. 1654, 12-19-2016)
1-28-5: ENTERTAINMENT EXPENSES:
The City of Spring Valley shall not reimburse any elected official, employee,
or officer for any activities which would be considered entertainment.
Activities which would otherwise be considered entertainment, but which are
excluded from the prohibition on reimbursement due to being ancillary to the
purpose of the program or event, may be reimbursed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1654, 12-19-2016)
CHAPTER 29
ASSESSING AND DETERMINING CLAIMS UNDER PSEBA
SECTION:
1-29-1: Purpose
1-29-2: Definitions
1-29-3: Application Procedure
1-29-4: Administrative Composition
1-29-5: Administrative Hearing
1-29-6:    Health Insurance Benefits
1-29-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method for
determining the eligibility of a full-time employee for the benefits enumerated
under PSEBA through an administrative process, including if necessary, an
administrative hearing. (Ord. 1711, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. 1742, 3-11-2019)
1-29-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms will have the following
meanings. These definitions are derived from the federal Public Health and
Welfare Act, which was enacted in 1944 and amended in 1984 to define, by
inclusion or reference, the following terms.
For use in this chapter, provisions containing the words" "mayor",
"commissioner", "alderman" or "city council" also apply to the president,
trustee, council member and boards of trustees so far as the provisions are
applicable to them.
CATASTROPHIC INJURY:
An injury, the direct and proximate consequences of which permanently prevent
an individual from performing any gainful work.
GAINFUL WORK:
Full-or part-time activity that actually is compensated or commonly is
compensated.
INJURY:
A traumatic physical wound (or a traumatized physical condition of the body)
directly and proximately caused by external force (such as bullets, explosives,
sharp instruments, blunt objects, or physical blows), chemicals, electricity,
climatic conditions, infectious disease, radiation, virii, or bacteria, but
does not include:
   (A)   Any occupational disease; or
   (B)   Any condition of the body caused or occasioned by stress or strain.
(Ord. 1711, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. 1742, 3-11-2019)
1-29-3: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
As noted by the Court in Englum, "while the Act contained substantive
requirements for section 10 eligibility, the Act contained no procedural
requirements for determining whether a former employee met the substantive
criteria." ¶ 55. This chapter and the application procedure of this section
establishes guidance on the proper procedural requirements for public safety
officers seeking PSEBA benefits in the City.
   (A)   Public safety officers, or family member(s) of an injured or deceased
public safety officer, ("applicant") must file a full and complete PSEBA
application in writing within thirty (30) days of filing a pension claim with
the City or within thirty (30) days of the date of the adoption of this chapter
in the event that an applicant has filed for a PSEBA claim prior to the date of
adoption of this chapter, whichever is later, if the applicant is seeking
benefits under PSEBA. The City shall notify applicant if the PSEBA application
is incomplete and applicant shall have five (5) days to remedy their
application. Failure to timely file the full and complete application shall
result in a forfeiture of the benefits under PSEBA by failure to properly
submit a complete application.
   (B)   A complete PSEBA application includes the following:
      1.   The name of the applicant, date of hire, detailed information
regarding the incident, including information relating to how the injury was
sustained in the line of duty (date, time, place, nature of injury, and other
factual circumstances surrounding the incident giving rise to said claim);
      2.   The applicant's firsthand knowledge explaining, to the City's
satisfaction, how the injury/death directly resulted from:
         (a)   Response to fresh pursuit;
         (b)   Response to what is reasonably believed to be an emergency;
         (c)   Response to an unlawful act perpetrated by another; or
         (d)   Participation during the investigation of a criminal act;
      3.   A signed PSEBA medical authorization release which authorizes the
collection of information related to the incident including, but not limited
to, disability pension proceedings, worker's compensation records, and medical
records and specified the name and address for pertinent health care provider
(s);
      4.   A signed PSEBA general information release specifying the name and
signature of the applicant or her /his authorized representative along with
legal proof of said representation and name and signature of witness
authorizing the collection of information pertinent to the incident review
process;
      5.   The name(s) of witnesses to the incident;
      6.   The name(s) of witnesses the applicant intends to call at the PSEBA
hearing;
      7.   Information and supporting pension documentation filed with the
appropriate pension board;
      8.   Information supporting the PSEBA eligibility requirements; and
      9.   Other sources of health insurance benefits currently enrolled in or
received by the applicant and/or family members if the applicant is deceased.
   (C)   The PSEBA application must be submitted to the Spring Valley City
Clerk in its entirety.
   (D)   The PSEBA application must be sworn and notarized to certify the
truthfulness of the content of the information. A review of the application
shall not occur until the application is complete.
   (E)   On the date that the PSEBA application is deemed complete by the City,
the completed application shall then be submitted to the City as the
preliminary record, and a copy of the same shall be date stamped and provided
to the applicant.
   (F)   Upon receipt of a complete application for PSEBA benefits, the City
shall set the matter for an administrative hearing before a hearing officer to
make a determination on whether to grant the applicant PSEBA benefits based on
the result of the administrative hearing.
   (G)   The applicant will be given written notice of the date for the
scheduled administrative hearing to be served not less than ten (10) days prior
to the commencement of the hearing. If the applicant, upon receiving written
notice of the administrative hearing, cannot attend said date, the applicant
must contact the hearing officer in writing within seven (7) days after being
served. The hearing officer shall establish an alternative hearing date which
is within thirty (30) days of the original hearing date. Failure to appear at
the administrative hearing shall result in denial of PSEBA benefits.
(Ord. 1711, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. 1742, 3-11- 2019)
1-29-4: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
The administrative hearing shall be scheduled and conducted by a hearing
officer whose authority and limitations are as follows:
(A)   Authority Of The Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer shall have all of
the authorities granted to her/him under common law relative to the conduct of
an administrative hearing, including the authority to:
   1.   Preside over City hearings involving PSEBA;
   2.   Administer oaths;
   3.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under PSEBA;
   4.   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
   5.   Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence;
   6.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits in
evidence introduced at the hearing; and
   7.   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the hearing,
the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a written
finding of fact, decision and order.
(B)   Hearing Officer: The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, is hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold the position of
hearing officer for each hearing on PSEBA benefits that shall come before this
City. In making said selection, the following information should be considered,
at a minimum:
   1.   The individual's ability to comply with the job description as set
forth herein; and
   2.   The individual must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the
State of Illinois and have knowledge of and experience in employment and labor
law, general civil procedure, the rules of evidence, and administrative
practice.
(Ord. 1711, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. 1742, 3-11-2019)
1-29-5: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
The system of administrative hearings for the determination of eligibility for
benefits under PSEBA shall be initiated either by the City or by the applicant
after the submission of a full and complete PSEBA application. An
administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate and determine whether the
applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. If the applicant is found
eligible, the benefits shall be consistent with the Act.
   (A)   Record: The City shall ensure that all hearings are attended by a
certified court reporter and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by
said certified court reporter and a copy be provided to the applicant within
twenty-eight (28) days of the date of the administrative hearing.
   (B)   Procedures: The City and the applicant shall be entitled to
representation by counsel at said administrative hearing and present witnesses,
testimony and documents, may cross-examine opposing witnesses, and may request
the issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the
production of relevant documents.
   (C)   Evidence: The Illinois Rules of Evidence shall apply to the extent
practicable unless, by such application, the Hearing Officer determines that
application of the rule would be an injustice or preclude the introduction of
evidence of the type commonly relied upon by a reasonably prudent person in the
conduct of her or his affairs. Such determination shall be in the sole
discretion of the Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer must state on the record
her or his reason for that determination.
   (D)   Final Determination: A written determination by the hearing officer of
whether the petitioning applicant is eligible for the benefits under PSEBA
shall constitute a final administrative determination for the purpose of
judicial review under the common law writ of certiorari.
   (E)   Burden of Proof: At any administrative hearing, the applicant shall
have the obligation and burden of proof to establish that the applicant is
eligible and qualified to receive PSEBA benefits. The standard of proof in all
hearings conducted under this chapter shall be by the preponderance of the
evidence.
   (F)   Administrative Records: All records pertaining to the administrative
process shall be held in a separate file under the applicant's name with the
City.
(Ord. 1711, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. 1742, 3-11-2019)
1-29-6: HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS:
Upon qualification for PSEBA benefits, the applicant shall be entitled to the
City's basic group health insurance plan. Basic group health insurance plan
shall mean the lowest-cost plan available to the City. The basic group health
insurance plan may change from time to time. An applicant may choose to enroll
in any other health insurance plan offered by the City different from the basic
group health insurance plan, but shall pay the difference in insurance premium
between the City's basic plan and the other plan. Failure of the PSEBA
beneficiary to timely pay the premium's non-basic level coverage shall result
in coverage in the basic plan. PSEBA benefits do not include benefits not
provided under the City's basic group health insurance plan such as, but not
limited to, disability benefits, life insurance, dental or vision benefits,
etc.
   (A)   Open Enrollment: Individuals receiving benefits under PSEBA will only
be able to change from one plan to another during the City's Open Enrollment
Period.
   (B)   Other Benefits: Health insurance benefits payable from any other
source will reduce the benefits payable from the City. Each applicant shall
sign an affidavit attesting that the applicant is not eligible for insurance
benefits from any other source, unless there is another source. If there is
another source, the applicant shall notify the City of that source no later
than five (5) business days from that source becoming available to the
applicant or the applicant's beneficiaries. The City reserves the right on an
annual basis to have the benefit recipient provide another affidavit affirming
whether other health insurance is available or payable to the applicant, his/
her spouse and/or his/her qualifying dependent children. The affidavit must be
completed and returned to the City within thirty (30) calendar days of written
notice from the City. If the recipient does not complete and return the
affidavit within the time required, the City shall give the recipient an
additional written notice providing an additional fifteen (15) calendar days
for the recipient to complete and return the affidavit. Failure to return the
affidavit within the time required shall result in the recipient incurring
responsibility for reimbursing the City for premiums paid during the period the
affidavit is due and not filed.
   (C)   Disclosure Of Health Insurance Coverage: The applicant has an ongoing
obligation and shall update health insurance coverage information provided and
failure to do so may result in the denial of benefits and/or reimbursement to
the City for duplicate coverage. If duplicate coverage has been received by a
PSEBA beneficiary, further PSEBA benefits will be denied until the City has
been fully reimbursed by the PSEBA beneficiary for what it would have been
credited if it had known about other coverage.
   (D)   Reimbursement: Receipt of health insurance benefits from other sources
without notice to the City shall require the applicant to reimburse the City
for the value of those benefits.
   (E)   Medicare Eligibility: The applicant shall notify the City when the
applicant becomes Medicare eligible regardless of the status of the enrollment
period, so the City may assist with the transition to Medicare coverage and/or
adjust health insurance benefits or PSEBA benefits accordingly.
(Ord. 1742, 3-11-2019)
CHAPTER 30
SEXUAL HARASSMENT 1
SECTION:
1-30-1: Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-30-2: Definition Of Sexual Harassment
1-30-3: Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment
1-30-4: Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment Allegations
1-30-5: Consequences Of A Violation Of The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-30-6: Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report
 
Notes
  1. This policy was drafted using the Illinois Department of Human Rights
1 Sexual Harassment Model Policy and has been modified to conform to Public Act
  100-0554, amended by Public Act 100-1066.
1-30-1: PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under Title VII
of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a
right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment
is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual
orientations. It is a policy of the City of Spring Valley to prohibit
harassment of any person by any Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal
employee or Municipal agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All
Municipal officials, Municipal agents, Municipal employees and Municipal
agencies or offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person,
regardless of any employment relationship or lack thereof.
(Ord. 1712, 12-18-2017; amd. Ord. 1733, 10-22-2018)
1-30-2: DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   (A)   This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in
the Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct
of a sexual nature when:
      1.   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment;
      2.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
      3.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   (B)   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
      1.   Verbal: sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor, and
jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
      2.   Non-verbal: suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls", "smacking"
or "kissing" noises.
      3.   Visual: posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
      4.   Physical: touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching, brushing
the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
      5.   Textual/Electronic: "sexting" (electronically sending messages with
sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit
language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of electronic
communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line postings,
blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to determine.
On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more subtle and
depends, to some extent, on individual perception and interpretation. The
courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what would offend a
"reasonable person."
(Ord. 1712, 12-18-2017; amd. Ord. 1733, 10-22-2018)
1-30-3: PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   (A)   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/
himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s)
as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to
the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not necessary
for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
   (B)   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following:
      1.   Electronic/Direct Communication: If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
      2.   Contact with Supervisory Personnel: At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or
intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a
director of human resources, an ethics officer, the city manager or
administrator, or the chief executive officer of the municipality.
      The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual harassment
must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there are no
witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other responsible
officer, the municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of the
harassment.
      3.   Resolution Outside Municipality: The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within three hundred (300) days
of the alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with
the EEOC must also be filed within three hundred (300) days.
      4.   Allegations Of Sexual Harassment Made Against An Elected Official Of
The Governmental Unit By Another Elected Official Of A Governmental Unit: In
addition to the methods of reporting included above, an elected official may
request an independent review of a complaint of sexual harassment by another
elected official. The request shall be made to the human resources director,
the city manager or administrator or the chief elected official of the
municipality. The official receiving the request shall take immediate action in
keeping with the procurement process of the municipality to retain a qualified
individual or entity for the independent review of the allegations of sexual
harassment in violation of this policy. The outcome of the independent review
shall be reported to the corporate authorities.
   (C)   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what
was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not limited
to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
   (D)   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome. (Ord. 1712,
12-18-2017; amd. Ord. 1733, 10-22-2018; Ord. 1840, 5-16-2022)
1-30-4: PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS:
   (A)   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal office shall take any retaliatory action against any municipal
employee or official due to a municipal employee's or official's:
      1.   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this policy;
or
      2.   Providing information related to an investigation or testimony
before any public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any
violation of this policy; or
      3.   Assistance with or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
   (B)   For purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the reprimand,
discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer or change in
the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that is taken
in retaliation for a municipal employee's or official's involvement in
protected activity pursuant to this policy.
   (C)   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   (D)   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act 1  provides whistleblower protection
from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, or
denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for an employee who
does any of the following:
      1.   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, State agency, or
other State employee that the State employee reasonably believes is in
violation of a law, rule, or regulation;
      2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, State agency or other State
employee; or
      3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
   (E)   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act 2 , an employer may not retaliate
against an employee who discloses information in a court, an administrative
hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in any other
proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the
information discloses a violation of a State or federal law, rule, or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a State or federal law, rule, or regulation, an employer may not
retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an
administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in
any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that
the information discloses a violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation 3 .
   (F)   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act 4 , it is a civil rights
violation for a person, or for two or more people to conspire, to retaliate
against a person because he/she has opposed that which he/she reasonably and in
good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment, because he/she has
made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an
investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois Human Rights Act.
   (G)   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may
file a retaliation charge - either due within three hundred (300) days of the
alleged retaliation.
(Ord. 1712, 12-18-2017; amd. Ord. 1733, 10-22-2018; Ord. 1840, 5-16-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/15-10.
2 2. 740 ILCS 174/15(a).
3 3. 740 ILCS 174/15(b).
4 4. 775 ILCS 5/6-101.
1-30-5: CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this policy or the
Prohibition on Sexual Harassment contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65, may be subject
to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000) per offense, applicable
discipline or discharge by the municipality and any applicable fines and
penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, State law or Federal law.
Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any discipline imposed by the
municipality shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed by an
ethics commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court of law or a
State or Federal agency.
(Ord. 1712, 12-18-2017; amd. Ord. 1733, 10-22-2018)
1-30-6: CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT:
A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser using the
sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping sexual
harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is
not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the seriousness
of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe
offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements.
In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act to
an ethics commission, an inspector general, the State Police, a State's
Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official is guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission may levy an administrative fine
of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000) against any person who intentionally
makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation.
(Ord. 1712, 12-18-2017; amd. Ord. 1733, 10-22-2018)
CHAPTER 31
IDENTITY PROTECTION POLICY
SECTION:
1-31-1: Policy
1-31-2: Training
1-31-3: Prohibitions
1-31-4: Mailings
1-31-5: Use Of Social Security Number
1-31-6: When Disclosure And Collection Allowed
1-31-7: Access
1-31-8: Public Records Request
1-31-9: Statement Of Purpose For Collecting
1-31-10: Redacting Required
1-31-11: State And Federal Law
1-31-12: Compliance With State Statute
1-31-13: National Unique Patient Health Identifier Program
1-31-14: Encoding Or Embedding Prohibited
1-31-15: Advising Personnel
1-31-16: Copies To Public
1-31-17: Amendments
1-31-18: More Restrictive Law
1-31-19: Violation
1-31-1: POLICY:
It is the policy of the City of Spring Valley to protect social security
numbers from unauthorized disclosure in accordance with the Illinois Identity
Protection Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 179/1 et seq. All employees of the
City of Spring Valley are required to comply with this Identity Protection
Policy ("policy"). For purposes of this policy, only, "employee" shall be
defined as any person performing work on behalf of the City of Spring Valley
including, but not limited to, full-time, part- time, seasonal, temporary or
contractual employees, volunteers, interns, and elected or appointed officials.
(Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-2: TRAINING:
Any employee of the City of Spring Valley who has access to social security
numbers in the course of performing their duties will be trained to protect the
confidentiality of social security numbers and will be trained on the
requirements of this policy. Training will include instructions on the proper
handling of information and documents that contain social security numbers from
the time of collection through the destruction of the information or documents.
(Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-3: PROHIBITIONS:
The City of Spring Valley prohibits the following:
   (A)   Publicly posting or publicly displaying in any manner an individual's
social security number;
   (B)   Printing an individual's social security number on any card required
for the individual to access products or services provided by the City of
Spring Valley;
   (C)   Requiring an individual to transmit his or her social security number
over the internet, unless the connection is secure or the social security
number is encrypted;
   (D)   Printing an individual's social security number on any materials that
are mailed to the individual, through the U.S. Postal Service, any private mail
service, electronic mail, or any similar method of delivery, unless State or
Federal law requires the social security number to be on the document to be
mailed. (Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-4: MAILINGS:
Notwithstanding any provision in this policy to the contrary, social security
numbers may be included in applications and forms sent by mail, including, but
not limited to, any material mailed in connection with the administration of
the Unemployment Insurance Act, any material mailed in connection with any tax
administered by the Department of Revenue, and documents sent as part of an
application or enrollment process or to establish, amend, or terminate an
account, contract, or policy or to confirm the accuracy of the social security
number. A social security number that may be permissibly mailed under this
policy may not be printed, in whole or in part, on a postcard or other mailer
that does not require an envelope, or be visible on an envelope without the
envelope having been opened. (Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-5: USE OF SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER:
The City of Spring Valley prohibits the following:
   (A)   The collection, use or disclosure of a social security number from an
individual, unless: 1) required under State or Federal law, rules, or
regulations, or the collection, use, or disclosure of the social security
number is otherwise necessary for the performance of that agency's duties and
responsibilities; 2) the need and purpose for the social security number is
documented before collection of the social security number; and 3) the social
security number collected is relevant to the documented need and purpose;
   (B)   Requiring an individual to use his or her social security number to
access an internet website;
   (C)   Using the social security number for any purpose other than the
purpose for which it was collected. (Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-6: WHEN DISCLOSURE AND COLLECTION ALLOWED:
Notwithstanding any provision in this policy to the contrary, social security
numbers may be collected, disclosed or used in the following circumstances:
   (A)   The disclosure of social security numbers to agents, employees,
contractors, or subcontractors of a governmental entity or disclosure by a
governmental entity to another governmental entity or its agents, employees,
contractors, or subcontractors if disclosure is necessary in order for the
entity to perform its duties and responsibilities, and if disclosing to a
contractor or subcontractor, prior to such disclosure, the individual acting on
behalf of the City of Spring Valley first receives from the contractor or
subcontractor a copy of the contractor's or subcontractor's policy that sets
forth how the requirements imposed under this policy of protecting an
individual's social security number will be achieved;
   (B)   The disclosure of social security numbers pursuant to a court order,
warrant, or subpoena;
   (C)   The collection, use, or disclosure of social security numbers in order
to ensure the safety of: State and local government employees; persons
committed to correctional facilities; local jails, and other law enforcement
facilities or retention centers; wards of the State; youth in care as defined
in section 4d of the Children and Family Services Act; and all persons working
in or visiting a State or local government agency facility;
   (D)   The collection, use, or disclosure of social security numbers for
internal verification or administrative purposes;
   (E)   The disclosure of social security numbers by a State agency to any
entity for the collection of delinquent child support or of any State debt or
to a government agency to assist with an investigation or the prevention of
fraud;
   (F)   The collection or use of social security numbers to investigate or
prevent fraud, to conduct background checks, to collect a debt, to obtain a
credit report from a consumer reporting agency under the Federal Fair Credit
Reporting Act, to undertake any permissible purpose that is enumerated under
the Federal Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, or to locate a missing person, a lost
relative, or a person who is due a benefit, such as a pension benefit or
unclaimed property benefit. (Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-7: ACCESS:
Only employees who are required to use or handle information or documents that
contain social security numbers are permitted to have access to such
information or documents. (Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-8: PUBLIC RECORDS REQUEST:
When the City of Spring Valley must request an individual provide a social
security number, it must be provided in a manner that makes the social security
number easy to redact if the record is required to be released as part of a
response to a public records request. (Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-9: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE FOR COLLECTING:
When collecting a social security number, or upon request by an individual, the
City of Spring Valley will provide a statement of the purpose or purposes for
which the City of Spring Valley is collecting and using the social security
number provided. (Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-10: REDACTING REQUIRED:
Any individual responding to a Freedom of Information Act request or other
request for records, must redact social security numbers from the information
or documents before allowing the public inspection or copying of the
information or documents. (Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-11: STATE AND FEDERAL LAW:
This policy does not apply to the collection, use or disclosure of a social
security number as required by State or Federal law, rule, or regulation. (Ord.
1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-12: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE STATUTE:
This policy does not apply to documents that are recorded with a County
Recorder or required to be open to the public under any State or Federal law,
rule or regulation, applicable case law, Supreme Court Rule, or the
Constitution of the State of Illinois. Notwithstanding this section, County
Recorders must comply with 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 179/35. (Ord. 1719, 3-
26-2018)
1-31-13: NATIONAL UNIQUE PATIENT HEALTH IDENTIFIER PROGRAM:
If a Federal law takes effect requiring any Federal agency to establish a
national unique patient health identifier program, any employee of the City of
Spring Valley that complies with that Federal law shall be deemed to be in
compliance with this policy. (Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-14: ENCODING OR EMBEDDING PROHIBITED:
The City of Spring Valley prohibits the encoding or embedding of a social
security number in or on a card or document, including, but not limited to,
using a bar code, chip, magnetic strip, RFID technology, or other technology,
in place of removing the social security number as requited by this policy.
(Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-15: ADVISING PERSONNEL:
This policy must be provided to supervisory personnel of the City of Spring
Valley within thirty (30) days of approval and employees will be promptly
advised of the existence of this policy and will be provided a copy of this
policy promptly upon approval. (Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-16: COPIES TO PUBLIC:
The City of Spring Valley will make a copy of this policy available to any
member of the public, upon request. (Ord. 1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-17: AMENDMENTS:
If this policy is amended in the future, a copy will be provided to supervisory
personnel of the City of Spring Valley, and employees will be promptly advised
of the amended policy and provided with a copy of the policy. (Ord. 1719, 3-26-
2018)
1-31-18: MORE RESTRICTIVE LAW:
This policy does not supersede any more restrictive law, rule, or regulation
regarding the collection, use or disclosure of social security numbers. (Ord.
1719, 3-26-2018)
1-31-19: VIOLATION:
Anyone violating this policy is subject to disciplinary action, up to and
including termination of employment and/or criminal prosecution as provided in
5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 179/45 or any other applicable law. (Ord. 1719, 3-
26-2018)
CHAPTER 32
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM
SECTION:
1-32-1: Purpose
1-32-2: Definitions
1-32-3: Creation
1-32-4: Jurisdiction
1-32-5: Administrative Adjudication Supervisor
1-32-6: Instituting Administrative Adjudication Proceedings
1-32-7: Subpoenas; Defaults
1-32-8: Continuances; Representation At Code Hearings
1-32-9: Hearing; Evidence
1-32-10: Qualifications Of Administrative Hearing Officers
1-32-11: Findings, Decision, And Order
1-32-12: Review Under Administrative Law
1-32-13: Judgment Of Findings, Decision, And Order
1-32-1: PURPOSE :
   (A)   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for fair and efficient
enforcement of City ordinances as allowed by law and directed by ordinance
through the administrative adjudication of violations of said ordinances,
thereby reinforcing voluntary compliance and expediting the correction and
prosecution of violations of said ordinances.
   (B)   The establishment of an administrative hearing and adjudication system
under this Chapter does not preclude the City from using any other legal system
or other methods for correcting or enforcing violations of its ordinances.
(Ord. 1877, 8-7-2023)
1-32-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER: A City employee or an officer or an agent of
the City, other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
   (a)   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or
not a Code violation exists;
   (b)   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties
relevant to the existence of a Code violation;
   (c)   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and
all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
   (d)   Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating whether
a Code violation exists.
CODE: Any City ordinance except for:
   (a)   Any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.)
or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of
vehicles and except for any reportable offense under Section 6-204 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-204). (Ord. 1877, 8-7-2023)
1-32-3: CREATION:
   (A)   Pursuant to Division 2.2-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
1-2.2-1 et seq.), which authorizes non-home rule units to implement a system of
administrative hearings and adjudication, there is hereby created an
Administrative Adjudication System for charges of City Code violations for the
City of Spring Valley. This system will authorize an Administrative Hearing
Officer to conduct adjudicatory hearings on cases initiated by City
departments.
   (B)   The City hereby adopts Division 2.2-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time to time. In the
event of a conflict between said statutes and this Chapter, said statutes shall
prevail. (Ord. 1877, 8-7-2023)
1-32-4: JURISDICTION:
The Administrative Adjudication System may adjudicate any violation of a City
ordinance, so long as the relief sought is not a penalty of incarceration or a
total fine in excess of seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00), excluding
allowable costs. Further, any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS
5/1-100 et seq.) or similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the
movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under Section 6-204
of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-204). (Ord. 1877, 8-7-2023)
1-32-5: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SUPERVISOR:
There is hereby created the Office of Administrative Adjudication. That office
shall be directed by the Administrative Adjudication Supervisor, who shall be
the City Clerk, or their designee. The Administrative Adjudication Supervisor
functions to expedite the prosecution and/or correction of City Code violations
subject to the jurisdiction of the Administrative Adjudication System. The
Administrative Adjudication Supervisor is authorized to manage the
administrative adjudication process in the manner provided in this Chapter,
which shall include reviewing the qualifications of potential Administrative
Hearing Officer and establishing such rules and regulations as may be necessary
for the effective operation of the Administrative Adjudication System. The City
Clerk may also appoint other persons to assist with the Administrative
Adjudication System. (Ord. 1877, 8-7-2023)
1-32-6: INSTITUTING ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEEDINGS:
When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a Code violation
finds a Code violation to exist, he or she shall note the violation on a
multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates:
   (A)   The name and address of the defendant;
   (B)   The type and nature of the violation;
   (C)   The date and time the violation was observed; and
   (D)   The names of witnesses to the violation. (Ord. 1877, 8-7-2023)
1-32-7: SUBPOENAS; DEFAULTS:
At any time prior to the hearing date, the Administrative Hearing Officer
assigned to hear the case may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses
to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If on the date set for hearing the
defendant or their attorney fails to appear, the Administrative Hearing Officer
may find the defendant in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept
evidence relevant to the existence of a Code violation. (Ord. 1877, 8-7-2023)
1-32-8: CONTINUANCES; REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS:
No continuances shall be authorized by the Administrative Hearing Officer in
proceedings under this Chapter except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized
by an Administrative Hearing Officer under this Chapter shall not exceed forty
five (45) days. The case for the City may be presented by an attorney
designated by the City or by any other City employee, except that the case for
the City shall not be presented by an employee of the Office of Administrative
Adjudication. The case for the defendant may be presented by the defendant,
their attorney, or any other agent or representative of the defendant. (Ord.
1877, 8-7-2023)
1-32-9: HEARING; EVIDENCE:
At the hearing an Administrative Hearing Officer shall preside, shall hear
testimony, and shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence or non-
existence of a Code violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to
judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this Chapter.
(Ord. 1877, 8-7-2023)
1-32-10: QUALIFICATIONS OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICERS:
   (A)   Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings under this
Chapter, an Administrative Hearing Officer shall successfully complete a formal
training program that includes the following:
      1.   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearings that they will
conduct;
      2.   Orientation to each subject area of the Code violations that they
will administer;
      3.   Observation of administrative hearings; and
      4.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and
issuing final orders.
   (B)   In addition, every Administrative Hearing Officer must be an attorney
licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years.
   (C)   The Mayor shall have the authority to appoint Administrative Hearing
Officers, with the advice and consent of the City Council. (Ord. 1877, 8-7-
2023)
1-32-11: FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER:
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall make
a determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a Code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing
and shall be designated as findings, decision, and order. The findings,
decision, and order shall include
   (A)   The Administrative Hearing Officer's findings of fact;
   (B)   A decision of whether or not a Code violation exists based upon the
findings of fact; and
   (C)   An order that states the sanction or dismisses the case if a violation
is not proved.
A monetary sanction for a violation under this chapter shall not exceed seven
hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00), exclusive of hearing costs and fees. A
copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be provided to the defendant
within five (5) days after it is issued. Service shall be in the same manner
that the report form and summons are served under Section 1-32-6 of this
Chapter, namely by first class mail. Payment of any penalty or fine and the
disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in the Code.
(Ord. 1877, 8-7-2023)
1-32-12: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE LAW:
The findings, decision, and order of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall
be subject to review in the Circuit Court of Bureau County. The provisions of
the Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.) and the rules adopted
pursuant thereto shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review
of the findings, decision, and order of an Administrative Hearing Officer under
this Chapter. (Ord. 1877, 8-7-2023)
1-32-13: JUDGMENT OF FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER:
   (A)   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review
Law shall be a debt due and owing the City and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   After the expiration of the period within which judicial review under
the Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of the
Code violation, the City may commence a proceeding in the Circuit Court of
Bureau County for the purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings,
decision, and order. Noting in this Section shall prevent the City from
consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and orders against a person in such
a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the City shall file a certified
copy of the findings, decision, and order, which shall be accompanied by a
certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings,
decision, and order was issued in accordance with this Chapter. Service of the
summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided for by Section
2-203 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.) or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other
sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order does not
exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied
that the findings, decision, and order was entered in accordance with the
requirements of this Chapter and the applicable City ordinance(s) and that the
defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this Chapter and for judicial
review as provided in this Chapter:
      1.   The court shall render judgment in favor of the City and against the
defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision, and order, plus
costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same
manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
      2.   The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are
requested by the City to enforce the order of the Administrative Hearing
Officer to correct a Code violation.
   (C)   In place of a proceeding under subsection (B) of this Section, after
the expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Administrative
Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a code violation, unless
stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision, and order
of the Administrative Hearing Officer may be enforced in the same manner as a
judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment ordering
a defendant to correct a Code violation or imposing any fine or other sanction
as a result of a Code violation, any expenses incurred by the City to enforce
the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, court costs, and
costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a
court of competent jurisdiction or an Administrative Hearing Officer, shall be
a debt due and owing to the City and may be collected in accordance with
applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by an Administrative Hearing
Officer pursuant to this subsection (C), the City shall provide notice to the
defendant that states that the defendant shall appear at a hearing before the
Administrative Hearing Officer to determine whether the defendant has failed to
comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such a hearing,
which shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date the notice is served.
If the notice is served by mail, the seven (7) day period shall begin to run on
the date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the Code of Civil
Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial Code, a lien shall be imposed on the
real estate or personal estate, or both, of the defendant in the amount of any
debt due and owing the City under this Section. The lien may be enforced in the
same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
An Administrative Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment entered by default
and set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed within twenty one (21) days
after the issuance of the order of default, if the Administrative Hearing
Officer determines that the petitioner's failure to appear at the initial
hearing was for good cause or at any time if the petitioner establishes that
the City did not provide proper service of process. If any judgment is set
aside pursuant to this Subsection (C), the Administrative Hearing Officer shall
have the authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien which has been
recorded for any debt due and owing the City as a result of the vacated
judgment. (Ord. 1877, 8-7-2023)
CHAPTER 33
ADOPTION OF THE PUBLIC OFFICERS PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES ACT
SECTION:
1-33-1:    Prohibited Interests In Contracts
1-33-1: PROHIBITED INTERESTS IN CONTRACTS:
   (A)   The regulations of 50 ILCS 105/3 and 50 ILCS 105/4 of the Public
Officer Prohibited Activities Act are hereby adopted by reference and made
applicable to the officers of the city.
   (B)   Conflicts Of Interest: No officer of the City may have a prohibited
interest in a contract with the City as outlined in the Act, 50 ILCS 105/3.
   (C)   Penalty: The penalty for violations of this section shall be the same
as those penalties set forth in 50 ILCS 105/4. (Ord. 1843, 6-6-2022)
CHAPTER 34
COMMUNITY CENTER
SECTION:
1-34-1: Activities And Program Coordinator
1-34-2: Event And Marketing Manager
1-34-1: ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAM COORDINATOR:
   (A)   The City of Spring Valley hereby establishes the position of
Activities and Program Coordinator for the Community Center. The Activities and
Program Coordinator shall be responsible for developing and implementing a
variety of programs and activities that cater to the needs and interests of the
community members. This includes scheduling public and private events,
maintaining the community calendar, and collaborating with local organizations,
businesses, and volunteers to organize activities that promote community
engagement and participation. Additionally, the Coordinator shall serve as a
point of contact for community members, addressing their concerns, providing
information about activities and programming, and fostering a sense of
community within the Community Center. The Coordinator shall work closely with
the Event and Marketing Manager, sharing ideas and providing feedback to ensure
the success of hosted events and their positive impact on the community. Other
duties that arise will be a shared responsibility of the Coordinator and the
Event and Marketing Manager.
   (B)   The Activities and Program Coordinator for the Community Center of the
City of Spring Valley shall report his or her activities to the Spring Valley
City Council and provide the Spring Valley City Council with periodic updates
on his or her activities and accomplishments. The Activities and Program
Coordinator for the Community Center of the City of Spring Valley shall report
directly to the Mayor of the City of Spring Valley and be supervised by the
Mayor of the City of Spring Valley with additional reporting to the Spring
Valley City Council as set forth in this section. (Ord. 1917, 5-19-2025)
1-34-2: EVENT AND MARKETING MANAGER:
   (A)   The City of Spring Valley hereby establishes the position of Event and
Marketing Manager for the Community Center. The Event and Marketing Manager
shall be responsible for supervising and managing events at the Community
Center. This includes creating and distributing promotional materials, managing
online content for social media posts and website updates, and building and
maintaining positive relationships with community members, local businesses,
and media outlets to enhance the participation in and coverage of events. The
Manager shall work with community leaders and residents to identify their needs
and interests, collaborate with the Activities and Program Director, and ensure
a safe and welcoming environment for all visitors. Additionally, the Manager
shall collaborate with local organizations and businesses on the marketing and
promotion of events. The Manager shall assist in the supervision of events held
in the Community Center. The Manager shall work closely with the Activities and
Program Coordinator, sharing ideas and providing feedback to ensure the success
of hosted events and their positive impact on the community. Other duties that
arise will be a shared responsibility of the Manager and the Activities and
Program Coordinator.
   (B)   The Event and Marketing Manager for the Community Center of the City
of Spring Valley shall report his or her activities to the Spring Valley City
Council and provide the Spring Valley City Council with periodic updates on his
or her activities and accomplishments. The Event and Marketing Manager for the
Community Center of the City of Spring Valley shall report directly to the
Mayor of the City of Spring Valley and be supervised by the Mayor of the City
of Spring Valley with additional reporting to the Spring Valley City Council as
set forth in this section. (Ord. 1917, 5-19-2025)
TITLE 2
COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  14-10-1 of this code.
CHAPTER 2
PLANNING COMMISSION 1
(Rep. by Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  14-10-1 of this code.
CHAPTER 3
EMERGENCY SERVICE AND DISASTER AGENCY LIAISON
SECTION:
2-3-1: Establishment
2-3-2: Liaison Officer
2-3-3: Function
2-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Spring Valley ESDA liaison officer to facilitate
the cooperation and protection of the city with the Bureau County emergency
service and disaster agency in the work of disaster mitigation, preparedness,
response and recovery in accordance with the Illinois emergency service and
disaster agency act of 1988 (PA 85-1027). (Ord. 705, 11-6-1989)
2-3-2: LIAISON OFFICER:
The liaison officer of the Spring Valley ESDA shall be appointed by the mayor
and shall serve until removed by the same. The Spring Valley ESDA shall consist
only of the liaison officer unless additional personnel is approved by the
Spring Valley city council. The liaison officer shall have direct
responsibility for facilitating the cooperation and protection of the city with
the Bureau County emergency service and disaster agency.
In the event of the absence, reservation, death or inability to serve as
liaison officer, the mayor or any person designated by him, shall be enacted as
liaison officer until a new appointment is made as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 705, 11-6-1989)
2-3-3: FUNCTION:
The city has decided not to establish a separate and independent emergency
service and disaster agency. Rather, the city council of the city has deemed it
appropriate to act in liaison with the emergency service and disaster agency
provided to the residents of the city by Bureau County, Illinois. The Spring
Valley liaison officer shall operate as a liaison with the Bureau County ESDA
and the Spring Valley liaison officer shall perform no functions other than
those liaison officer duties specifically enumerated in section 10,
subparagraph E of the Illinois emergency service and disaster agency act of
1988 (PA 85-1027). (Ord. 705, 11-6-1989)
CHAPTER 4
PARK BOARD
SECTION:
2-4-1: Creation Of Board
2-4-2: Membership
2-4-3: Removals
2-4-4: Finances
2-4-5: Jurisdiction
2-4-6: Control
2-4-7: Pool Manager And Assistant Pool Manager
2-4-8: Safety
2-4-9: Park Supervisor Duty
2-4-10: Park Custodian Duty
2-4-11: Violation Of Park Rules
2-4-1: CREATION OF BOARD:
There is hereby created a park board for the city. The park board serves to
implement the policies of the mayor and the city council, and the park board
will inform the mayor and the city council of the park board's plans for the
city parks under the direction of the park board, and for any procedures which
the park board desires to adopt in order to properly manage the city parks.
(Ord. 1800, 11-30-2020)
2-4-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The park board shall consist of eleven (11) members who shall serve for a term
of five (5) years, except that the members thus appointed for such term that
the terms of one member shall expire annually thereafter to the extent
practicable. If a vacancy occurs in the office of any board member, the mayor
shall appoint a successor to serve for the unexpired term. The members of the
park board shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and consent
of the council. (Ord. 1800, 11-30-2020; Ord. 1820, 9-7-2021)
2-4-3: REMOVALS:
The mayor may, with the consent of the council, remove any member of the park
board for misconduct or neglect of duty. (Ord. 1800, 11-30-2020)
2-4-4: FINANCES:
The park board shall have charge of the expenditure of the playground and
recreation fund developed from the special tax for that purpose or from any
other source; and warrants in this fund shall be honored only on order of the
board; and shall have such other and further powers and authority as in the
statutes in such case made and provided; including the power to receive gifts
and bequests, and the issuance of bonds and all other powers specifically
provided by law. The president of the park board shall have authority to
authorize expenditures up to five hundred ($500.00) dollars. Any expenditures
made by the park board exceeding five hundred ($500.00) dollars must be
approved by the majority vote of the park board. Before making any expenditures
in excess of ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars, the expenditure must be
approved by the majority of the members of the park board and also approved by
a majority of the city council.(Ord. 1800, 11-30-2020)
2-4-5: JURISDICTION:
The park board shall have control and jurisdiction over all playgrounds,
recreation centers, swimming pools and other public places which have
previously, or may in the future, be dedicated to the purpose of public
recreation and given over to their control. The park board has the
responsibility for the safety, cleanliness and security of Knol Park, Kirby
Park, Foley Field, the soccer field adjacent to Kirby Park, the Coveny Veterans
Memorial Pool, Baltikauski Park, Pederzani Park, Casford Park, Cole Miner's
Park, the Spring Valley Mini Park, Savitch Park, the City Hall Park and flare
outs on the 100 and 200 blocks of East and West St. Paul Street. (Ord. 1800,
11-30-2020)
2-4-6: CONTROL:
   (A)   The playgrounds and recreation areas under the jurisdiction of the
park board shall be closed to the public each day, from ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M., except that during the months of June, July,
August and September, the closing time for Kirby Park shall be extended to
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. in the event a regularly scheduled and park board
authorized activity is in progress, and except that the closing time for the
Second Place basketball courts shall be eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. at all times
during the year.
   (B)   No automobiles, motor vehicles or bicycles shall be permitted within
the playgrounds and recreation areas under control of the park board at any
time except within parking areas expressly marked as such; no automobiles,
motor vehicles or bicycles shall be permitted within said playgrounds and
recreation areas between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   (C)   No alcoholic liquor or other beverages shall be sold within said
playgrounds and recreation areas under the jurisdiction of the park board at
any time except as provided in subsection (H) of this section.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way litter or cause to
be littered, the grounds, driveways or parking areas of said playgrounds and
recreation areas under the jurisdiction of the park board by scattering or
leaving papers, garbage, bottles, cans or any other refuse matter in said
playgrounds and recreation areas.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to act in an intoxicated,
boisterous, disorderly, lewd or otherwise objectionable manner within said
playgrounds and recreation areas under the jurisdiction of the park board.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface or otherwise
injure any property within said playgrounds and recreation areas under the
jurisdiction of the park board.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, rifle or
firearm of any type within said playgrounds and recreation areas under the
jurisdiction of the park board.
   (H)   No undertaking for profit of any kind may be held or conducted within
the playgrounds and recreation areas under the jurisdiction of the park board;
provided however, that the park board may permit fraternal, benevolent,
charitable or religious organizations organized not for profit to sell
refreshments and beer but excluding all other alcoholic beverages for special
events approved by both the park board and the city council. Any fraternal,
benevolent, charitable or religious organizations, organized not for profit
desiring to sell beer, but excluding all other alcoholic beverages, must first
obtain a temporary license issued by the Liquor Control Commissioner of the
City of Spring Valley as provided for by Section
5-18-11 of this code, and subject to the applicant tendering evidence of liquor
liability insurance, naming the applicant and the city as insureds with maximum
limits as provided for by Illinois law and that applicant further furnish
public liability insurance naming the city as an insured with maximum and
minimum limits to be determined by the city council.
   That the park board may further permit individuals, fraternal, benevolent,
charitable or religious organizations organized not for profit to serve beer,
but excluding all other alcoholic liquor, in conjunction with any picnic
authorized by the park board on park property, meeting the aforementioned
insurance requirements.
   That any alcoholic beverages either sold at retail or otherwise served on
playground and recreation areas under the jurisdiction of the park board shall
be in a fenced off area where no person under the age of twenty one (21) years
shall be served alcoholic liquor or be permitted to loiter. The security fence
herein required shall be of such design and construction so as to prevent the
removal of alcoholic beverages from the fenced in area and shall be approved as
to type and construction by the board or its representative.
   The sponsoring organization shall be responsible for and required to provide
security personnel which may include, but shall not be limited to, off duty law
enforcement officers or specially trained security personnel, to prevent the
violation of the restrictions imposed herein and in the event of a violation of
the restrictions set forth, the chief of police may order the sponsoring
organization to cease and terminate the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages
as herein provided.
   The sponsoring organization shall, no later than ten (10) days prior to the
scheduled event, deposit with the city clerk the sum of one thousand
($1,000.00) dollars in cash, which said deposit shall be made for the purpose
of ensuring the cleanup costs or damage to park property occasioned in the
course of conduct of the activity by said sponsoring organization. The deposit
shall be returned to the sponsoring organization within five (5) days of the
activity and only in the event the board or its representative determines that
the area used by the sponsoring organization has been restored to the same
condition as it was prior to the holding of said activity and that no unusual
damage was suffered by the park and recreation property.
   That in the event any sporting venture is permitted other than under the
recreation program sponsored by the park board of the city, the sponsor thereof
must further furnish evidence of public liability insurance naming the city as
a named insured in limits required by the city, and in addition thereto,
execute an indemnity and save harmless agreement prepared by the city attorney
in addition to the aforesaid insurance requirements.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume alcohol in
or around the Coveny Veteran's Memorial Swimming Pool and the swimming pool
parking lot. For the purposes of this section prohibiting the possession or
consumption of alcohol, the Spring Valley city pool shall be deemed to
encompass that area bounded by Strong Avenue on the east, the entrance road to
Kirby Park off of Strong Avenue on the north, the easternmost boundary of the
new parking lot established immediately to the west of the swimming pool to the
west and the boundary of Kirby Park to the south.
   (J)   No alcoholic beverages are permitted on the playing areas or within
the confines of the fenced in areas of the baseball field (including dugouts),
the tennis courts or the volleyball courts unless prior approval for the
consumption of alcoholic beverages is given by the park board.
   (K)   Consumption of alcoholic beverages is not permitted within thirty feet
(30') of the fence surrounding the baseball field at Kirby Park during high
school baseball games.
   (L)   Non-Spring Valley residents wishing to reserve a park shelter in the
Spring Valley park system shall be required to pay a nonrefundable registration
fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) to help defray the cost of maintaining the
Spring Valley park system.
   (M)   Glass containers of any kind are not permitted in the Spring Valley
city parks due to the significant safety hazard presented by broken bottles.
All dogs, except seeing eye dogs and police canine dogs, are not permitted in
the Spring Valley city parks due to the significant safety hazard they may
present.
   (N)   The park board, with the approval and consent of the city council,
shall be authorized to appoint and employ a park supervisor and a park
custodian who shall be responsible for enforcing the park board rules and
regulations and the provisions set forth in this code. The park supervisor
shall be a full-time city employee assigned to the park board from the Spring
Valley Street Department. The park supervisor shall be assigned to the park
board and the park board shall delineate the duties and responsibilities of the
park supervisor for the period from March 1st through October 31st of each
year. During the period of each year when the park supervisor is not working at
the direction of the park board, the park supervisor shall return to his
regular employment as a member of the Spring Valley Street Department.
   (O)   Any individual or group violating either the park board rules and
regulations (copies of which are available at the Spring Valley city clerk's
office) or any provisions of this code or state law shall be subject to the
fine provisions as set forth in this section and shall also be subject to
immediate removal and ejection from the Spring Valley park system.
   (P)   All baseball leagues wishing to use Spring Valley city park facilities
shall be required to pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) league registration fee for
use of the Spring Valley baseball diamond facilities. This fee shall not apply
to Hall High School, but shall apply to any other baseball teams using Spring
Valley park facilities.
   (Q)   The fees established for the swimmers wishing to use the Coveny
Veteran's Memorial Swimming Pool shall be as follows:
 
Daily fee: adults, senior citizens and high school $ 1.25
Daily fee: youth                                   1.00
Adult season pass                                  35.00
Family season pass                                 70.00
Senior citizen pass (62 years of age and older)    20.00
Youth season pass (under 14 years of age)          30.00
 
   (R)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense.
   (S)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to use Foley Field on the days that
the Hall High School baseball teams have home games and require the use of
Foley Field. (Ord. 1800, 11-30-2020; amd. Ord. 1866, 4-3-2023)
2-4-7: POOL MANAGER AND ASSISTANT POOL MANAGER:
With the consent of the Spring Valley City Council, the park board shall employ
a pool manager and an assistant pool manager to operate the Coveny Veteran's
Memorial Swimming Pool. With the approval of the park board and the Spring
Valley City Council, the pool manager may hire pool employees and may designate
and established job responsibilities for these pool employees. The assistant
pool manager shall perform all of the functions of the pool manager when the
pool manager is not available. The salaries to be paid to the pool manager, the
assistant pool manager and any employees hired to operate the Coveny Veteran's
Memorial Swimming Pool will be established by the Spring Valley City Council
based upon recommendations and input from the park board. (Ord. 1800, 11-30-
2020)
2-4-8: SAFETY:
The pool manager is hereby authorized to implement whatever safety procedures
he deems necessary in order to ensure for the proper, responsible and safe use
of the city swimming pool. Specifically, said pool manager is authorized to
prohibit glass containers in the immediate area around the pool as well as to
take any other actions deemed necessary for public safety. (Ord. 1800, 11-30-
2020)
2-4-9: PARK SUPERVISOR DUTY:
The City of Spring Valley will assign a member of the Spring Valley Street
Department to serve as park supervisor from March 1st through October 31st of
each year. Between April 1st and October 31st of each year, the park supervisor
shall report to the park board president and the park board president shall be
responsible for supervising all work duties assigned to the park supervisor by
the park board. The park supervisor shall be required to submit a plan for
maintenance and park improvements for all playground and recreation areas under
the control of the park board not less than annually. The park supervisor shall
also attend all park board meetings and give a report of his/her work
activities to the park board. The park board shall prepare a written list of
duties and responsibilities to be performed by the park supervisor. Those
duties shall include, at a minimum, to cut grass at all city parks, clean the
restrooms at all city parks in order to keep the restrooms in a clean and safe
condition, assist other city employees in opening and closing the Coveny
Veterans Swimming Pool in May and August of each year, prepare baseball,
softball and soccer fields for their intended uses, clean and maintain picnic
pavilions, make repairs to all recreational facilities and equipment as
required, supervise any part-time summer help assigned to the park supervisor
to assist the park supervisor with the park supervisor's duties, and to
accomplish any other additional tasks assigned to the park supervisor by the
park board. If requested by the president of the park board, the park
supervisor shall be available for work during weekends and after five o’clock
(5:00) P.M. on weekdays. From November 1st to February 28th each year, the park
supervisor shall work as a member of the Spring Valley Street Department and
shall be under the direct supervision of the city superintendent of public
works. In the event of any unanticipated emergency occurring between March 1st
and October 28th of each year which requires the park supervisor to temporarily
return to work as a member of the Spring Valley Street Department, the city
superintendent of public works shall notify the park board president that the
park supervisor has been temporarily reassigned to the Spring Valley Park
Department. After the emergency ends, the city superintendent of public works
shall notify the park board president that the park supervisor has been
returned to his or her duties as park supervisor under the supervision of the
park board president. (Ord. 1800, 11-30-2020)
2-4-10: PARK CUSTODIAN DUTY:
The park custodian position is created to assist the park supervisor with the
duties assigned to the park supervisor by the park board. The park custodian
position is created in order to ensure that there will be an employee available
to perform the duties assigned to the park supervisor on weekends and on
holidays when the park supervisor may not be at work. Additionally, the park
custodian may be assigned by the park board to assist the park supervisor
during those times during the year when the duties assigned to the park
supervisor cannot be reasonably completed by only one employee. The park
custodian position shall be a part-time position. The park custodian shall not
be allowed to work more than five hundred ninety-nine (599) hours in any fiscal
year (May 1st to April 30th) and the park custodian position will not receive
any benefits other than the salary paid to the park custodian. Before hiring a
park custodian, the park board must provide the city council with the name of
the proposed park custodian, the wage to be paid to the park custodian and the
days and hours during which the park custodian will be expected to work and
receive approval from the city council to hire a park custodian. (Ord. 1800,
11-30-2020)
2-4-11: VIOLATION OF PARK RULES:
Any individual or group violating either the park boar rules and regulations
(copies of which are available at the Spring Valley City Clerk's office) or any
provisions of the Spring Valley City Code or state law shall be subject to a
fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) and shall also be subject to immediate removal and ejection
from the Spring Valley park system. (Ord. 1800, 11-30-2020)
CHAPTER 5
POLICE PENSION BOARD
SECTION:
2-5-1: Creation
2-5-2: Members
2-5-3: Maintenance Of Fund
2-5-1: CREATION:
There shall be a police pension fund established in the city as provided by
law. (1972 Code)
2-5-2: MEMBERS:
The board of trustees of the said fund shall consist of five (5) members, two
(2) appointed by the mayor, one of such members serving for the period of one
year beginning on the second Tuesday of the first May after the passage of this
chapter, and one of such members serving for a period of two (2) years
beginning on the same date, with the successors to any of the foregoing
trustees serving for a period of two (2) years, or until such time as their
successors are appointed and qualified, and two (2) elected by the members of
the police department, and one elected by the beneficiaries of the pension
fund. The elections shall be held on the third Monday in April, and the term of
each member elected shall be for two (2) years, beginning on the second Tuesday
of the first May after the passage of this chapter. The pension board shall
meet at least quarterly as provided by law, and shall hold such additional
meetings as may be called by the president of the pension board. (1972 Code)
2-5-3: MAINTENANCE OF FUND:
There shall be deposited in the pension fund, the sums required by law, which
shall include eight and one-half percent (81/2%) per month, deducted from the
salary of each member of the police force, together with the proceeds of an
annual tax which shall be levied as provided by law.
For the purposes of this section, the word "salary" means the annual salary
including longevity attached to the rank held by the policemen as established
by the municipality's appropriation ordinance, but does not include "overtime
pay", "holiday pay", "bonus pay", "merit pay", or any other cash benefit over
and above the salary established by the appropriation ordinance. (Ord., 11-2-
1981)
CHAPTER 6
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
2-6-1: Creation And Members
2-6-2: Duties
2-6-3: Quarantine And Vaccination
2-6-1: CREATION AND MEMBERS:
There is hereby created the board of health for the city. The board of health
shall consist of the mayor, chief of police and health officer, said health
officer being a duly licensed physician appointed by the mayor with the advice
and consent of the council. (1972 Code)
2-6-2: DUTIES:
The board of health shall have the powers and perform the duties assigned to it
by statute or ordinance. It shall be the duty of the board of health to enforce
all provisions of this code which relate to public health or relate to
nuisances.
The board of health shall make all necessary rules and regulations for the
protection of the health of the city and to guard against the spread of
contagious diseases and to prevent by necessary rules the induction of
diseases, contagious or otherwise, within the corporate limits of the city.
(1972 Code)
2-6-3: QUARANTINE AND VACCINATION:
The board of health is hereby authorized to make such reasonable rules as may
be necessary regarding quarantine and vaccination, for the prevention and
spread of contagious diseases, and to quarantine premises where such diseases
occur for such time as may be necessary to protect public health.
The said board shall have the power to prevent persons from entering or leaving
premises on which a case of contagious or epidemic disease occurs or is found,
and to placard the same with signs indicating the nature of such disease and
the existence of quarantine. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 7
LIBRARY BOARD
SECTION:
2-7-1: Establishment And Approval
2-7-2: Number Of Directors
2-7-3: Terms Of Directors
2-7-4: Vacancies
2-7-5: Officers
2-7-6: Freedom Of Use
2-7-7: Report Of Directors
2-7-8: Donations
2-7-9: Damage To Property
2-7-10: Penalties
2-7-11: Name
2-7-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND APPROVAL:
The grant heretofore made to the city by Andrew Carnegie for the purpose of
building and establishing a free public library for the use and benefit of the
inhabitants of the city, and the ordinance approving the same be and the same
is hereby accepted and readopted by the city. (1972 Code)
2-7-2: NUMBER OF DIRECTORS:
The mayor has by previous ordinance and with the approval of the council,
appointed a board of nine (9) directors for the said public library and reading
room, chosen from the citizens at large with reference to their fitness for
such office. (1972 Code)
2-7-3: TERMS OF DIRECTORS:
Said directors shall hold office, one-third (1/3) for one year, one-third (1/3)
for two (2) years and one-third (1/3) for three (3) years from July 1 following
their appointment, and have been so appointed that annually thereafter the
mayor shall before July 1 of each year appoint as before three (3) directors,
to take the place of the retiring directors, who shall hold office for three
(3) years and until their successors are appointed. The mayor may, by and with
the consent of the council, remove any director for misconduct or neglect of
duty. (1972 Code)
2-7-4: VACANCIES:
Vacancies in the board of directors occasioned by removals, resignations or
otherwise shall be reported to the council by the mayor and be filled in like
manner as original appointments, and no director shall receive compensation as
such. (1972 Code)
2-7-5: OFFICERS:
Said directors shall elect one of their number president and elect a secretary
and such other officers as they may deem necessary, and annually thereafter, on
the first Tuesday in July, they shall elect a president and secretary. Said
board of directors shall keep a record of its proceedings and shall make and
adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for the guidance of said board and for
the government of said library and reading room as may be expedient, not
inconsistent with this chapter. Said board of directors shall have exclusive
control of the library building and of the supervision, care and custody of the
grounds, rooms or buildings constructed or procured for that purpose, shall be
authorized to receive donations and gifts, and the income arising therefrom and
all other like funds shall be deposited in the treasury of the city to the
credit of the library fund, and shall be kept separate and apart from other
monies of the city; and the council shall on the duly authenticated request of
the board of directors of the library, appropriate out of the library funds
above mentioned such sums as may be required for the construction, supply and
maintenance of said library. The appropriations above provided for in this
section shall be paid by the city treasurer on the order of the board of
directors of the library signed by their president and secretary; and the
council shall make annual appropriations of such amount as may be deemed
necessary for the support of said library and reading room and levy a tax for
the same or transfer the amount so appropriated out of other funds not
otherwise appropriated; and all such monies so raised by taxation or
transferred out of other funds as aforesaid shall be deposited in the treasury
of the city, to the credit of the library fund, and shall be kept separate and
apart from other monies of the city and shall be drawn upon warrants signed by
the mayor and city clerk upon vouchers signed by the president and secretary of
the said board of directors.
Said board of directors shall have power to invest at interest the library
funds received from donations as aforesaid and to collect and pay over to the
city treasurer the amounts so invested and the income arising from the same;
shall have the power to appoint a suitable librarian and necessary assistants
and fix their compensation, and shall have power to remove such appointees and
shall in general carry out the spirit and intent of this chapter in
establishing and maintaining a public library and reading room. (1972 Code)
2-7-6: FREEDOM OF USE:
The public library and reading room established by this chapter shall be
forever free to the inhabitants of the city, always subject to such reasonable
rules and regulations as the library board may adopt in order to render the use
of said library and reading room of the greatest benefit to the greatest
number. The said board may exclude from the use of said library and reading
room any and all persons who shall wilfully violate said rules. Said board may
extend the privileges and use of such library and reading room to persons
residing outside of the city and in this state, upon such terms and conditions
as said board may from time to time, by its regulations prescribe. (1972 Code)
2-7-7: REPORT OF DIRECTORS:
The said board of directors shall make, on or before the second Monday in June,
an annual report to the council, stating the condition of their trust on June 1
in that year, the various sums of money received from the library fund and from
other sources, and how much monies have been expended and for what purpose; the
number of books and periodicals on hand and the number added by purchase, gift
or otherwise during the year, the number lost or missing; the number of
visitors attending; the number of books loaned out and the general character
and kind of such books, and other statistics, information and suggestions as
they may deem of general interest, and all portions of said report as relate to
the receipt and expenditure of money, as well as the number of books on hand,
books lost or missing, and books purchased shall be verified by the affidavit
of the president or secretary of said board of directors. (1972 Code)
2-7-8: DONATIONS:
Any person desiring to make donations of money, personal property or real
estate for the benefit of such library shall have the right to vest the title
to the money or real estate so donated in the board of directors of the public
library and reading room, to be held and controlled by such board, when
accepted according to the terms of the deed, gift, devise or bequest of such
property; and as to such property, the said board shall be held and considered
to be special trustees. (1972 Code)
2-7-9: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
Every person who shall negligently injure any book or other property of said
library and reading room under the control of the board of directors thereof,
or who shall neglect or refuse to return any book, periodical or paper
belonging thereto or under the control thereof, after demand therefor has been
made by the said board or its agent, shall, on conviction thereof, be fined not
less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
each offense. (1972 Code)
2-7-10: PENALTIES:
Every person who shall wilfully violate any rule or regulation adopted by said
board of directors pursuant to sections
2-7-6 and
2-7-7 of this chapter, and conspicuously posted in the room or rooms where the
books of said library and reading room are kept, or who shall be guilty of any
noisy, boisterous or disorderly conduct in or about said room or rooms, shall,
on conviction thereof, be fined not exceeding twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
each offense. Any fines recovered for violations of this chapter shall be paid
into and become a part of the library fund. (1972 Code)
2-7-11: NAME:
The public library and reading room heretofore established shall be known and
called "Spring Valley Public Library". (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 8
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-8-1: Creation
2-8-2: Membership
2-8-3: Appointment Of Board
2-8-4: Appointment Of Police Officers
2-8-5: Rules
2-8-6: Qualification Of Applicants To Police Department
2-8-7: Notice Of Examination
2-8-8: Register Of Eligibles
2-8-9: Promotions
2-8-10: Temporary Appointments
2-8-11: Discharge
2-8-12: Report To Council
2-8-13: Records
2-8-14: Forfeiture As Member Of Board
2-8-15: Compensation
2-8-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created a board to be known as the board of fire and police
commissioners. (Ord. 899, 5-17-1997)
2-8-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The mayor of the city, with the consent of the council, shall appoint a board
of fire and police commissioners. This board shall consist of three (3)
members, whose terms of office shall be three (3) years and until their
respective successors are appointed and have qualified, except as provided in
section
2-8-3 of this chapter. No such appointment, however, shall be made by any mayor
within thirty (30) days before the expiration of his term of office. (Ord. 899,
5-17-1997)
2-8-3: APPOINTMENT OF BOARD:
The first appointments to be made by the mayor, with the approval of the
council, shall be as follows: one of the members shall be appointed to serve
until the end of the then current municipal year, another to serve until the
end of the municipal year second next ensuing. But every member shall serve
until his successor is appointed and has qualified. (Ord. 899, 5-17-1997)
2-8-4: APPOINTMENT OF POLICE OFFICERS:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall appoint all officers and
members of the police department of the municipality with the exception of the
chief of police, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
council. All appointments to such department other than that of the lowest
rank, however, shall be made from the rank next below that to which the
appointment is made, except that the chief of police shall be appointed by the
mayor with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 899, 5-17-1997)
2-8-5: RULES:
The board shall make rules: a) to carry out the purpose of this chapter, and b)
for appointments and removals in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The board, from time to time, may make changes in these rules.
All these rules and changes shall be printed immediately for distribution. The
board shall give notice: a) of the place where the printed rules may be
obtained, and b) of the date, not less than ten (10) days subsequent to the
time of publication, when the rules or changes therein shall go into operation.
This notice shall be published in the official paper of the municipality, if
there is one, and if not, then in a newspaper generally circulated in the
municipality. (Ord. 899, 5-17-1997)
2-8-6: QUALIFICATION OF APPLICANTS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT:
All applicants for a position in the police department of the municipality
shall be subjected to examination, which shall be public, competitive, free to
all electors of the municipality, subject to reasonable limitations as to
residence, age, health, habits and moral character and subject to any other
provisions as set forth in the board of fire and police commissioners act 1
and subject to those rules and regulations duly adopted and promulgated by the
board of fire and police commissioners pursuant to the authority granted to the
board by this chapter. (Ord. 899, 5-17-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 – 5/10-2.1-30.
2-8-7: NOTICE OF EXAMINATION:
Notice of the time and place of every examination shall be given by the board
by a publication not less than two (2) weeks preceding the examination, in the
official newspaper of the municipality, if there is one, and if not, then in
any newspaper of general circulation published in the municipality. This notice
shall also be posted in a conspicuous place in the city hall for two (2) weeks
prior to the examination. (Ord. 899, 5-17-1997)
2-8-8: REGISTER OF ELIGIBLES:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall prepare and keep a register of
persons whose general average standing, upon examination, is not less than the
minimum fixed by the rules of the board, and who are otherwise eligible. These
persons shall take rank upon the register as candidates in the order of their
relative excellence as determined by examination, subject to the provisions of
the board of fire and police commissioners act and the rules and regulations
promulgated by the board pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 899, 5-17-1997)
2-8-9: PROMOTIONS:
The board, by its rules, shall provide for promotion in the police department
on the basis of ascertained merit and seniority in service and examination, and
shall provide in all cases, where it is practicable, vacancies shall be filled
by promotion. All examinations for promotion shall be competitive among such
members of the next lower rank as desire to submit themselves to examination.
All promotions shall be made from the three (3) having the highest rating. The
rules governing examination for promotion shall be as provided for by the board
in its published rules and regulations. (Ord. 899, 5-17-1997)
2-8-10: TEMPORARY APPOINTMENTS:
In order to prevent a stoppage of public business, to meet extraordinary
emergencies, or to prevent material impairment of the police department, the
board may make temporary appointments, to remain in full force until the
regular appointments may be made under the provisions of this chapter, but
never to exceed sixty (60) days. The provision for temporary appointments
granted to the board shall in no way be deemed to limit or negate the authority
of the mayor, upon the recommendation of the chief of police, to appoint and
hire part time police officers pursuant to the provisions contained in the
Illinois municipal code 1 . (Ord. 899, 5-17-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-21.
2-8-11: DISCHARGE:
No officer or member of the police department of the city of Spring Valley who
has held that position for more than one year prior to the adoption of this
chapter, or who has been appointed under the rules and examination provided for
by this chapter, shall be removed or discharged except for cause, upon written
charges, and after an opportunity to be heard in his own defense. All
provisions relating to the procedure for discharging or reprimanding an officer
or member of the police department shall be as set forth in the board of fire
and police commissioners act 1  and the rules and regulations of the board of
fire and police commissioners duly adopted and promulgated pursuant to the
authority granted by this chapter. (Ord. 899, 5-17-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1-5 – 5/10-2.1-30.
2-8-12: REPORT TO COUNCIL:
At any time requested by the corporate authorities of the city, the board of
fire and police commissioners shall submit to the mayor a report of its
activities and the rules in force and the practical effect thereof. In this
report, the board may make suggestions which the board believes would result in
greater efficiency in the police department. The mayor shall transmit the
report to the council. (Ord. 899, 5-17-1997)
2-8-13: RECORDS:
The board may designate one of its own members to act as secretary or may
appoint the city attorney as acting secretary to the board. The secretary: a)
shall keep the minutes of the board's proceedings, b) shall be custodian of all
papers, pertaining to the business of the board, c) shall keep a record of all
examinations held, and d) shall perform all other duties the board prescribes.
(Ord. 899, 5-17-1997)
2-8-14: FORFEITURE AS MEMBER OF BOARD:
No person holding a lucrative office under the United States, this state or
this municipality shall be a member of the board of fire and police
commissioners. The acceptance of any such lucrative office by a member of the
board shall be treated as a resignation of his office as a member of the board.
Not more than two (2) members of the board shall belong to the same political
party. (Ord. 899, 5-17-1997)
2-8-15: COMPENSATION:
The secretary shall be paid a reasonable compensation for his services, to be
fixed by the council. The council shall also fix the compensation to be paid to
the members of the board, but until the council makes provisions therefor, the
members of the board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 899, 5-17-1997)
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL BAND
SECTION:
2-9-1: Creation
2-9-2: Appropriation For Levy
2-9-3: Council To Have Full Power
2-9-4: Concerts
2-9-5: Band Officers And Finances
2-9-6: Records And Reports
2-9-1: CREATION:
There is hereby established and created a municipal band, which said group
shall continue to provide musical entertainment in accordance with the
provisions and intent of the statutes of the state of Illinois. (1972 Code)
2-9-2: APPROPRIATION FOR LEVY:
The council shall annually appropriate and levy such sums as may be necessary
and proper for the maintenance of such municipal band. (1972 Code)
2-9-3: COUNCIL TO HAVE FULL POWER:
The council shall have full power, jurisdiction and authority with reference to
the employment of such band, including compensation to be paid such band, the
designation of the place or places within said city at which such band shall
furnish music as aforesaid, the number of concerts to be given, or occasions
upon which such band shall be employed, and the matter of arrangement of any
and all details necessary in connection with the employment of such band, and
the payment of compensation therefor. (1972 Code)
2-9-4: CONCERTS:
The council shall be the sole judge as to the number of concerts to be given
annually, the date of commencement and close of the season for the holding of
outdoor concerts; all of which shall be as nearly as possible in conformity
with the practice adhered within the city in the past for the holding of such
band concerts. (1972 Code)
2-9-5: BAND OFFICERS AND FINANCES:
The members of the municipal band shall, from time to time, elect officers from
within said membership for the purpose of managing the municipal band, and the
officers thus elected shall have charge of the expenditures from the band fund,
and warrants on this fund shall be honored only upon proper presentation to the
council. (1972 Code)
2-9-6: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
The officers of the municipal band shall keep a record of its proceedings, and
shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations as may be necessary for
the guidance of said band. The officers shall annually and within thirty (30)
days from the close of the fiscal year, make a report to the council of the
condition of said band and the activities during the preceding fiscal year.
(1972 Code)
CHAPTER 10
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-10-1: Appointments
2-10-2: General Duties
2-10-3: Meeting Dates
2-10-1: APPOINTMENTS:
There is hereby established the board of local improvements for the city, which
shall consist of the mayor and members of the council. (1972 Code)
2-10-2: GENERAL DUTIES:
The board of local improvements shall have the powers and perform the duties
assigned to it by statute or ordinance. (1972 Code)
2-10-3: MEETING DATES:
The board of local improvements shall meet on the second Monday of January,
April, July and October at seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. If the regular
meeting date falls on a holiday or if there is no quorum present, the board of
local improvements shall meet on the next secular day. Provided that a special
meeting may be called by the mayor in the manner provided for calling special
meetings of the city council. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 11
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-11-1: Definitions
2-11-2: Creation Of Industrial Development Commission Of The City
2-11-3: Commission Membership, General
2-11-4: Powers Of The Industrial Development Commission Of The City
2-11-5: Investment Of Funds
2-11-6: Exemption From Construction And Bidding Requirements For Public
Buildings
2-11-7: Powers Conferred As Additional And Supplemental; Limitations Imposed;
Effect
2-11-8: Pecuniary Interest Of Members Or Employees Of The Commission;
Prohibition; Disclosure
2-11-9: Severability Clause
2-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms wherever used or referred to in this chapter shall have the
following meanings unless in any case a different meaning appears from the
context:
CITY: The city of Spring Valley.
COMMISSION: The industrial development commission of the city of Spring Valley.
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT OR PROJECT: Any building or facility or any area,
industrial park or portion thereof, or combination or part thereof occupied or
utilized by an industrial, manufacturing, or business enterprise located within
or partially within the municipality, or plan to so occupy or utilize now
existing or hereafter acquired or constructed by the commission pursuant to the
terms of this act, including any or all buildings, improvements, additions,
extensions, replacements, appurtenances, lands, machinery, equipment,
furnishing, landscaping, utilities, railroad spurs and sidings, wharfs,
approaches and roadways necessary or desirable in connection therewith or
incidental thereto.
GOVERNMENT: The United States Of America or instrumentality thereof.
PROJECT COSTS: The sum total of all reasonable or necessary costs incidental to
the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, improvement and
extension of a project including, without limitation, the cost of studies and
surveys, plans, specifications, architectural and engineering services, legal,
marketing or other special services, financing, acquisition, demolition,
construction, equipment and site development of new and rehabilitated
buildings, rehabilitation, reconstruction, repair or remodeling of existing
buildings and all other necessary or incidental expenses whether directly or
indirectly related to the project.
PROJECT SITE DESIGNATION: Project area and site plan.
SITE PLAN: Proposed planned development or planned conservation project. (Ord.
709, 2-5-1990)
2-11-2: CREATION OF INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION OF THE CITY:
There is hereby created a body politic and corporate to be known as the
industrial development commission of the city. The commission is constituted a
public instrumentality of the city and the exercise by the commission of the
powers conferred by this chapter shall be deemed and held to be the performance
of an essential public function. (Ord. 709, 2-5-1990)
2-11-3: COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP, GENERAL:
   (A)   The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint the
members of the industrial development commission, whose terms of office shall
commence from the date of appointment.
   (B)   The commission shall consist of five (5) members.
   (C)   On creation of the commission, initial appointments to the commission
shall be as follows: two (2) members for two (2) year terms; two (2) members
for three (3) year terms; one member for a four (4) year term. Thereafter,
whenever a vacancy occurs by reason of the expiration of the term of any
member, the mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint a
member to the commission for a term of three (3) years.
   (D)   Members of the commission shall hold office until their successors are
appointed and may serve more than one successive term.
   (E)   Whenever a vacancy on the commission shall occur as a result of
resignation, death, or any other reason other than expiration of the term of a
member, the mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint a
member to complete the term of vacancy.
   (F)   Members of the commission shall receive no compensation for their
services.
   (G)   Removal from the commission by the mayor shall be for cause and only
with the concurrence of the city council.
   (H)   The commission shall determine bylaws consistent with the purposes of
this chapter subject to approval of the city council. (Ord. 709, 2-5-1990)
2-11-4: POWERS OF THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION OF THE CITY:
The commission may exercise the following powers under this chapter provided,
however, that in no event shall the commission encumber city funds or incur
city debt or liability without prior city council approval; or take any final
action under the provisions of the following subsections without approval of
the city council.
   (A)   To construct, acquire by gift, lease or purchase, reconstruct,
improve, better or extend, or to finance the construction acquisition,
reconstruction, improvement, betterment, or extension of any industrial project
within or without the municipality or partially within or partially without the
municipality, but in no event further than ten (10) miles from the territorial
boundaries of such municipality, and to acquire by gift, lease or purchase
lands or rights in land in connection therewith.
   (B)   To rent, lease, sell or otherwise dispose of such industrial project.
   (C)   To enter into agreements or contracts with any individual,
association, foundation, developer, private corporation, governmental agencies,
or any form of joint ownership or venture or any type of real estate agreement
containing covenants, restrictions and conditions regarding the use of such
property for industrial and commercial and related purposes, in accordance with
the planned project and such other covenants, restrictions and conditions as
the commission may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
   (D)   To make any of the covenants, restrictions and conditions of the
foregoing contracts, covenants running with the land, and to provide
appropriate remedies for any breach of any such covenants or conditions,
including the right in the commission to terminate such contracts and any
interest in the property created pursuant thereto.
   (E)   To apply for and accept advances, grants, contributions and any other
form of financial assistance from the federal government, the state, county,
city or other public body or from any sources, public or private, for the
purposes of this law, and to enter into and carry out contracts in connection
therewith.
   (F)   The commission, notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance,
may include in any contract for financial assistance with the federal
government for a project such conditions imposed pursuant to federal law as the
commission may deem reasonable and appropriate and which are not inconsistent
with the purpose of this chapter.
   (G)   To propose and to assist in the preparation of, designation of, or
plans for economic development projects and to assist in the undertaking and
carrying out of projects for economic development.
   (H)   To do all acts and things necessary or convenient for the promotion of
its businesses and the general welfare of the commission; to carry out the
powers granted to it by this chapter or any other ordinance.
   (I)   In all of the above, the departments and instrumentalities of the city
are directed to cooperate with the commission consistent with their
responsibilities under law, the general public interest, and the purposes of
this chapter. (Ord. 709, 2-5-1990)
2-11-5: INVESTMENT OF FUNDS:
The commission, without further city council approval, may invest any funds
held by it pursuant to this chapter in accordance with the provisions set forth
in the investment of public funds act, 30 Illinois Compiled Statutes 235/1 et
seq. (Ord. 709, 2-5-1990)
2-11-6: EXEMPTION FROM CONSTRUCTION AND BIDDING REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC
BUILDINGS:
The acquisition and construction of a project shall not be subject to any
requirements relating to public buildings, structures, grounds, works or
improvements imposed by the Illinois Revised Statutes or any other similar
requirements which may be lawfully waived by this section and any requirements
of competitive bidding or restriction imposed on the procedure for award of
contracts for such purpose or for the lease, sale or other disposition of
property of the commission is not applicable to any action taken under
authority of this chapter. (Ord. 709, 2-5-1990)
2-11-7: POWERS CONFERRED AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL; LIMITATIONS IMPOSED;
EFFECT:
The powers conferred by this chapter are in addition and supplemental to, and
the limitations imposed by this chapter shall not affect the powers conferred
by law or any other ordinance. Projects may be acquired, purchased,
constructed, reconstructed, improved, bettered, equipped and extended,
notwithstanding that any law or any other ordinance may provide for the
acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping,
betterment and extension of a like project; and without regard to the
requirements, restrictions, limitations or other provisions contained in any
law or any other ordinance. (Ord. 709, 2-5-1990)
2-11-8: PECUNIARY INTEREST OF MEMBERS OR EMPLOYEES OF THE COMMISSION;
PROHIBITION; DISCLOSURE:
   (A)   Any member of the commission who owns or controls any interest direct
or indirect in any property included in any industrial development commission
project shall disclose the same in writing to the commission and such
disclosure shall be entered upon the minutes book of the commission.
   (B)   No member of the commission shall vote or act on any project in which
said member holds an interest.
   (C)   No employee of the commission shall acquire any interest, direct or
indirect, in any industrial development commission project or in any property
included or planned to be included in any industrial development commission
project.
   (D)   If the city council of the city determines that any commission member
has acquired an interest that is adverse to the best interests of the city, the
city council may require said member to divest himself of said property or
interest, or take what other steps are necessary to assure compliance with this
section.
   (E)   In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter or
in the event that a matter not covered by this chapter shall arise, the
provisions regarding conflicts of interest as set forth in 50 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 105/3 et seq., shall control. (Ord. 709, 2-5-1990)
2-11-9: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
The provisions of this chapter are severable and if any of its provisions or
any sentence, clause or paragraph shall be held unconstitutional by any court,
of competent jurisdiction, the decisions of such court shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions. (Ord. 709, 2-5-1990)
CHAPTER 12
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD
SECTION:
2-12-1: Establishment
2-12-2: Rules And Regulations
2-12-3: Rate Of Tax Or License
2-12-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
The Spring Valley Fire Department is hereby authorized and directed to
establish a Foreign Fire Insurance Board pursuant to the provisions of section
11-10-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code 1 . (Ord. 1651, 11-21-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-10-2.
2-12-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Spring Valley Fire Department is hereby authorized and directed to prepare
a set of rules and regulations to be adopted by the members of the Spring
Valley Fire Department to handle, administer and expend funds received by the
Spring Valley Fire Department pursuant to the Foreign Fire Insurance Fund.
(Ord. 1651, 11-21-2016)
2-12-3: RATE OF TAX OR LICENSE:
The City of Spring Valley hereby adopts the rate of the Foreign Fire Insurance
Tax or license to be the amount established pursuant to section 11-10-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code 1 . (Ord. 1651, 11-21-2016)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1.
TITLE 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING INSPECTOR
SECTION:
3-1-1: Appointments
3-1-2: Building Inspector Duties
3-1-3: Fire Marshal Duties
3-1-4: Building Inspector Qualifications
3-1-5: Fire Marshal Qualifications
3-1-6: Ex Officio Electrical Official
3-1-7: Ex Officio Housing Official
3-1-8: Ex Officio Building Official
3-1-9: Stop Order
3-1-10: Entry Powers
3-1-11: Penalty
3-1-12: Copies Of Permits To Assessors
3-1-13: Deputy Building Inspector
3-1-14: Commercial Building Inspection Program
3-1-15: Refuse Dumpsters For Construction Projects
3-1-1: APPOINTMENTS:
   (A)   Building Inspector: There is hereby created the position of building
inspector who shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and
consent of the Council.
   (B)   Fire Marshal: There is hereby created the position of Fire Marshal who
shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the
Council. (Ord. 1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-2: BUILDING INSPECTOR DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to see to the enforcement of all
ordinance provisions relating to building or zoning, to inspect all buildings
or structures being constructed, repaired or altered as frequently as may be
necessary to insure compliance with all Spring Valley City ordinances and
Building Codes adopted by the City of Spring Valley, and to discharge any other
duties assigned to the building inspector by the Mayor of the City of Spring
Valley with the consent of the Spring Valley City Council. The building
inspector shall perform the following duties which are intended to be examples
of, but not an exclusive list of the building inspector's duties: (Ord. 1738,
1-28-2019)
   (A)   Enforces City's zoning ordinance and all adopted Building Codes,
including Plumbing, Electrical, and Engineering Codes.
   (B)   Review all building and zoning requests in the City of Spring Valley.
   (C)   Respond to inquiries and confirm compliance for a proposed or existing
use of site.
   (D)   Responsible for issuing all building and demolition permits.
   (E)   Responsible for the enforcement of other City ordinances, such as
inspection of vacant buildings, inspection of residential rental property,
inspection of signs and inspection of demolition projects.
   (F)   Acts as a liaison to the City Engineer, Spring Valley Plan Commission,
Spring Valley Board of Zoning Appeals, and Spring Valley City Attorney.
   (G)   Prepares monthly and annual reports to City Council pertaining to
building activities that include number of permits issued, to whom they were
issued, the amount of fees collected and the estimated value of the project.
Prepares monthly reports to the City Council pertaining to building inspections
conducted by the building inspector which include the date of the inspection,
the owner of the property, the location of the property and any defects noted
during the inspection. Provides a monthly report to the City Council listing
all deficiency notifications issued by the building inspector, including the
name of the property owner to whom the deficiency notice was sent, the address
for the property and a description of the deficiency.
   (H)   Maintains a daily activity log for all fees associated with specific
types of building permits.
   (I)   Coordinates inspection services as needed.
   (J)   Reviews plan and document submittals required for building permits.
   (K)   Responsible for the review of the International Building Code,
International Mechanical Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas
Code, National Electric Code, International Energy Conservation Code, Illinois
State Plumbing Code, and Illinois Accessibility Code for the necessary
upgrades. Provides recommendation to the City Engineer, the Spring Valley Plan
Commission and the Spring Valley Board of Zoning Appeals, prior to Spring
Valley City Council approval.
   (L)   Performs various office duties including filing, record keeping,
report writing and data entry as it relates to the building inspector's duties.
   (M)   Handle all of the duties of the Zoning Administrator as defined in
subsection
14-10-2(B) of this Code.
   (N)   Is responsible for conducting all inspections required pursuant to the
Spring Valley, Illinois residential rental property nuisance prevention
ordinance. (Ord. 1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-3: FIRE MARSHAL DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal to perform responsible management,
technical and administrative work in developing, implementing and managing a
comprehensive fire prevention and loss management program. The position shall
be a part time position with compensation of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per
month. The Fire Marshal position is not under the jurisdiction of the Fire
Department. The Fire Marshal shall perform the following duties which are
intended to be examples of, but not an exhaustive list of, the Fire Marshal's
duties:
   (A)   Code interpretation, assistance to building inspector and City
Engineer as requested.
   (B)   Code review and recommendation:
      1.   Review and evaluate code updates and fire safety conditions, and
State Fire Marshal directives as they are disseminated, considering Federal,
State and local codes applicable to fire safety, and make recommendations to
policies, procedures and ordinances. Recommend changes to City codes that will
be affected, furnish information regarding code updates to City officials,
Building Inspector, City Attorney, Fire Chief and Fire Department Training
Officer.
      2.   Assist the Fire Department and other City departments with ISO
documentation when requested.
      3.   Maintain library of applicable code, and fire prevention and loss
management documentation as it pertains to the Fire Marshal position.
Participate in webinars updating various codes affecting building construction,
fire safety and fire suppression.
   (C)   Plan review for compliance with Fire Codes:
      1.   Perform comprehensive review of plan documents, and assist other
City departments when meeting with architects, engineers, contractors, other
building and development related persons to review and discuss construction
activities and City loss management programs for all development and remodeling
projects.
      2.   Conduct field inspections of construction projects related to fire
and life safety issues in conjunction with the building inspector and the City
Engineer.
      3.   Review and sign off on sprinkler system plans, and witness final
sprinkler system tests. Provide information, test results, location of system
components to the Fire Department.
      4.   When requested by the Fire Chief, review incident reports for
guidance in code review when a code violation or violations are involved in a
fire event.
   (D)   Other duties:
      1.   Assist with flow testing of water mains when requested for fire
flows required and building sprinkler applications in conjunction with the City
Engineer and the City Public Works Superintendent. Determine fire flow required
for new systems with sprinkler contractor and installer.
      2.   Attend safety seminars and hazard review meetings to obtain current
information as required. Subscribe to publications related to fire prevention
and safety of the public and fire responders.
      3.   Maintain log of activities and present to City Council on regular
basis.
      4.   Assist in training of other personnel in fire prevention and related
technical areas as related to Fire Marshal position.
      5.   Assist State Fire Marshal or Fire Chief, when requested, with items
including, but not limited to: determining cause of origin, cause and loss
value of fire incidents, collection of evidence and participate in prosecution
activities.
      6.   Provide code compliance information to contractors, job managers and
builders.
      7.   Assist Fire Department with building information and perform
preplans.
      8.   Provide special training when requested to first responders. (Ord.
1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-4: BUILDING INSPECTOR QUALIFICATIONS:
The building inspector shall have the following qualifications:
   (A)   Have knowledge of the basic principles and techniques of structural
building inspection, permit process and Building Codes.
   (B)   Have the ability to analyze and interpret building plans and
specifications for compliance with other applicable laws.
   (C)   Have the ability to apply codes and ordinances in making zoning and
building decision.
   (D)   Have the ability to work well with engineers, architects, contractors
and the general public.
   (E)   Possess an Associate's Degree in engineering science, construction
management, or a related trade school, or equivalent construction experience.
   (F)   Have experience with plumbing, electrical, framing, and foundation
inspections. (Ord. 1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-5: FIRE MARSHAL QUALIFICATIONS:
The Fire Marshal shall have knowledge of the principles, methods, and practices
of fire loss prevention management, applicable Federal, State and local codes,
Spring Valley ordinances and regulations. The Fire Marshal shall also have
knowledge of the mechanical, chemical, and related characteristics for a wide
variety of flammable and explosive materials and objects. The Fire Marshal
shall also have the following job related qualifications.
   (A)   Plan, organize, and participate in comprehensive fire prevention and
loss management programs.
   (B)   Develop, revise and assure compliance with fire loss management
policies and procedures.
   (C)   Maintain accurate and thorough records, files and reference materials.
   (D)   Read and interpret construction plans and specifications.
   (E)   Establish and maintain effective and cooperative working relationships
with various City departments, citizens and professional contacts.
   (F)   Supervise and train new personnel for the Fire Marshal position.
   (G)   The Fire Marshal shall possess any combination of equivalent education
and experience that could likely provide the required knowledge, skills and
abilities including, but not limited to:
      1.   Education: An Associate's Degree or equivalent in fire science or
closely related field is strongly recommended, but not required. In lieu of an
Associate's Degree or equivalent in fire science, the Fire Marshal shall have
sufficient professional experience in fire science through employment or
volunteer activities.
      2.   Experience: Five (5) years' experience involving suppression and
prevention activities and the inspection of structures for conformance to fire
safety standards and systems, including supervisory experience, and building
trade experience and affiliations.
      3.   Licenses, Certifications, Registrations:
         (a)   Licenses: Possession of a valid Illinois driver's license.
         (b)   Certificates: Certification as a State Fire Prevention Officer.
(Ord. 1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-6: EX OFFICIO ELECTRICAL OFFICIAL:
The building inspector shall act as electrical official and shall have all
powers and duties necessary for enforcement of the Electrical Code. (1972 Code;
amd. Ord. 1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-7: EX OFFICIO HOUSING OFFICIAL:
The building inspector shall act as housing official and shall have all powers
and duties necessary for enforcement of the Housing Code. (1972 Code; amd. Ord.
1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-8: EX OFFICIO BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The building inspector shall act as building official and have all powers and
duties necessary for enforcement of the Building Code. (1972 Code; amd. Ord.
1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-9: STOP ORDER:
The building inspector shall have the power to order all work stopped on
construction, alteration or repair of buildings in the City when such work is
being done in violation of any provision of any ordinance relating thereto or
in violation of the land development provisions of this Code. Work shall not be
resumed after the issuance of such an order except on the written permission of
the building inspector; provided, however, that if the stop order is an oral
one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within an hour. Such stop
order may be served by any policeman. (1972 Code; amd. Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008;
Ord. 1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-10: ENTRY POWERS:
The building inspector shall have the power to make or cause to be made an
entry into any building or premises where work of altering, repairing or
constructing of any building or structure is going on for the purpose of making
inspections at any reasonable hour. (1972 Code; amd. Ord. 1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-11: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall continue work in violation of a stop
order of the building inspector shall be fined not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each day on
which any work in violation of such stop order is done. (1972 Code; amd. Ord.
1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-12: COPIES OF PERMITS TO ASSESSORS:
In addition to all other duties the building inspector shall forward to the
Township Assessor and County Assessor a copy of each building permit issued
within fifteen (15) days of such issuance. Each such copy shall show the legal
description of the lot or area concerned, and the real estate index number, if
any. (1972 Code; amd. Ord. 1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-13: DEPUTY BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, may appoint a deputy
building inspector to assist the building inspector if necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of this Code. The deputy building inspector shall
have the same authority as the building inspector as set forth in this chapter.
(1972 Code; amd. Ord. 1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-14: COMMERCIAL BUILDING INSPECTION PROGRAM:
   (A)   The building inspector shall be required to conduct periodic
inspections of all commercial buildings and all buildings located within a
commercial district as defined under the Spring Valley Land Development Code in
order to verify that all buildings comply with the Spring Valley Building Code,
the Electrical Code, the Plumbing Code and the Housing Code. The inspections
called for under the provisions of this section shall be performed on a
periodic basis as determined by the building inspector. However, the
inspections called for under the provisions of this section shall be performed
not less frequently than once every two (2) years. At the conclusion of the
inspection, the building inspector shall notify the property owner, in writing,
of any violations of the Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code or
Housing Code disclosed by said inspection. The property owner or any other
individual or entity legally responsible for correcting any Building Code,
Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, or Housing Code violations shall have thirty
(30) days from the date of the building inspector's notice of code violations
to correct any code violations noted by the building inspector. (Ord. 1564, 3-
31-2014; amd. Ord. 1705, 11-20-2017)
   (B)   The building inspector shall provide the property owner with a written
notice notifying the property owner of the date and time when the building
inspector will conduct the inspection called for under the provisions of this
section. The building inspector shall provide this notice of the date and time
of the inspection to the property owner at least ten (10) days prior to the
date set for the inspection. If the property owner refuses to allow the
building inspector entry to the property in order for the building inspector to
complete the inspection called for under the provisions of this section, the
building inspector shall report the property owner's action to the City
Attorney and the City Attorney shall be directed to file a lawsuit in the
Circuit Court of Bureau County in order to obtain a court order authorizing the
building inspector to enter into the building and conduct the inspection called
for under this section.
   (C)   Any building owner or other individual or entity legally responsible
for correcting any code violations noted by the building inspector in his
written report who refuses to correct the code violations within the timetables
set forth in this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and said refusal
to correct the code violations shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. The
City Council may direct the City Attorney to file a lawsuit in the Circuit
Court of Bureau County seeking to compel the building owner or individual or
legal entity responsible for correcting the code violations to take whatever
action is necessary to correct the code violations and abate said nuisance.
(Ord. 821, 7-5-1994; amd. Ord. 1705, 11-20-2017)
3-1-15: REFUSE DUMPSTERS FOR CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS:
The building inspector shall have the authority to require contractors to
purchase a dumpster to dispose of construction debris on any construction
project within the corporate limits of the City of Spring Valley. The building
inspector shall have the discretion to either demand that a contractor purchase
a dumpster or waive the requirement that a contractor purchase a dumpster,
depending upon the following factors: a) the size of the construction project;
b) the anticipated debris to be generated in conjunction with the construction
project; c) the anticipated cost of the construction project; and d) assurances
from the contractor that construction debris will be disposed of by the
contractor in a manner in accordance with the rules promulgated by the State of
Illinois through the Environmental Protection Agency, and the ordinances
adopted by the City of Spring Valley. Any decision by the building inspector to
waive the requirement that a contractor purchase a dumpster must be in writing.
(Ord. 1705, 11-20-2017)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODE; MECHANICAL CODE; EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
3-2-1: Adoption
3-2-2: Establishment Of Office Of Building Official
3-2-3: Duties Of Building Official
3-2-4: Right Of Entry
3-2-5: Definitions
3-2-6: Fire Limits Established
3-2-7: Savings Clause
3-2-8: Validity
3-2-9: Penalties
3-2-10: Swimming Pool Fences
3-2-1: ADOPTION:
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the city of Spring Valley for the purpose
of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration,
removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of
buildings and structures, including permits and penalties, that certain
building code known as the international building code, latest edition,
including any amendments, deletions or additions thereto incorporated into said
international building code after the passage of the ordinance codified herein
or any revisions or subsequent modifications thereof made after the passage of
the ordinance codified herein. If the international building code or any other
code adopted by the city of Spring Valley allows for more than one option for
construction or design, the most restrictive option shall apply, unless
permission to deviate from the most restrictive option is granted to the
applicant by the Spring Valley city council, after review and recommendation by
the Spring Valley city engineer, the Spring Valley building inspector or the
Spring Valley fire chief, as appropriate.
   (B)   There is hereby adopted by the city of Spring Valley for the purpose
of establishing rules and regulations for mechanical equipment used in building
construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy,
location and maintenance, including permits and penalties, that certain
mechanical code known as the international mechanical code, latest edition,
including any amendments, deletions or additions thereto incorporated into said
international mechanical code after the passage of the ordinance codified
herein or any revisions or subsequent modifications thereof made after the
passage of the ordinance codified herein. If the international mechanical code
allows for more than one option for construction or design, the most
restrictive option shall apply, unless permission to deviate from the most
restrictive option is granted to the applicant by the Spring Valley city
council, after review and recommendation by the Spring Valley city engineer,
the Spring Valley building inspector or the Spring Valley fire chief, as
appropriate. (Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
   (C)   There is hereby adopted by the city of Spring Valley for the purpose
of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration,
removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of
buildings and structures, including permits and penalties, that certain
building code known as the 2012 international existing building code, latest
edition, including any amendments, deletions, or additions thereto incorporated
into said international existing building code after the passage of the
ordinance codified herein or any revisions or subsequent modifications thereof
made after the passage of the ordinance codified herein. If the 2012
international existing building code adopted by the city of Spring Valley
allows for more than one option for existing construction or existing design,
the most restrictive option shall apply, unless permission to deviate from the
most restrictive option is granted to the applicant by the Spring Valley city
council, after review and recommendation by the Spring Valley city engineer,
the Spring Valley building inspector or the Spring Valley fire chief as
appropriate. (Ord. 1562, 3-17-2014)
3-2-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF BUILDING OFFICIAL:
   (A)   The office of building official is hereby created and the executive
official in charge shall be known as the building official.
   (B)   The building official shall be appointed by the mayor of the city
subject to approval of the council. His appointment shall continue during good
behavior and satisfactory service. He shall not be removed from office except
for cause after full opportunity has been given him to be heard on specific
charges.
   (C)   During temporary absence or disability of the building official the
appointing authority shall designate an acting building official. (1972 Code)
3-2-3: DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL:
It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce all laws relating to
the construction, alteration, removal and demolition of buildings and
structures. (1972 Code)
3-2-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The building official, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper
identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or
premises at any reasonable hour. (1972 Code)
3-2-5: DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the building code, it
shall be held to mean the city of Spring Valley, Illinois.
   (B)   Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the building code,
it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city.
   (C)   Wherever the term "building official" is used in the building code, it
shall be held to mean the building inspector of the city of Spring Valley.
(1972 Code)
3-2-6: FIRE LIMITS ESTABLISHED:
The fire limits of the city are as heretofore defined in an ordinance of the
city adopted April 12, 1895, as amended, defining the fire limits of the city.
In addition thereto, all parts of the city zoned B1, downtown commercial
district; B2, community retail and service district; B3, professional services
district; and B4, general commercial district, are hereby designated to be the
fire limits of the city of Spring Valley. (Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
3-2-7: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
Nothing in this chapter or in the codes hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court, or any rights acquired,
or liability incurred, nor any cause or causes of action accrued or existing,
under any act or ordinance, repealed hereby. Nor shall any right or remedy of
any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. (1972 Code)
3-2-8: VALIDITY:
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter or of the codes
hereby adopted shall not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof. (1972
Code)
3-2-9: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the codes hereby adopted
or fail to comply therewith, or who violate or fail to comply with any order
made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate
or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who
shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the court of
competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each
and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The imposition of one penalty for
any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects
within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days
that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
The application of the foregoing penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (1972 Code)
3-2-10: SWIMMING POOL FENCES:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of all property owners to erect a fence around
their inground or aboveground swimming pools. The fence required by this
section shall be of sufficient size and construction material so as to prevent
a person from accidentally coming into contact with the swimming pool. At a
minimum, the fence shall be at least forty two inches (42") in height and
constructed of a material sufficient to prevent a person from accidentally
coming into contact with the swimming pool.
   (B)   Any resident of the city of Spring Valley owning an aboveground
swimming pool may obtain a waiver from the fence requirement contained herein,
if the owner of the aboveground swimming pool can demonstrate to the Spring
Valley building inspector that the size of the aboveground swimming pool and
location of the aboveground swimming pool makes it unnecessary to erect a fence
for the protection of the public. (Ord. 1273, 8-21-2006)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
3-3-1: Adoption Of Electrical Code
3-3-2: Establishment Of Office Of Electrical Official
3-3-3: Duties Of Electrical Official
3-3-4: Right Of Entry
3-3-5: Definition
3-3-6: Savings Clause
3-3-7: Validity
3-3-8: Penalties
3-3-9: Ground Rod Requirements For Residential Electric Service
3-3-1: ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the city of Spring Valley for the purpose of
safeguarding of persons and of buildings and their contents from hazards
arising from the use of electricity for light, heat, power, radio, signaling
and for other purposes, including permits and penalties, that certain
electrical code recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, being
particularly the NFPA, national electrical code, latest edition, including any
amendments, deletions or additions thereto incorporated into said NFPA,
national electrical code, after the passage of the ordinance codified herein or
any revisions or subsequent modifications thereof made after the passage of the
ordinance codified herein. If the NFPA, national electrical code, allows for
more than one option for construction or design, the most restrictive option
shall apply, unless permission to deviate from the most restrictive option is
granted to the applicant by the Spring Valley city council, after review and
recommendation by the Spring Valley city engineer, the Spring Valley building
inspector or the Spring Valley fire chief, as appropriate.
Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in the NFPA, national
electrical code, it shall be unlawful to use PVC (plastic conduit) for service
entrance installations running from the outside power meter to the main
electrical disconnect located within the building for the supply of electrical
power to any structure within the corporate limits of the city. The use of PVC
(plastic conduit) for conduit installed throughout the structure from the main
electrical disconnect to the various power outlets shall be as provided for in
the NFPA, national electrical code, latest edition. (Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
It shall be unlawful to use aluminum conductors for any branch or feeder
circuits on the load side of the main switchgear or on the load side of the
main panel board or distribution box. (Ord. 1440, 11-23-2009)
3-3-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF ELECTRICAL OFFICIAL:
The building inspector of the city shall be ex officio electrical official in
charge of enforcement of the code. During his temporary absence or disability,
the mayor shall designate an acting building inspector or ex officio electrical
official to enforce the code. (1972 Code)
3-3-3: DUTIES OF ELECTRICAL OFFICIAL:
It shall be the duty of the electrical official to enforce all laws relating to
the installation of electrical conductors and equipment as provided herein.
The electrical official of the city shall certify that the structure in
question has been constructed in accordance with the national electrical code
by placing a tag on the line located adjacent to the meter supplied by the
electrical utility outside the structure. The tag which the electrical official
places on the electric line shall authorize the public utility supplying
electric power to the structure that power can be supplied to the structure in
accordance with the national electrical code; failure by the property owner to
display such a tag on the electrical line shall prohibit the public utility
supplying electrical service to the structure from connecting the structure to
the main electrical lines of the public utility. (Ord. 759, 1-20-1992)
3-3-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The electrical inspector, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon
proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or
premises at any reasonable hour. (1972 Code)
3-3-5: DEFINITION:
Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the electrical code, it shall be
held to mean the city of Spring Valley, Illinois. (1972 Code)
3-3-6: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
Nothing in this chapter or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court, or any rights acquired,
or liability incurred, nor any cause or causes of action accrued or existing,
under any act or ordinance, repealed hereby. Nor shall any right or remedy of
any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. (1972 Code)
3-3-7: VALIDITY:
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter or of the code
hereby adopted shall not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof. (1972
Code)
3-3-8: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted
or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any
order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by the court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall
severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The imposition of
one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise
specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense. The application of the foregoing penalty shall
not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (1972
Code)
3-3-9: GROUND ROD REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL ELECTRIC SERVICE:
Pursuant to the authority granted to the City of Spring Valley by the National
Fire Protection Association, National Electrical Code, the City of Spring
Valley hereby elects to require two ground rods for all residential electrical
service connections within the corporate limits of the City of Spring Valley.
After the adoption of this section, neither the Spring Valley Building
Inspector nor the Spring Valley Electrical Inspector shall sign off on any
electrical inspection for residential electrical service which does not include
two ground rods as required by this chapter. (Ord. 1773, 2-24-2020)
CHAPTER 4
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
3-4-1: Adoption Of Plumbing Code
3-4-2: Plumbing Inspector
3-4-3: Duties Of Plumbing Official
3-4-4: Right Of Entry
3-4-5: Definition
3-4-6: Validity
3-4-7: Savings Clause
3-4-8: Penalties
3-4-1: ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the City of Spring Valley for the purposes of
establishing rules and regulations for control of fixtures, materials, design
and installation of plumbing systems, including permits and penalties, that
certain Plumbing Code known as the Illinois Plumbing Code, latest edition,
including any amendments, deletions or additions thereto incorporated into the
Illinois Plumbing Code after the passage of the ordinance codified herein or
any revisions or subsequent modifications thereof made after the passage of the
ordinance codified herein. If the Illinois Plumbing Code allows for more than
one option for construction or design, the most restrictive option shall apply,
unless permission to deviate from the most restrictive option is granted to the
applicant by the Spring Valley City Council, after review and recommendation by
the Spring Valley City Engineer, Spring Valley Building Inspector or the Spring
Valley Fire Chief, as appropriate. (Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
3-4-2: PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
There is hereby created the position of plumbing inspector who shall be
appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the Council. The
appointee must be a plumber licensed and in good standing in the State of
Illinois. The Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the Council shall
designate an ex officio plumbing inspector to act in the temporary absence or
disability of the plumbing inspector. The appointee must also be a plumber
licensed and in good standing in the State of Illinois. The City of Spring
Valley shall pay the plumbing inspector up to the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00)
for each inspection performed by the Spring Valley plumbing inspector. (Ord.
1665, 2-13-2017)
3-4-3: DUTIES OF PLUMBING OFFICIAL:
It shall be the duty of the plumbing official to enforce all laws relating to
the installation of plumbing systems as herein stated. (1972 Code)
3-4-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The plumbing official, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper
identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or
premises at any reasonable hour. (1972 Code)
3-4-5: DEFINITION:
Wherever the word "Municipality" is used in the Plumbing Code, it shall be held
to mean the City of Spring Valley, Illinois. (1972 Code)
3-4-6: VALIDITY:
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter or of the code
hereby adopted shall not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof. (1972
Code)
3-4-7: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
Nothing in this chapter or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court, or any rights acquired,
or liability incurred, nor any cause or causes of action accrued or existing,
under any act or ordinance, repealed hereby. Nor shall any right or remedy of
any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. (1972 Code)
3-4-8: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted
or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any
order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by the court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall
severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The imposition of
one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise
specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense. The application of the foregoing penalty shall
not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (1972
Code)
CHAPTER 5
HOUSING CODE
SECTION:
3-5-1: Adoption Of Housing Code
3-5-2: Establishment Of Housing Official
3-5-3: Duties Of Housing Official
3-5-4: Right Of Entry
3-5-5: Definitions
3-5-6: Savings Clause
3-5-7: Validity
3-5-8: Penalties
3-5-1: ADOPTION OF HOUSING CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the city of Spring Valley for the purpose of
protecting the public health, safety and welfare in buildings used for one- and
two-family dwelling purposes those certain housing codes known as the CABO one-
and two-family dwelling code, latest edition, and the international residential
code for one- and two-family dwellings, latest edition, including any
amendments, deletions or additions thereto incorporated into said CABO one- and
two-family dwelling code or the international residential code for one- and
two-family dwellings after the passage of the ordinance codified herein or any
revisions of this chapter. If the CABO one- and two-family dwelling code or the
international residential code for one- and two-family dwellings, allows for
more than one option for the construction or design of any structure, the most
restrictive option shall apply, unless permission to deviate from the most
restrictive option is granted to the applicant by the Spring Valley city
council, after review and recommendation by the Spring Valley city engineer,
Spring Valley building inspector or the Spring Valley fire chief, as
appropriate. (Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
3-5-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF HOUSING OFFICIAL:
The building inspector of the city shall be ex officio housing official in
charge of enforcement of the code. During his temporary absence or disability,
the mayor shall designate an acting building inspector or ex officio housing
official to enforce the code. (1972 Code)
3-5-3: DUTIES OF HOUSING OFFICIAL:
It shall be the duty of the housing official to enforce the provisions of the
housing code as herein provided. (1972 Code)
3-5-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The housing official, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper
identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or
premises at any reasonable hour. (1972 Code)
3-5-5: DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the housing code, it shall
be held to mean the city of Spring Valley, Illinois.
   (B)   Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the housing code,
it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city. (1972 Code)
3-5-6: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
Nothing in this chapter or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court, or any rights acquired,
or liability incurred, nor any cause or causes of action accrued or existing,
under any act or ordinance, repealed hereby. Nor shall any right or remedy of
any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. (1972 Code)
3-5-7: VALIDITY:
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter or of the code
hereby adopted shall not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof. (1972
Code)
3-5-8: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted
or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any
order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by the court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall
severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The imposition of
one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise
specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense. The application of the foregoing penalty shall
not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (1972
Code)
CHAPTER 6
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
3-6-1: House Mover's License; Permit
3-6-2: Application For License; Bond
3-6-3: Cash Deposit Required
3-6-4: Application For Permit
3-6-5: Issuance Of Permit
3-6-6: Wooden Buildings; Moving Within Fire Limits Prohibited
3-6-7: Notice To Utility Companies Required
3-6-8: Warning Lights Required After Sunset
3-6-9: Injury To Property
3-6-10: Indebtedness To City
3-6-1: HOUSE MOVER'S LICENSE; PERMIT:
In order to regulate the use of the streets and public places within the city
by persons desiring to move buildings and other structures thereon it is hereby
provided that no person shall move any building, house or other structure along
or upon the public streets, alleys, ways or places within the city without
first having obtained a license as a house mover as herein provided, and
without also receiving a permit to move such building or other structure as
herein provided. (1972 Code)
3-6-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; BOND:
Any person desiring a license as a house mover shall make application for such
license to the clerk, and make payment of an annual license fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) and shall furnish a bond to the city in the sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned as herein set forth, and after
approval of the bond by the council, the clerk shall issue to the applicant a
license as house mover expiring on May 1 next thereafter. The bond of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be conditioned among other things that the
applicant for such license will pay for any and all damage which he, in any of
his operations as a house mover, shall cause to any tree, pavement, street or
sidewalk, or any other city property whatsoever, whether inflicted by himself
or by his agents or employees, and further conditioned to save and keep
harmless the city from any and all suits, judgments, costs, liabilities or
expenses whatsoever which may in anywise accrue or be alleged against the city
in consequence of the granting of such license or permit and/or any operations
thereunder, and conditioned further, that the applicant will in all things
comply with the provisions of this code, applicable thereto. (1972 Code)
3-6-3: CASH DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
No house mover shall remove any building, house or other structure, along or
upon any public street, alley or place in the city, without first having
obtained from the council a permit to remove the particular building or
structure in question, under the regulations hereinafter provided, and without
first depositing with the clerk a cash deposit in an amount equal to the cost
of caring for, splicing, removing and replacing any wires, poles or cables,
pipes or other property of the city, the caring for, splicing, removing and
replacing of which is necessary to facilitate the operations of the house
mover. Such estimate of cost shall be made by the superintendent of public
works. The cost shall be paid out of the cash deposit and any amount unexpended
from such deposit shall be returned to the depositor. If any deficiency results
under the deposit, the depositor must make up the difference. (1972 Code)
3-6-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Before any permit shall be granted, the person desiring same shall make
application in writing to the council at the office of the clerk stating the
building proposed to be removed, where located, and the place to which it is
proposed to be moved. (1972 Code)
3-6-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The council, or someone designated by it, shall thereupon, if it sees fit,
issue a permit therefor, prescribing the route to be taken, and the maximum
time to be allowed for such removal, and any other conditions which to it shall
seem needful for the public good. The work of removal shall be done in such
manner as to meet the approval of the street commissioner. (1972 Code)
3-6-6: WOODEN BUILDINGS; MOVING WITHIN FIRE LIMITS PROHIBITED:
No wooden building, within or without the fire limits shall be moved to any
lot, or part of lot, located within the fire limits as defined by section
3-2-6 of this title. (1972 Code)
3-6-7: NOTICE TO UTILITY COMPANIES REQUIRED:
No building shall be allowed to be moved upon any street, alley or other public
place unless at least forty eight (48) hours' previous notice has been given to
any street railways, telephone or telegraph or electric light or power
companies whose right of way or wires or poles, the moving of the building will
interfere with. (1972 Code)
3-6-8: WARNING LIGHTS REQUIRED AFTER SUNSET:
Every person so moving a building hereunder, or who makes any sort of
excavation or piles any lumber or other material upon any of the public
streets, alleys or places within the city, shall in addition to the
requirements of the other provisions of this code, keep from sunset until dawn
a red light hung out upon or about such obstruction or excavation so as to give
ample warning thereof. (1972 Code)
3-6-9: INJURY TO PROPERTY:
No mover of any building shall be permitted to cut or injure any tree within
the city without the consent of the owner thereof, or if on city property,
without the consent of the street commissioner. (1972 Code)
3-6-10: INDEBTEDNESS TO CITY:
No permit to move any building or other structure shall be issued to any house
mover, nor shall the license of any house mover be renewed, in the event that
the house mover is in any way indebted to the city in any amount on account of
any expenses, costs, judgments, damages, liabilities or other indebtedness
whatsoever, occasioned or incurred by or on account of any of the operations of
the house mover upon or along the public streets, alleys, ways or places in the
city. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 7
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: Powers And Duties Of Building Inspector
3-7-3: Regulation Of Demolition Contractors
3-7-4: Regulation Of Property Owners
3-7-5: Fees And Permits; Nonresidential Demolition; Demolition Of Residential
Real Property With Value Greater Than Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars
3-7-6: Fees And Permits; Demolition Of Residential Real Property With Value
Less Than Twenty Five Thousand Dollars
3-7-7: Demolition Inspections
3-7-8: Nonresidential Demolition; Residential Demolition Where Value Of
Property Demolished Exceeds Twenty Five Thousand Dollars
3-7-9: Residential Demolition; Value Of Property Demolished Is Less Than Twenty
Five Thousand Dollars
3-7-10: Violations, Penalties
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The city of Spring Valley building inspector or his
authorized agent.
DEMOLITION: The removal, in whole or in part, of any structure or building, the
removal of demolition debris, or the installation of fill material and final
grading in connection with such removal.
DEMOLITION CONTRACTOR: Any person or firm engaged in the business of demolition
of buildings or structures by contract.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS: The removal of valuable materials, including but not
limited to, copper, wiring, plumbing fixtures, appliances, lumber, and other
recyclable or reusable components, from a building or structure. (Ord. 1587,
10-27-2014; amd. Ord. 1905, 11-16-2024)
3-7-2: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR:
In addition to the other powers and duties prescribed in this chapter, the
building inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours, or at any time
when an extreme danger exists, to enter any premises for which a demolition
permit has been issued or applied for to determine the progress of work or to
determine if a safety hazard exists. He shall have the authority to order the
discontinuation or modification of any demolition work when he determines that
a hazardous condition may result from continued work. He shall approve or
disapprove all applications for demolition permits. He shall approve all bonds
required under this chapter. He shall submit an accounting of all fees
collected to the city clerk. (Ord. 1587, 10-27-2014)
3-7-3: REGULATION OF DEMOLITION CONTRACTORS:
Prior to issuance of any demolition permit, a demolition contractor shall
provide the building inspector with the following:
   (A)   License And Permit Bond: A license and permit bond specifically
covering demolition work and conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, such bond to be in the amount of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00).
   (B)   Insurance: A certificate of liability insurance containing general
liability coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). If it would
be necessary for the demolition contractor to place any equipment for the
demolition and/or removal of demolition debris and/or installation of fill
material and/or final grading on public right of way, the city of Spring Valley
will be listed as an additional insured under the general liability policy.
(Ord. 1587, 10-27-2014)
3-7-4: REGULATION OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
Owners of real property may demolish their own buildings or structures.
However, the building inspector shall not issue a demolition permit until the
owner has provided the following:
   (A)   Bond: A cash bond equal to fifty cents ($0.50) per one square foot of
ground floor area of all buildings named in the application for a demolition
permit. Such bond shall be conditioned upon compliance with this chapter. Such
bond shall be canceled and all monies returned to the owner upon completion of
the demolition to the reasonable satisfaction of the building inspector.
   (B)   Entry Agreement: An agreement signed by the owner granting permission
to employees or agents of the city to enter the named property to complete all
work required under this chapter if such work is uncompleted on the date of
expiration of the demolition permit. Any expenses incurred by the city as a
result of such entry and work shall be deducted from the bond. (Ord. 1587, 10-
27-2014)
3-7-5: FEES AND PERMITS; NONRESIDENTIAL DEMOLITION; DEMOLITION OF RESIDENTIAL
REAL PROPERTY WITH VALUE GREATER THAN TWENTY-FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS:
   (A)   Permits Required - Demolition: It shall be unlawful for any person to
demolish any building or structure, or any structural part thereof, that is
over four hundred (400) square feet, or connected to electric, gas, water, or
sewer lines, or has one or more party walls, without having first obtained a
demolition permit from the building inspector. Application for a permit shall
be made on a form prescribed by the building inspector.
   (B)   Permits Required - Salvage: It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in the salvage operation-as defined in section
3-7-1  of this chapter-of any building or structure with a value greater than
ten thousand dollars, or any structural part thereof, that is over four hundred
(400) square feet, or connected to electric, gas, water, or sewer lines, or has
one or more party walls, without having first obtained a demolition permit from
the building inspector. Application for a permit shall be made on a form
prescribed by the building inspector. Salvage operations shall be accompanied
by a comprehensive demolition plan and appropriate financial safeguards as
salvage operations are not allowed absent plans to demolish or rehabilitate the
associated building.
   (C)   Expiration Of Permits: Permits for demolition shall expire sixty (60)
days after issuance. The building inspector may, upon good cause shown, extend
such date of expiration for a successive thirty (30) day period.
   (D)   Denial Of Permit: The building inspector may refuse to issue a
demolition permit when the requirements of this chapter are not met or where a
permit has already been issued for a specific property and no significant
progress has been made toward complete demolition. A permit may also be denied
when a salvage operation is not accompanied by a comprehensive demolition plan.
   (E)   Drawings Required: Applicants for a demolition permit shall provide
drawings indicating the height and location of buildings on the site, distance
from property lines and adjacent buildings, final grading, party walls,
protective canopies and such other information as may be reasonably requested
by the building inspector. The building inspector may, if he determines that
the safety of the persons or property will not be adversely affected, waive the
requirements of this subsection (E).
   (F)   Permit Fees: The building inspector shall collect fees for all
demolition permits according to the following schedule:
 
Estimated Cost            Fee
$1.00 to $500.00          $10.00
$500.01 to $2,000.00      $10.00 for first $500.00 plus $1.50 each additional
                          $100.00 or fraction of, to and including $2,000.00
$2,000.01 to $25,000.00   $32.50 for first $2,000.00 plus $6.00 each additional
                          $1,000.00 or fraction of, to and including $25,000.00
                          $170.00 for first $25,000.00 plus $4.50 each
$25,000.01 to $50,000.00  additional $1,000.00 or fraction of, to and including
                          $50,000.00
                          $283.00 for first $50,000.00 plus $3.00 each
$50,000.01 to $100,000.00 additional $1,000.00 or fraction of, to and including
                          $100,000.00
$100,000.01 and up        $433.00 for first $100,000.00 plus $2.50 each
                          additional $1,000.00 or fraction of
 
(Ord. 1587, 10-27-2014; amd. Ord. 1905, 11-16-2024)
3-7-6: FEES AND PERMITS; DEMOLITION OF RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY WITH VALUE
LESS THAN TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS:
   (A)   Permits Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to demolish any
building or structure, or any structural part thereof, that is over four
hundred (400) square feet, or connected to electric, gas, water, or sewer
lines, or has one or more party walls, without having first obtained a
demolition permit from the building inspector. Application for a permit shall
be made on a form prescribed by the building inspector.
   (B)   Expiration Of Permits: Permits for demolition shall expire sixty (60)
days after issuance. The building inspector may, upon good cause shown, extend
such date of expiration for a successive thirty (30) day period.
   (C)   Denial Of Permit: The building inspector may refuse to issue a
demolition permit when the requirements of this chapter are not met or where a
permit has already been issued for a specific property and no significant
progress has been made toward complete demolition.
   (D)   Drawings Required: Applicants for demolition permits for residential
real estate having a value of less than twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) shall provide drawings indicating the height and location of
buildings on the site, the distance from the property lines and adjacent
buildings, final grading, party walls, protective canopies and such other
information as may be reasonably requested by the building inspector. The
building inspector may, if he determines that the safety of the persons or
property will not be adversely affected by his decision, waive any of the
specific requirements of this subsection in those cases where strict compliance
with the requirements of this subsection would constitute an unnecessary
hardship on the applicant.
   (E)   Permit Fees: The building inspector shall collect a permit fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for all demolition permits for the demolition of
residential real property having a value of less than twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00). (Ord. 1587, 10-27-2014)
3-7-7: DEMOLITION INSPECTIONS:
   (A)   Inspections Required: The building inspector shall cause an inspection
to be made of all demolitions upon the completion of the work and such other
stages of the work as he may determine to be necessary.
   (B)   Notification For Inspections: The person carrying out a demolition
shall notify the building inspector that the site is ready for final
inspection. The building inspector shall cause an inspection to be made within
twenty four (24) hours of such notification, nonworking days excluded.
   (C)   Discontinuance Of Demolition For Safety Reasons: If, after inspection,
the building inspector finds continued demolition will create a hazard to the
public, he shall order the demolition discontinued and recommend a safer method
of demolition be used. (Ord. 1587, 10-27-2014)
3-7-8: NONRESIDENTIAL DEMOLITION; RESIDENTIAL DEMOLITION WHERE VALUE OF
PROPERTY DEMOLISHED EXCEEDS TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS:
   (A)   General: All demolition work shall be carried out in a safe and
workmanlike manner to minimize hazard to adjacent property and the public.
   (B)   Subterranean Walls, Floors, Footings: All subterranean walls, floors
and footings shall be removed.
   (C)   Fill Material: All depressions, cavities, cisterns or wells shall be
filled with approved granular material to within six inches (6") of final
grade.
   (D)   Site Restoration: The final grading shall be such that no depressions
or cavities exist and stormwater cannot stand on the demolition site. Six
inches (6") of earth shall be installed over any depression, cavity, cistern or
well filled with fill material. Backfill shall be placed in layers of
approximately nine inches (9") thickness and mechanically compacted. Mechanical
compaction against foundation walls that are common to adjacent buildings or
structures shall be completed in an approved manner. Finish grading shall be
mounded approximately twelve inches (12") above existing grade in the center of
the excavation unless the excavation abuts an existing building.
   (E)   Removal Of Debris: All debris resulting from demolition shall be
removed from the site where demolition occurs in a timely manner. In no event
shall debris be used for fill material. No wood, frozen materials, putrescibles
or demolition material shall be used for backfill.
   (F)   Barricades, Fencing And Canopies: Where necessary to protect public
health and safety, the building inspector may require the erection of fencing,
barricades or protective canopies around the perimeter of the demolition site.
   (G)   Working Hours: No demolition work shall be conducted between the hours
of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., unless previously
approved by the building inspector.
   (H)   Closing Of Streets: Streets, roadways and alleys adjacent to a
demolition site may be closed only after approval by the building inspector.
The building inspector shall, prior to approval of such closing, consult with
the fire chief, police chief and director of public works.
   (I)   Disconnection Of Utilities: It is the responsibility of the owner or
his agent to arrange the disconnection of all utilities to a demolition site
prior to demolition. All water, sewer and gas lines shall be properly capped
and sealed.
   (J)   Notice: Notice to adjoining owners must be given at least ten (10)
days prior to the beginning of the proposed demolition. Only when written
notice has been given by the applicant to the owners of adjoining lots, and to
the owners of wired or other facilities, of which the temporary removal is
necessitated by the proposed work, shall a permit be granted for the removal of
the building or structure. Said notice shall contain the address of the
structure to be demolished as well as the date demolition is scheduled to
begin. Said notice shall also include the demolition contractor's name,
address, and phone number.
   (K)   Party Walls: In the event the structure to be demolished has one or
more party walls, the applicant shall provide drawings sealed by a registered
architect or structural engineer indicating the measures to be taken to support
the adjacent structures after demolition. In the event adjacent structures do
not require additional support, the architect or engineer shall provide a
written statement stating such conclusion. The written consent of owners of
adjacent buildings to install necessary shoring or bracing shall be provided.
   (L)   State Permits: The applicant shall provide the building inspector with
a copy of all permits required by the state of Illinois and the Illinois
environmental protection agency for the demolition of the property, including,
but not by way of limitation, asbestos abatement permits, demolition permits
(if applicable), lead paint inspection permits, and any other permits or
regulations required by either the state of Illinois or the Illinois
environmental protection agency. (Ord. 1587, 10-27-2014)
3-7-9: RESIDENTIAL DEMOLITION; VALUE OF PROPERTY DEMOLISHED IS LESS THAN TWENTY
FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS:
   (A)   General: All demolition work shall be carried out in a safe and
workmanlike manner to minimize hazard to adjacent property and the public.
   (B)   Additional Requirements: As a condition of issuing a demolition
permit, the Spring Valley building inspector may include in the demolition
permit any of the requirements contained in section
3-7-8 of this chapter dealing with nonresidential demolition requirements and
demolition requirements for residential demolition wherein the value of the
property demolished exceeds twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) as the
building inspector reasonably determines is necessary given the scope of the
proposed demolition. (Ord. 1587, 10-27-2014)
3-7-10: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES:
   (A)   Violation Defined: It is a violation of this chapter for any person to
cause or allow demolition to occur on any property under his ownership or
control except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Penalty For Violation: Any person who violates, neglects or refuses to
comply with or who resists or opposes the enforcement of any provision of this
chapter or who shall proceed to engage in the demolition of any structure
without having first obtained a demolition permit therefor shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each day any violation of any provision of this chapter
shall continue.
   (C)   Penalty Does Not Excuse Violation: The imposition of a penalty
hereunder shall not excuse the violation nor shall it permit the continuance of
any such violation. (Ord. 1587, 10-27-2014)
CHAPTER 8
UNSAFE OR DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Dangerous Buildings Generally
3-8-2: Definition Of Dangerous Building
3-8-3: Deciding Upon Questions Arising Under Ordinance Notice To Remedy Unsafe
Condition Of Buildings; Failure To Obey Notice
3-8-4: Notice Of Unsafe Condition Of Buildings; Means Of Service
3-8-5: Lis Pendens
3-8-6: Placarding Of Building Or Structure
3-8-7: Demolition Lien, Personal Judgment
3-8-8: Nuisance, Penalty
3-8-1: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any
building or structure or part thereof in any unsafe or dangerous condition. The
word "building", as used in this chapter shall describe any walled or roofed
structure including mobile homes, commercial establishments, dwellings and any
accessory structures.
The superintendent of public works or his designee is hereby authorized to
demolish, repair or cause the demolition or repair of dangerous and unsafe
buildings, uncompleted buildings, or abandoned buildings within the territorial
limits of the city. (Ord. 657, 9-8-1987)
3-8-2: DEFINITION OF DANGEROUS BUILDING:
For the purpose of this chapter, any building or structure which has any of the
following defects or is in any of the conditions hereinafter described shall be
deemed a "dangerous building" and any conditions hereinafter described shall be
deemed unsafe:
   (A)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit
is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe
and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic for all persons housed or
assembled therein who would be required to or might use such door, aisle,
passageway, stairway or other means of exit;
   (B)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by wind, flood, fire or
by any other cause in such a manner that the structural strength or stability
thereof is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe and is less than
the minimum requirements of this chapter;
   (C)   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fail or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property;
   (D)   Whenever any portion thereof has settled to such an extent that walls
or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is
required in the case of new construction;
   (E)   Whenever any building or structure or any part thereof, because of
dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the
removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of
supporting such building or portion thereof, or for other reason, is likely to
partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or
underpinning is likely to fall or give away;
   (F)   Whenever for any reason whatsoever, the building or structure or any
portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used;
   (G)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind
or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an
attractive nuisance to children who might play in or about the building
structure to their danger;
   (H)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind
or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to afford a harbor
for vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons, or as to enable persons to resort
thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful or immoral acts;
   (I)   Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty
construction or arrangement is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation and is
likely to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living
within;
   (J)   Whenever a building or structure is infested with rodents, insects,
pests or other vermin, or is likely to cause sickness or disease when so
determined by the health officer of the city;
   (K)   Whenever any building shall become vacant, dilapidated or open at door
or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or
accessible to entrance by trespassers;
   (L)   Whenever any unoccupied building or structure is deemed a nuisance by
section
3-8-8 of this chapter and the structure or building has been secured by the
owner or his agents by covering up the windows and exits with lumber or
materials other than glazing material for a period of thirty (30) days or more,
thereby causing a blighting influence on a neighborhood. (Ord. 657, 9-8-1987)
3-8-3: DECIDING UPON QUESTIONS ARISING UNDER ORDINANCE NOTICE TO REMEDY UNSAFE
CONDITION OF BUILDINGS; FAILURE TO OBEY NOTICE:
The superintendent of public works or his designee shall have full power to
pass upon any question arising under the provisions of this chapter, subject to
the conditions, modifications and limitations contained in this chapter.
The superintendent of public works or his designee is hereby authorized to
demolish or repair or cause the demolition or repair of dangerous buildings or
uncompleted buildings or abandoned buildings within the territorial limits of
the city. (Ord. 657, 9-8-1987)
3-8-4: NOTICE OF UNSAFE CONDITION OF BUILDINGS; MEANS OF SERVICE:
When a building or structure within the city is found to be a "dangerous
building" or contains an unsafe condition, an inspector for the superintendent
of public works shall issue and serve a notice thereof upon all owners of
record or persons having an interest therein as shown by documents recorded in
the office of the Bureau County recorder of deeds and upon persons in apparent
possession of the premises.
The notice shall briefly and concisely specify the conditions and factors of
the building or structure which render it dangerous or unsafe. The notice shall
further specify that the owners make the building safe (by complete elimination
of any unsafe conditions) or commence demolition at owner's costs within
fifteen (15) days of said notice. The notice shall further specify that: a)
demolition shall commence no later than fifteen (15) days of said notice, and
b) a date for completion of demolition. The date for completion shall be
reasonably set in light of the nature of the building, weather conditions, and
other related factors. The fifteen (15) day time period shall commence upon
receipt of the notice.
The notice authorized by this section shall be served by either personal
service or by certified mail with return receipt. Personal service may be made
by either an inspector designated by the superintendent of public works or a
police officer of the city.
Where, upon diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of the owner or owners
of any such building, including the lienholders of record is not ascertainable,
notice mailed to the person or persons in whose name such real estate was last
assessed for general real estate taxes is sufficient notice under this section.
In the event the owner fails to comply with any time period set forth in the
notice, the corporation counsel is authorized to commence a civil action in the
circuit court of Bureau County seeking a court order authorizing demolition or
repair of the building or structure subject to the notice provided by this
section and to create the lien described in section
3-8-7 of this chapter. It shall not be a defense to this cause of action that
the building is boarded up or otherwise enclosed. It further shall not be
defense that the building is put in a safe condition during the pendency of the
civil action.
Joined as defendants in said cause shall be the owner of record and other
parties having an interest in the property as shown by documents recorded in
the office of the Bureau County recorder of deeds on the date of the filing of
the complaint for demolition. (Ord. 657, 9-8-1987)
3-8-5: LIS PENDENS:
Upon the commencement of the civil action set forth in section
3-8-4 of this chapter, a lis pendens designating the property upon which the
subject building is located shall be filed with the recorder of deeds. Failure
to file or the improper filing of the lis pendens does not, however, affect the
civil action for demolition. Any person obtaining or recording in said office
an interest in the property after such filing may become party to the civil
action only if he intervenes by order of the court. (Ord. 657, 9-8-1987)
3-8-6: PLACARDING OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE:
Whenever any dwelling or building has been designated a "dangerous building" or
contains unsafe conditions, an inspector designated by the superintendent of
public works shall placard the building indicating that the condition is
dangerous and unsafe. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, cause to
remove or cover up in any way any placard designating a building structure a
"dangerous building". Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be
punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 657, 9-8-1987)
3-8-7: DEMOLITION LIEN, PERSONAL JUDGMENT:
The cost of demolition, repair, engineering and related expenses, and legal
proceedings incurred by the city in enforcing the provisions of this chapter
shall be recoverable from the owner or owners of the real estate and is a lien
thereon, which lien shall be superior to all prior existing liens and
encumbrances, except taxes, provided, however, that within sixty (60) days
after completion of the demolition or repair, the corporation counsel shall
file a notice of lien for the cost and expense incurred by the city, in the
office of the recorder of deeds of Bureau County. Upon payment of said cost of
demolition by the owner or any person who has an interest in the property, the
lien shall be released by the corporation counsel.
The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case of mortgages or
mechanics' liens. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced by the
corporation counsel within three (3) years after the date of filing of notice
of lien.
If payment of the city's cost of demolition is not paid to the city within
fifteen (15) days of the filing of the notice of lien, the corporation counsel
may commence proceedings in the circuit court seeking a personal judgment from
the owner of the subject property at the time the complaint for demolition was
filed with the circuit clerk in the amount of said costs. The action authorized
by this paragraph shall be in addition, and without waiver of, any other
remedies. (Ord. 657, 9-8-1987)
3-8-8: NUISANCE, PENALTY:
Any unsafe, dilapidated and abandoned building, house, barn or other structure
situated within the limits of the city is, and the same is hereby declared to
be, a nuisance.
Any person maintaining a nuisance shall be punished by a fine of not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense, and each and every day that such nuisance remains unabated
shall constitute a new and separate offense. (Ord. 657, 9-8-1987)
CHAPTER 9
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY CODE
SECTION:
3-9-1: Purpose
3-9-2: Scope And Applicability
3-9-3: Definitions
3-9-4: Property Maintenance Requirements; Maintenance Required
3-9-5: Responsibilities Of Owners And Occupants
3-9-6: Minimum Standards For Basic Facilities
3-9-7: Minimum Standards For Light And Ventilation
3-9-8: Minimum Thermal Standards
3-9-9: General Requirements Relating To The Safe And Sanitary Maintenance Of
Parts Of Dwellings And Dwelling Units
3-9-10: Maximum Density, Minimum Space, Use And Location Requirements
3-9-11: Rules And Regulations
3-9-12: Inspections
3-9-13: Notice Of Violations
3-9-14: Designation Of Building As Unfit For Human Use
3-9-15: Designation Of Building As Dangerous And A Public Nuisance
3-9-16: Emergency Cases
3-9-17: Penalties
3-9-18: Appeals
3-9-19: Records
3-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the environment and the public
health, safety and welfare, and to prevent and control blight by establishing
regulations for the administration and enforcement procedures to the end that
buildings and real estate within the city are maintained in a safe and sanitary
condition, free of health, fire and safety hazards; including establishment of
minimum standards and requirements relating to the safe and sanitary
maintenance of said buildings and real estate; determination of the
responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants. The intent of this chapter
is not to regulate, alter or in any way affect the lifestyle, personal habits,
or domestic patterns of such owners, operators and occupants unrelated to the
public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-2: SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY:
Except where otherwise specified hereinafter, and as limited by the foregoing
statement of purpose, the provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to
the maintenance, use and occupancy of all buildings and structures, where
applicable, and shall apply uniformly to the alteration, repair, equipment, use
and occupancy and maintenance of all existing buildings and structures, within
the jurisdiction of the city. This chapter is not intended to make any other
code, ordinance, rule or resolution applicable which by its terms is not
applicable to the matters addressed herein. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURES: A detached building or structure in a
secondary or subordinate capacity from the main or principal building or
structure on the same premises.
APARTMENT: A dwelling unit having bathroom, kitchen facilities and sleeping
area.
APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY: That person within the governmental structure of the
corporate unit who is charged with the administration of the appropriate code.
APPROVED: Approved by the local and/or state authority having such
administrative authority.
ASHES: The residue from the burning of combustible materials.
ATTIC: Any story situated wholly or partly within the roof, and so designed,
arranged or built as to be used for business, storage, or habitation.
BASEMENT: A portion of a building located partly or wholly below grade and
having one-half (1/2) or more than one-half (1/2) of its clear floor to ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
BOARDING HOUSE: See definition of Rooming House.
BUILDING: A single fixed structure with walls, foundation and roof, such as a
house, factory, garage, apartment, etc.
BULK CONTAINER: Any metal garbage, rubbish, and/or refuse container having a
capacity of two (2) cubic yards or greater and which is equipped with fittings
for hydraulic and/or mechanical emptying, unloading and/or removal.
CELLAR: A portion of a building located partly or wholly below grade and having
one-half (1/2) or more than one-half (1/2) of its clear floor to ceiling height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CENTRAL HEATING SYSTEM: A single system supplying heat to one or more dwelling
units or more than one rooming unit.
CHIMNEY: A vertical shaft of reinforced concrete, or other approved
noncombustible, heat resisting material enclosing one or more flues, for the
purpose of removing products of combustion from solid, liquid or gaseous fuel.
DILAPIDATED: No longer adequate for the purpose or use for which it was
originally intended.
DORMITORY: A building or a group of rooms in a building used for institutional
living and sleeping purposes by four (4) or more persons.
DWELLING: Any enclosed space wholly or partly used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating, provided that "temporary housing" as
hereinafter defined shall not be classified as a dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a
single habitable unit with facilities used or intended to be used by a single
family for living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes.
EGRESS: An arrangement of exit facilities to assume a safe means of exit from
buildings.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The person who is the inspector for the property
maintenance and occupancy code enforcement of the city of Spring Valley, and
any other so assigned code enforcement inspector or their superiors. This
person may also be the building inspector or assistant building inspector of
the city of Spring Valley.
EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved
by the local or state authority having such administrative authority.
FAIR MARKET VALUE: A price at which both buyers and sellers are willing to do
business.
FAMILY: One or more individuals occupying a single dwelling unit; provided
that, unless all such individuals who are related by blood, marriage, legal
adoption or are foster children, no such family shall contain over four (4)
unrelated persons; and not more than two (2) guests or roomers whether
gratuitous or nongratuitous may also be housed. The term "family", as regards
the number of persons residing within a dwelling unit, shall be further
regulated by the necessary minimum requirement to the land development code of
the city of Spring Valley whenever such standards are more restrictive.
FLUSH WATER CLOSET: A toilet bowl which is flushed with water which has been
supplied under pressure and equipped with a water sealed trap above the floor
level.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, service and nonconsumption of food.
GRADE: The finished ground level adjacent to a required window.
HABITABLE ROOM: A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, kitchenettes and utility
rooms of less than fifty (50) square feet of floor space, foyers or
communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces and workshops,
hobby and recreation areas.
HEATED WATER: Water heated to a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty
degrees Fahrenheit (120°F) at the outlet.
HEATING DEVICE: All furnaces, unit heaters, domestic incinerators, cooking and
heating stoves and ranges, and other similar devices.
HOTEL/MOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts and lodging homes.
HOUSEHOLD: One or more individuals living together in a single dwelling unit
and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities. (See also
definition of Family.)
IMPERVIOUS TO WATER: A clean, smooth floor, without cracks or (as to floors)
holes, and made of terrazzo, ceramic, wood, asphalt or rubber tile, smooth
concrete, linoleum or other similar material that is completely sealed so as to
be water resistant.
INFESTATION: The presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents
or other pests.
KITCHEN: Any room used for the storage of foods, preparation of foods and
containing the following equipment: sink and/or other device for dishwashing,
stove, and other device for cooking, refrigerator or other device for cool
storage of food, cabinets and/or shelves for storage of equipment and utensils,
and counter or table for food preparation.
KITCHENETTE: A small kitchen or an alcove containing cooking facilities.
LAVATORY: A fixed washbowl equipped with plumbing. Kitchen sinks do not meet
this definition.
LEAD BASED PAINT: Any paint containing more lead than the level established by
the U.S. consumer product safety commission as being the "safe" level of lead
in residential paint and paint products.
LODGING HOUSE: See definition of Rooming House.
MULTIPLE DWELLING: Any single building or structure containing more than one
dwelling unit.
OCCUPANT: Any individual, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or
eating in, or having possession of, a dwelling unit or a rooming unit; except
that in dwelling units a guest shall not be considered an occupant.
OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care, control or management of a building,
or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered
for rent or other consideration.
ORDINARY SUMMER TEMPERATURES: An outside air temperature ten degrees Fahrenheit
(10°F) below the highest recorded temperature in the locality for the prior ten
(10) year period.
ORDINARY WINTER CONDITIONS: See subsection
3-9-8(A) of this chapter.
OWNER: Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
   (A)   Shall have legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or
   (B)   Shall have charge, care, or control of any premises, dwelling or
dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator,
manager, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus
representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of
this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the
same extent as if he were the owner.
PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY: The maximum number of individuals permitted to reside in
a dwelling unit, rooming unit or dormitory.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
cooperative or governmental agency.
PLUMBING: Includes all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas
pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes,
water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower
baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drain spouts, drains,
vents, and plumbing; any other similarly supplied fixtures, and the
installation thereof, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas
lines.
PREMISES: A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land or
plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling
structure, and includes any such building, accessory structure or other
structure thereon.
PRIVACY: The existence of conditions which will permit an individual or
individuals to carry out an activity without interruption or interference by
either the noise or sight of unwanted individuals.
PROPERLY CONNECTED: Connected in accordance with all applicable codes and
ordinances of the city of Spring Valley as from time to time in force;
provided, however, that the application of this definition shall not require
the alteration or replacement of any connection in good working order and not
constituting a hazard to life or health.
RAT HARBORAGE: Any condition or place where rats can live, nest, or seek
shelter.
RATPROOFING: A form of construction which will prevent the ingress or egress of
rats to or from a given space or building, or from gaining access to food,
water or harborage. It consists of the closing and keeping closed of every
opening in foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior walls, ground
or first floors, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings and other places
that may be reached and entered by rats by climbing, burrowing or other
methods, by the use of materials impervious to rat gnawing and other methods
approved by the appropriate authority.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solids (except body wastes)
including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals.
REFUSE CONTAINER: A watertight container that is constructed of metal, or other
durable material impervious to rodents, that is capable of being serviced
without creating unsanitary conditions or such other containers that have been
approved by the appropriate authority. Openings into the container such as
covers and doors shall be tightfitting.
ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling other than a hotel or motel or that part of any
dwelling containing one or more rooming units, and/or one or more dormitory
rooms in which persons either individually or as families are housed with or
without meals being provided.
ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used
or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not used for cooking
purposes.
RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; and
the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and
other combustible materials; paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery, and dust.
SAFETY: The condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which
may cause accidents, illness or disease.
SHORT TERM: A period of time of a short duration such as a visitor visiting for
a week, but not to exceed thirty (30) days.
SPACE HEATER: A self-contained heating appliance of either the convection type
or the radiant type and intended primarily to heat only a limited space or area
such as one room or two (2) adjoining rooms.
SUPPLIED: Paid for, furnished by, provided by, or under the control of the
owner, operator or agent.
TEMPORARY HOUSING: Any tent, trailer, mobile home or any other structure used
for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system on the
same premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
TENANT: A person, persons, copartnership, firm, or corporation occupying or
using a building premises or any part or parts thereof owned by another.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE: Any chemical product applied on the surface of or incorporated
into any structural or decorative material which constitutes a potential hazard
to human health at acute or chronic exposure levels.
VARIANCE: A difference between that which is required or specified and that
which is permitted. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994; amd. Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
3-9-4: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS; MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of real estate or any owner or operator of a
building to fail, refuse or neglect to maintain such real estate or building in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   General Maintenance Standards:
      1.   All buildings and real estate shall be maintained in good repair and
each part of a building shall perform the function for which such part was
designed or intended to be used.
      2.   Facilities, utilities and equipment, including, but not limited to,
chimneys and heating and ventilating equipment and facilities, which are part
of or used in or on a building and the real estate on which such building is
located shall be maintained in good repair and working order so that they
function safely and effectively without threat to health and safety. (Ord. 948,
11-1-1999)
      3.   There is hereby adopted by the city of Spring Valley for the purpose
of establishing for the maintenance of buildings and structures that certain
maintenance code recommended by the building officials and code administrators
being particularly the international property maintenance code, latest edition,
including any amendments, deletions or additions thereto incorporated into said
international property maintenance code after the passage of the ordinance
codified herein or any revisions or subsequent modifications thereof made after
the passage of the ordinance codified herein. If the international property
maintenance code allows for more than one option for construction or design,
the most restrictive option shall apply, unless permission to deviate from the
most restrictive option is granted to the applicant by the Spring Valley city
council, after review and recommendation by the Spring Valley city engineer or
the Spring Valley fire chief, as appropriate. (Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
   (B)   Specific Maintenance Standards:
      1.   Foundations, Exterior Walls And Roofs: Every foundation, exterior
wall and roof of every building shall be substantially weathertight,
watertight, and rodentproof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair;
shall be kept free of holes or breaks, and of loose or rotting boards, timbers,
bricks, stones and other structural material; and shall be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
      2.   Exterior Surfaces: All exterior surfaces of any building shall be
reasonably capable of withstanding the effects of the elements and decay. Any
exterior surface which is deteriorated, decaying, disintegrating or which has
lost its capability to reasonably withstand the effects of the elements shall
be repaired.
      3.   Windows And Exterior Doors: Every window, exterior door, basement or
cellar door and hatchway shall be generally weathertight and rodentproof; shall
be equipped with all appropriate hardware; shall be capable of being easily
opened unless designed to be fixed; and all windows, exterior doors and screens
shall be kept in good repair.
      4.   Stairways And Porches: Every inside and outside stairway and porch
and every appurtenance thereto shall be maintained in good state or repair and
free from rotting, loose or deteriorating supports, rails, floors and stairs so
as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that normal use may
cause to be placed thereon.
      5.   Accessory Structures: All garages, toolsheds and all other accessory
structures shall be kept in good repair so as not to be unsafe or a harborage
for rats and other rodents. Fences and roadside mailboxes shall be maintained
in good repair, solid and in the same condition required for other exterior
surfaces. If attached to the exterior of a building, a television antenna shall
be firmly and securely fastened to the building and shall be maintained in good
repair. No television antenna shall be attached to any tree located on public
property.
      6.   Insects And Rodents: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit
the accumulation of any lumber, boxes, barrels, logs, concrete, stone or
similar materials on any property within the city in such a way that may be
harborage for any rats. In the case of logs or wood, including logs or wood
stored for fireplace or stove use, the same shall not be placed closer than two
feet (2') from any property line, or be placed on the property so as to
encroach on any easement or impair, stop or disrupt any drainage swale. All
lumber, boxes, concrete, stone or similar materials shall only be stored in a
rear yard and said storage area shall constitute no more than five percent (5%)
of the required rear yard, be piled no higher than four feet (4') in height,
and be out of view from the street.
      7.   Vegetation: No real estate within the city shall have uncontrolled
growths of vegetation in violation of title 7, chapter 7 of this code. No dead
trees shall be allowed to remain on real estate within the city for more than
three (3) months.
      8.   Driveways And Walkways: Cement or asphalt driveways and parking
areas shall be maintained free of loose or broken material, cracks which are
safety hazards, and such driveways and parking areas shall be repaired as
necessary to avoid safety hazards. Stone driveways and parking areas shall be
repaired as necessary to avoid safety hazards. Stone driveways, walkways and
parking areas shall be maintained in forms designed to prevent the spread of
gravel to public ways, easements and adjoining private property.
      9.   Gutters, Downspout And Sump Pumps: All gutters and downspouts shall
be maintained free of debris which might prevent their proper functioning and
shall not be allowed to discharge in a manner which might create unnecessary
erosion. All gutters and downspouts shall be securely fastened to the building
which they serve.
      10.   Ratproofing: Every building and the property on which such
buildings are located shall be maintained in a rat free and ratproof condition.
      11.   Plumbing: Every plumbing fixture and all water and waste pipes
shall be properly installed and maintained in good and sanitary working
condition.
      12.   Ingress And Egress: The means to ingress to and egress from any
building including, but not limited to, hallways, corridors, stairs and
porches, shall be maintained in good repair and free from any obstructions.
      13.   Protective Railings: Any handrails, guardrails or other types of
protective railings required to be constructed or installed under any provision
of this code or which have otherwise been constructed and installed shall be
maintained in good repair. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
      14.   Storage Of Motor Vehicles: (Rep. by Ord. 1464, 6-7-2010)
      15.   Garbage And Debris Accumulation Prohibited: Accumulation of garbage
and debris which violates any provisions of this code is prohibited. (Ord. 823,
8-1-1994)
3-9-5: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS:
Every owner or operator of a building or real estate shall:
   (A)   Compliance With Duties: Comply with all duties imposed by this
chapter. Furthermore, no owner or operator shall let to another person any
building or real estate unless such building or real estate or both are clean,
sanitary, fit for human use and occupancy, and comply with all applicable
provisions of local, state and federal law.
   (B)   Shared Area And Facilities: Maintain in a clean and safe condition the
shared or public areas of a building and the real estate on which it is
located, including parkways, and maintain and repair any equipment or
facilities which said owner or operator supplies or is required to provide
under this chapter.
   (C)   Extermination: Prevent infestation of any building and exterminate any
insects, rodents or other pest in any building.
   (D)   Garbage And Rubbish Disposal: Supply and maintain facilities for the
temporary storage and disposal of garbage and rubbish as required by title 7,
chapter 4 of this code and provide for the collection of garbage and rubbish
from the premises in the manner provided in said chapter.
   (E)   Accumulation Of Debris And Storage Of Goods: No owner of a building or
real estate shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of rubbish, boxes,
lumber, scrap metal or any other materials in such a manner that such
accumulation may provide a rat harborage or fire hazard.
   (F)   Responsibility Of Occupants: Every occupant of a building or real
estate shall:
      1.   Maintenance: Maintain in a safe and sanitary condition that part of
a building or real estate or both which such occupant controls and be
responsible for misuse of common areas and facilities.
      2.   Garbage And Rubbish Disposal: Dispose of all garbage and rubbish in
a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in approved storage or disposal
facilities which are safe and sanitary.
      3.   Accumulation Of Litter, Debris And Storage Of Goods: No person shall
place on any real estate or in a building or on the real estate upon which such
building is located any material which causes a fire hazard or otherwise
endangers the life, health or safety of any person or constitutes a blighting
or deteriorating influence on the premises or neighborhood, nor place in
storage on the premises any furniture, equipment or material which harbors
insects, rodents or other pests or is conducive to infestation.
   (G)   Responsibilities Of Owners And Operators Of Hotels And Motels:
      1.   General Responsibilities: Every owner or operator of a hotel or
motel shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Additional Responsibilities: The owner or operator of every hotel or
motel shall be responsible for the following:
         (a)   The sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings and
for the maintenance of a sanitary condition in every part of the hotel or
motel.
         (b)   The extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
wherever found in the hotel or motel.
         (c)   The sanitary maintenance and extermination of the premises.
         (d)   The disposal of all garbage and rubbish by supplying each
rooming unit with facilities for storage and disposal of garbage and rubbish
and by providing for the general garbage and rubbish storage, disposal and
collection needs of the hotel or motel in accordance with the requirements of
title 7, chapter 4 of this code.
   (H)   Transfer Of Responsibility: A contract effective as between owner and
operator or operator and occupant or owner and occupant with regard to
compliance hereunder shall not relieve any person of the requirements imposed
by this chapter upon such person. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-6: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC FACILITIES:
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy and
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purposes of living, sleeping, cooking or
eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which
food may be prepared and/or cooked, which shall have adequate circulation area,
and which shall be equipped with the following:
      1.   A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a
water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which
provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water
under pressure, and which is properly connected to a building drain.
      2.   Cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking, and
cooking equipment and utensils and of food that does not under ordinary summer
temperatures require refrigeration for safekeeping; and a counter or table for
food preparation; said cabinets and/or shelves and counter or table shall be of
sound construction furnished with surfaces that are easily cleanable and that
will not impart any toxic or harmful effect to food.
      3.   A stove, or similar device, for cooking food, and a refrigerator, or
similar device, for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than forty
five degrees Fahrenheit (45°F) but more than thirty two degrees Fahrenheit
(32°F) under ordinary maximum summer temperatures, which are properly installed
with all necessary conditions for safe, sanitary and efficient operation;
provided that such stove, refrigerator, and/or similar devices need not be
installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied and when the occupant is
expected to provide same on occupancy, and that sufficient space and adequate
confections for the safe and efficient installation and operation of said
stove, refrigerator and/or similar devices are provided.
   (B)   Within every dwelling unit there shall be a nonhabitable room which
affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a flush
water closet in good working condition. Said flush water closet shall be
equipped with easily cleanable surfaces, be properly connected to a water
system that at all times provides an adequate amount of running water under
pressure to cause it to be operated properly, and shall be properly connected
to a building drain.
   (C)   Within every dwelling unit there shall be a lavatory sink. Said
lavatory sink may be in the same room as the flush water closet, or, if located
in another room, the lavatory sink shall be located in close proximity to the
door leading directly into the room in which said water closet is located. The
lavatory sink shall be in good working condition and properly connected to a
water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which
provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water
under pressure, and which is properly connected to a sewer system. Water inlets
for lavatory sinks shall be located above the overflow rim of these facilities.
   (D)   Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room which affords privacy
to a person within said room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower in
good working condition. Said bathtub or shower may be in the same rooms as the
flush water closet or in another room and shall be properly connected to a
water supply system, and which provides at all times an adequate amount of
heated and unheated water under pressure and which is connected to a sewer
system. Water inlets for bathtubs shall be located above the overflow rim of
these facilities.
   (E)   Every dwelling unit shall have such means of egress as is provided in
the building code of the city.
   (F)   Structurally sound handrails shall be provided on any steps containing
three (3) risers or more and more than three feet (3') higher than the adjacent
area shall have structurally sound protective guard or hand rails.
   (G)   Access to or egress from each dwelling unit shall be provided without
passing through any other dwelling unit. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-7: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT AND VENTILATION:
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the requirements of this section:
   (A)   Every habitable room shall conform with city codes as to light
standards according to building codes at the time of construction.
   (B)   Every habitable room shall conform to city codes as to ventilation
standards according to building codes at the time of construction.
      1.   When facilities for interior climate control (heating, cooling, and/
or humidity) are integral functions of structures containing dwelling units or
rooming units, such facilities shall be maintained and operated in a continuous
manner and in accordance with the designed capacity of the installed equipment.
During instances when the integral equipment is inoperative because of poor or
mechanical failure, alternative provisions for fresh air ventilation of each
dwelling or rooming unit shall be provided.
   (C)   Every bathroom and water closet compartment, and nonhabitable room
used for food preparation shall comply with the light and ventilation
requirement for habitable rooms contained herein. Notwithstanding any provision
to the contrary in section
3-9-6 of this chapter, no window area shall be required in any kitchen which
does not contain an eating area and which was constructed under an applicable
provision of the BOCA building code of the city, which code did not require a
window area.
   (D)   Where there is usable electric service readily available from power
lines which are not more than three hundred feet (300') away from a dwelling,
every dwelling unit and all public and common areas shall be supplied with
electric service, outlets and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall
be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to a
source of electric power in a manner prescribed by the ordinances, rules and
regulations of the city. The minimum capacity of such services and the minimum
number of outlets and fixtures shall be as follows:
      1.   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with at least one 15-ampere
circuit and such circuit shall not be shared with another dwelling unit.
      2.   Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) separate wall
type duplex electric convenience outlets or one such duplex convenience outlet
and one supplied wall or ceiling type electric light fixture. No duplex outlet
shall serve more than two (2) fixtures or appliances.
      3.   Temporary wiring or extension cords shall not be used as permanent
wiring.
      4.   Every nonhabitable room, including water closet compartments,
bathrooms, laundry rooms, and public halls shall contain at least one supplied
ceiling or wall type electric light fixture.
      5.   All electric lights in bathrooms shall be controlled by either a
wall switch or pull chain which are of such design as shall minimize the danger
of electrical shock, and such lights shall be installed and maintained in such
condition as to minimize the danger of electrical shock.
   (E)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling building
shall be adequately lighted by natural or artificial light at all times, so as
to provide in all parts thereof at least ten (10) foot-candles of light at the
tread of floor level. Every public hall and stairway in a structure containing
not more than two (2) dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located
light switches controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on
when needed instead of full time lighting. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-8: MINIMUM THERMAL STANDARDS:
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   Every dwelling shall have heating equipment and appurtenances which
are properly installed, and are maintained in safe and good working condition,
and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms
and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a
temperature of at least sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) under ordinary
winter condition, or at least eighty degrees Fahrenheit (80°F) above the
temperature recorded at the national weather service station at Peoria,
Illinois.
   (B)   No owner or occupant shall install, operate or use a heating device
including hot water heating units, which employs the combustion of carbonaceous
fuel, which is not vented to the outside of the structure in an approved
manner, and which is not supplied with sufficient air to continuously support
the combustion of the fuel. All heating devices shall be constructed,
installed, and operated in such a manner as to minimize accidental burns. (Ord.
823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-9: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO THE SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE OF
PARTS OF DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS:
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior and interior wall, ceiling,
inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance thereto, shall be
safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be
placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
   (B)   Every foundation, roof and exterior wall, door, skylight and window
shall be reasonably weathertight and shall be kept in sound condition and good
repair. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be
protected from the elements and decay by paint which is not lead based paint or
by other protective covering or treatment.
   (C)   Every premises shall be graded, drained, kept free of standing water,
and maintained in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
   (D)   If gutters, leaders and downspouts are provided, they shall be
maintained in good working condition as to provide proper drainage of
stormwater and not be allowed to discharge in a manner which would create
unnecessary erosion.
   (E)   Every dwelling, multiple dwelling, or accessory structure and the
premises on which located shall be maintained in a rat free condition.
      1.   All openings in the exterior walls, foundation, basements, ground or
first floors and roofs which have a one-half inch (1/2") diameter or more
opening shall be ratproofed in a city approved manner if they are within forty
eight inches (48") of the existing exterior ground level immediately below such
openings, or if they may be reached by rats from the ground by climbing
unguarded pipes, wires, cornices, stairs, roofs, and other items such as trees
or vines or by burrowing.
      2.   All windows located at or near ground level used or intended to be
used for ventilation, all other openings located at or near ground level, and
all exterior doorways which might provide an entry for rats, shall be supplied
with adequate screens or such other devices as will effectively prevent the
entrance of rats into the structure.
      3.   All sewers, pipes, drains or conduits and openings around such pipes
and conduits shall be constructed to prevent the ingress or egress of rats to
or from a building.
      4.   Interior floors of basements, cellars and other areas in contact
with the soil shall be ratproofed in an approved manner. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
      5.   Material stored outside the dwelling shall be stored in accordance
with the provisions of section
6-7-5 of this code. (Ord. 1577, 8-18-2014)
Any materials used for ratproofing shall be acceptable to the Bureau County
health department.
   (F)   All fences shall be maintained in good condition and shall not create
a harborage for rats. Wood materials, except decay resistant woods, shall be
protected against decay by use of paint which is not lead based paint or by
other preservative material. The permissible height and other characteristics
of all fences shall conform to the appropriate statutes, ordinances and
regulations of this city.
   (G)   Accessory structures present or provided by the owner, agent or tenant
occupant on the premises of a dwelling shall be structurally sound, and be
maintained in good repair and free of insects, rodents, and/or other pests, or
such structures shall be made weather resistant through the use of decay
resistant materials or the use of lead free paint or other preservatives.
   (H)   Every plumbing fixture and pipe, every chimney, flue and smoke pipe,
and every other facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is present in a
dwelling or which is required under this chapter, shall be maintained in
conformance with the appropriate statutes, ordinances, and regulations of the
city and the state.
   (I)   No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment, or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed or
shut off or discontinued for any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or
occupied by him; except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary
while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary
emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the appropriate
authority.
   (J)   All construction and materials, ways and means of egress, and
installation and use of equipment shall conform with the appropriate statutes,
ordinances, and regulations dealing with fire protection of the city. (Ord.
823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-10: MAXIMUM DENSITY, MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall occupy or let to be occupied any dwelling unit, for the purpose
of living therein, unless there is compliance with the requirements of this
section.
   (A)   Occupancy; Dwelling Units: The maximum occupancy of any dwelling unit
shall not exceed the number established in subsection (A)1 of this section, or,
alternatively, in subsection (A)2 of this section unless otherwise approved by
the city.
      1.   For the first occupant of a dwelling unit there shall be at least
two hundred (200) square feet of floor area and there shall be at least one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area for every additional occupant
thereof; the floor area to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room
area;
      2.   The total number of persons occupying the dwelling unit shall be
less than two (2) times the number of habitable rooms within the dwelling unit;
no more than one family, plus two (2) occupants unrelated to the family as
guests, roomers, or domestic employees shall occupy a dwelling unit.
   (B)   Bulk Storage Containers: Bulk storage containers which are used for
storage of garbage, refuse and/or other putrescible waste shall be placed on
concrete or asphalt platforms which are constructed to minimize spillage onto
the adjacent areas. These storage areas shall be screened on three (3) sides by
fencing of at least eighty percent (80%) opacity. All bulk storage containers
shall be equipped with lids. These bulk storage requirements shall be
applicable one year following the adoption of this chapter.
   (C)   Three Or More Dwelling Units: Every owner of a dwelling containing
three (3) or more dwelling units shall supply facilities or bulk refuse
containers for the sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and
garbage and shall be responsible for their removal.
   (D)   Total Capacity Of Containers: The total capacity of all provided
garbage and/or refuse cans and bulk storage containers shall be sufficient to
meet the needs of the occupants of the dwelling. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-11: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The enforcement officer is authorized to develop such written rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the proper interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the mayor and
city council for approval and no such rule or regulation shall be effective
without such approval. Such rules and regulations, upon approval of the mayor
and/or city council, shall be kept on file with the enforcement officer for
public examination. Such rules and regulations shall have the force and effect
of this chapter and shall continue in effect until revoked by the enforcement
officer with the approval of the mayor and city council. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-12: INSPECTIONS:
   (A)   Inspections Authorized: The enforcement officer is hereby authorized
to conduct inspections of buildings, accessory structures and the real estate
on which they are located to enforce the provisions of this chapter in response
to written complaints or whenever the enforcement officer has reason to believe
on good cause shown or personal knowledge that a specific provision of this
chapter is being violated; provided, however, that such inspections must be
made at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice to, and with the consent
of, the owner or operator and the occupant, except when an emergency requires
immediate action.
   (B)   Inspection Upon Warrant: Whenever the enforcement officer, after
presentation of proper credentials and request for authorization to inspect, is
refused access to any building or the premises thereof, the enforcement
officer, with the approval of the mayor, is authorized to petition any court of
competent jurisdiction for the issuance of a search warrant authorizing the
inspection of such building or the premises thereof for the purpose of making
such inspections as shall be necessary to the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter.
   (C)   Owner's Right Of Entry: Every occupant of a building or portion
thereof shall give the owner thereof, or its agent or employee, access to any
part of such building, or its premises, for the purpose of making such repairs
or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of
this chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Entry pursuant to this
subsection shall be made only at reasonable times and after reasonable notice
to the occupant unless an emergency requires immediate action. (Ord. 823, 8-1-
1994)
3-9-13: NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Notice Required: Whenever in the opinion of the enforcement officer
after an inspection of a building or real estate as provided herein any
violation of the provisions of this chapter is found to exist, the enforcement
officer shall, within ten (10) days after discovery thereof, serve written
notice of such alleged violation upon the owner, operator or occupant
responsible therefor.
   (B)   Method Of Service: Notice shall be given either by personal service or
by mailing a copy thereof to the alleged violator by certified mail, return
receipt requested, at his last known address or, in the event neither of these
is effective to actually notify the alleged violator, by posting a copy thereof
in a conspicuous place in or about the building containing the alleged
violation.
   (C)   Required Contents: Such notice may include more than one alleged
violation; shall demand compliance with this chapter; and shall specify a
period of time for compliance, which shall be such time as, in the opinion of
the enforcement officer, is reasonably required to effect changes necessary for
compliance, and no case less than thirty (30) days nor more than three hundred
sixty five (365) days.
   (D)   Permissible Contents: Such notice may contain an outline of remedial
action which if taken will affect compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and with any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. Any
outline of remedial action shall state that the city accepts no responsibility
for work performed in response to the outline.
   (E)   Effect Of Noncompliance: If any alleged violation, of which notice has
been given in conformity with this chapter, is not corrected or eliminated
within the time specified in such notice, then:
      1.   Violator Subject To Penalty: The responsible owner, operator or
occupant shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day such
violation exists after expiration of the time specified for correction in the
notice given pursuant to this section; and unless the city has granted an
extension as requested in writing by the responsible owner, operator or
occupant.
      2.   Designation Of Dwelling As Unfit For Human Use Or The Use Intended:
The building or portion thereof where the violation was found shall be subject
to designation as unfit for human use or the use intended in accordance with
the procedures set forth hereinafter; or
      3.   Designation Of Dwelling As Dangerous And A Public Nuisance: Where
the alleged violations are of such a nature or extent that, in the opinion of
the enforcement officer, they render all or any portion of the building unsafe
and dangerous to the life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of
the occupants or the residents of the city or where the building or any portion
thereof is uncompleted or has been abandoned, the enforcement officer, upon the
approval of the mayor, may declare and designate the building, or portion
thereof, as dangerous and a public nuisance in accordance with the procedures
set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994; amd. Ord. 1921, 8-4-2025)
3-9-14: DESIGNATION OF BUILDING AS UNFIT FOR HUMAN USE:
Whenever any building or portion thereof is designated as unfit for the human
use of the use intended under the provisions of this section, the enforcement
officer shall carry out such designation in compliance with the following
procedures:
   (A)   Notice And Placarding: The enforcement officer shall serve notice of
such designation of the building or portion thereof upon the owner, operator
and occupant thereof. Service shall be in person, or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and by posting of a placard at each entrance of the affected
building. Where the identity or whereabouts of the owner or lienholder cannot
be ascertained, notice mailed to the person or persons in whose name the
premises were last assessed shall be sufficient notice.
   (B)   Contents: The notices and placards required by subsection (A) of this
section shall state that the affected building or portion thereof is by such
notice or placard declared to be unfit for human use or the use intended in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; shall state the specific
uncorrected violations of this chapter leading to such designation; and shall
order the affected building or portion thereof to be vacated within a specific
reasonable period of time as determined by the enforcement officer, which may
be immediately where conditions exist presenting immediate hazards to human
life, health or safety. Such notices and placards shall further state the right
of any aggrieved person to file an appeal pursuant to section
3-9-18 of this chapter within thirty (30) days of the date of the receipt of
such notice.
   (C)   Defacing Or Removing Placard: No person shall deface or remove the
placard required by subsection (A) of this section from any building which has
been designated as unfit for human use or the use intended and placarded as
such, except as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   Effect Of Designation Of Building As Unfit For Human Use Or The Use
Intended:
      1.   Vacation Required: Any building or portion thereof designated as
unfit for human use or the use intended shall be vacated within the time
specified by the enforcement officer pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
      2.   Conditions For Resumption Of Human Use Or The Use Intended: No
building or portion thereof which has been designated as unfit for human use or
the use intended in accordance with this section shall again be used for human
use or the use intended until written approval is secured from the city, and
the placard so designating it is removed by the enforcement officer, who shall
remove such placard only when the defects upon which the designation was based
have been eliminated, and after the building or portion thereof has been
inspected and found to comply in all respects with the requirements of this
chapter; or unless the removal of the placard is so ordered by the city
council. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-15: DESIGNATION OF BUILDING AS DANGEROUS AND A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Whenever any building or any portion thereof is designated as dangerous and a
public nuisance under the provisions of this section, the enforcement officer
shall carry out such designation in compliance with the following procedures:
   (A)   Notice And Placarding: The enforcement officer shall serve notice of
such designation or portion thereof upon the owner, operator, occupant and
lienholders of record. Service shall be in person or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and by posting a placard at each entrance of the affected
building. Where the identity or whereabouts of the owner or lienholder cannot
be ascertained, notice mailed to the person or persons in whose name the
premises were last assessed shall be sufficient notice.
   (B)   Contents: The notices and placards required by subsection (A) of this
section shall state that the affected building, or portion thereof, is by such
notice or placard declared to be dangerous and a public nuisance in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter; shall state the specific alleged
uncorrected violations of this chapter deemed sufficient to justify such
designation; and shall further state that such designation may result in an
order for demolition. Such notice shall require the party to appear before the
mayor or his designated agent at a hearing to be held at a specified place and
time, not less than ten (10) days following the date of the notice, to show
cause why the designated building, or portion thereof, should not be vacated
and repaired or demolished in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Defacing Or Removing Placard: No person shall deface or remove the
placard required by subsection (A) of this section from any building, or
portion thereof, which has been designated as dangerous and a public nuisance,
except as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   Hearings And Findings: At the appointed time and place, the mayor or
his designated agent shall hear such testimony as the interested parties shall
offer relative to the designated building, or portion thereof, and shall, based
on such testimony and investigation, make written findings of fact as to
whether the building is properly designated as dangerous and a public nuisance.
   (E)   Effect Of Designation Of Building As Dangerous And A Public Nuisance:
      1.   Order: Upon a finding pursuant to this section that the building, or
portion thereof, has been properly designated as dangerous and a public
nuisance, the mayor or his designated agent shall issue an order to the owner,
operator, occupant and lienholders of record, commanding the owner to vacate
and repair or demolish the building, or portion thereof; authorizing any
lienholder of record to demolish such building, or portion thereof, at their
own risk to prevent the attachment of a city lien, as provided in subsection
(D) of this section; and shall authorize any person so notified to vacate or
repair such building, or part thereof.
      2.   Petition To Circuit Court: Unless the designated building, or
portion thereof, shall have been vacated and the repair or demolition thereof
commenced within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of an order pursuant to
subsection (A) of this section, the mayor and city council of the city may
petition the circuit court of the county in which the premises are located,
pursuant to the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-1 for an
order requiring such vacation and authorizing such demolition or repair.
      3.   Repair Or Demolition By City: Upon receipt of an order of court
authorizing such action, the mayor shall cause the designated building, or
portion thereof, to be repaired or demolished, as the facts may warrant, by the
city. Provided, however, that where the mayor finds it to be in the best
interest of the city and its residents, the mayor shall notify the city council
and request them to take all actions necessary to compel repair or demolition
by the owner, including the application for an injunction pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-2.
      4.   Lien For Repairs Or Demolition: The costs of any vacation, repair or
demolition undertaken pursuant to this chapter by the city, or any lienholder
of record, shall be recoverable from the owner of the premises and shall be a
lien upon such premises, as provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-
1 and 11-31-2.
      5.   Conditions For Resumption Of Use: No building, or portion thereof,
which has been designated as dangerous and a public nuisance in accordance with
this section shall again be used for any purpose until and unless written
approval is secured from the mayor, and the placard so designating it is
removed by the enforcement officer, who shall remove such placard only when the
defects upon which the designation was based have been eliminated, and after
the building, or portion thereof, has been inspected and found to comply in all
respects with the requirements of this chapter; or unless the removal of the
placard is so ordered by the city council. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-16: EMERGENCY CASES:
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life
or safety of any person unless a building, or portion thereof, is immediately
repaired or demolished, the mayor may request the city council to waive all the
foregoing provisions of this chapter and to proceed directly to secure a
demolition order according to the procedures of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-31-1 and the mayor and city council may, at their discretion, so proceed.
(Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-17: PENALTIES:
Imposition of penalty no bar to legal action: The imposition of any penalty
pursuant to this section shall not preclude the city from instituting an
appropriate action or proceeding in a court of proper jurisdiction to prevent
an unlawful repair or maintenance; to restrain, correct or abate a violation;
to prevent the occupancy of a building; to require compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations, or the orders and determinations of the mayor or the city council.
(Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-18: APPEALS:
Appeals may be made in writing to the mayor.
   (A)   Scope Of Appeal: An appeal may be taken from any decision of the
enforcement officer, made pursuant to the authority conferred by this chapter,
which finds a violation of any provision of this chapter; designates any
building or portion thereof as unfit for human use or the use intended or
dangerous and a public nuisance; orders the vacation, repair or demolition of
any building or portion thereof; refuses to authorize the resumption of human
use in any building or portion thereof; interprets this chapter; or which in
any other manner adversely affects an owner, operator or occupant of a building
or portion thereof subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Persons Entitled To Appeal: Any person aggrieved by a decision within
the scope of subsection (A) of this section may appeal from such decision.
   (C)   Time For Appeal: An appeal shall be commenced within ten (10) days of
the date of the receipt of notice of the decision appealed from. Appeals not
commenced within such time shall be deemed waived.
   (D)   Commencement Of Appeal: An appeal under this section shall be
commenced by filing with the mayor a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The enforcement officer shall forthwith transmit to the mayor all of
the papers constituting the records upon which the decision from which appeal
has been taken was made. The notice of appeal and the appeal itself shall be
filed in such number of copies, be in such form, and contain such information
as the mayor may provide from time to time by general rule.
   (E)   Stay Pending Appeal: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the decision appealed from and all duties imposed thereby,
unless the enforcement officer certifies to the mayor, after the notice of
appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would, in his opinion, cause immediate hazards to human life, health or
safety; in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the city council or by a court of
record upon application following notice to the mayor and upon due cause shown.
Any stay in effect pursuant to this subsection shall continue until a decision
on the appeal is rendered pursuant to subsection (F) of this section.
   (F)   Action On Appeal:
      1.   The mayor or his designated agent shall set a reasonable time and
place for a public hearing on the appeal, shall give due notice thereof in
writing to the parties having a known interest therein and shall render a
written decision within ten (10) days after the date of the public hearing.
      2.   If the person filing the appeal under the provisions of this section
is not in agreement with the written recommendation rendered by the mayor, they
may appeal his decision to the city council public health and safety committee
within ten (10) days after receipt of the mayor's decision. The chairman of the
public health and safety committee shall select a reasonable time and place for
a public hearing on the appeal. The public health and safety committee shall
recommend to the city council to reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may
modify the decision from which the appeal was taken, and to the end the city
council shall have all the powers of the mayor and code enforcement officer
with respect to such decision. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
3-9-19: RECORDS:
The enforcement officer shall maintain a record of the following:
   (A)   Each and every written complaint received by or referred to the
enforcement officer of any alleged violation of this chapter; and
   (B)   Any investigations undertaken or directed by the mayor and any and all
reports or other documents related to such investigation; and
   (C)   Any and all warrants and notices related to the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 823, 8-1-1994)
CHAPTER 10
BUILDING PERMIT FEES AND INSPECTIONS
SECTION:
3-10-1: Permit Fees
3-10-2: Filing Fees
3-10-3: Preliminary Plat Approval
3-10-4: Plan Review Fee
3-10-5: Submissions To Building Inspector
3-10-6: Notice To The Building Inspector
3-10-7: Commercial Or Industrial Construction
3-10-8: Annual Registration For Contractors
3-10-9: Violation; Penalty
3-10-1: PERMIT FEES:
   (A)   All applicants for building permits for new construction in the city
of Spring Valley shall be charged a building permit fee calculated at the rate
of thirty cents ($0.30) per square foot for all new construction up to five
thousand (5,000) square feet, and at the rate of fifteen cents ($0.15) per
square foot for all construction between five thousand one (5,001) and one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet. Any applicant for a building permit for
new construction in the city of Spring Valley in excess of one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet shall be charged a building permit fee in an amount to be
negotiated between the city of Spring Valley and the developer, builder or
owner which shall not be less than the fees set forth in this chapter for the
first one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of construction, but which
would be subject to negotiations for any additional fees for a construction
project greater than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.
   (B)   All applicants for a building permit for new construction of an
accessory building up to one hundred fifty (150) square feet, driveway paving,
swimming pools or demolition shall be charged a flat rate of twenty dollars
($20.00) per building permit.
   (C)   All applicants for building permit for the erection of a fence in the
city of Spring Valley shall be charged a building permit fee calculated at the
rate of fifteen cents ($0.15) per linear foot of fence with a minimum building
permit fee of twenty dollars ($20.00).
   (D)   All applicants for building permits for new sign construction in the
city of Spring Valley shall be charged a building permit fee of twenty dollars
($20.00) per sign.
   (E)   All applicants for building permits for a structural alteration adding
square footage to an existing structure in the city of Spring Valley shall be
charged a building permit fee calculated in the same manner as the fees for new
construction, subject to the requirement that any building permit issued for a
structural alteration shall have a minimum fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
   (F)   All applicants for building permits for the installation of
residential solar energy systems shall be subject to both an electrical
inspection by a qualified electrical inspector chosen by the City of Spring
Valley and a structural inspection by the Spring Valley building inspector
after the residential solar energy system has been installed to ensure its
proper installation. The home owner shall pay a fee of two hundred fifty
($250.00) dollars to the City of Spring Valley to defray the cost of these
inspections. The electrical inspector shall review the residential solar energy
project to ensure the following requirements have been completed in accordance
with all applicable provisions of the National Electric Code:
      1.   Electrical wiring meets the national code and it is installed in a
professional manner;
      2.   All solar energy devices are Underwriter Laboratory approved;
      3.   Installation of the residential solar energy system follows all
manufacturer's guidelines and recommendations;
      4.   The installation of the residential solar energy system has been
completed by a qualified installer;
      5.   The homeowner has reported the installation of the residential solar
energy system to the utility supplying electrical power to the site; and
      6.   The homeowner has reported the installation of the residential solar
energy system to the fire department having fire jurisdiction over the site and
notified the fire department of the disconnect locations for the residential
solar energy system.
      7.   Any homeowner using batteries to store solar energy for future
consumption must provide for proper ventilation and comply with all
installation and maintenance provisions of the battery manufacturer.
(Ord. 1370, 3-3-2008; amd. Ord. 1766, 10-21-2019)
3-10-2: FILING FEES:
   (A)   A developer requesting approval of a preliminary plat for a new
subdivision shall pay a filing fee in an amount equal to five dollars ($5.00)
per lot for a subdivision containing fifty (50) or fewer lots with a minimum
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and any subdivision of more than fifty
(50) lots shall pay a charge of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus a
charge of three dollars ($3.00) per lot for each lot in excess of fifty (50)
lots.
   (B)   In addition to the filing fee set forth in the immediately preceding
subsection, the developer submitting a preliminary subdivision plat to the city
of Spring Valley shall also be responsible for paying the rate per hour
approved by the city of Spring Valley for payment to the city engineer for any
work performed by the city engineer in reviewing the preliminary plat of
subdivision. (Ord. 1370, 3-3-2008)
3-10-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL:
All preliminary plats of subdivision submitted to the city of Spring Valley for
approval must contain a certification by a licensed engineer indicating that
the preliminary plat is in compliance with the provisions of the Spring Valley,
Illinois, land development code. For resubdivisions of adjoining lots where no
new roads, utilities or easements are required, the provision for engineering
certification contained in this chapter can be waived by recommendation of the
Spring Valley planning commission and approval of the recommendation by the
Spring Valley city council. (Ord. 1370, 3-3-2008)
3-10-4: PLAN REVIEW FEE:
A developer seeking approval of a final plat of subdivision must pay to the
city of Spring Valley a plan review fee based upon the following percentages of
total construction costs (which shall consist of, but not exclusively limited
to, curb and gutters, sidewalks, pavements, sanitary sewer system, storm sewer
system, water distribution system, stormwater detention facilities, parkway
trees, landscaping, street lighting, plus soil erosion control measures) as
estimated by the city engineer for the city of Spring Valley and approved by
the city of Spring Valley planning commission in the amounts as follows: a) one
percent (1%) of the construction cost for the first fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) of construction costs; b) three-fourths of one percent (0.75%) of
the next two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) of construction costs
between fifty thousand one dollars ($50,001.00) and two hundred fifty thousand
dollars ($250,000.00); and c) one-half of one percent (0.5%) of construction
costs over two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00).
These fees shall be paid at the time the developer requests a permit
application or requests a plan commission hearing whichever occurs first and
shall be placed by the city clerk into an escrow account to cover plan review
costs. Upon completion of review, the city engineer shall present a summary of
charges to the city and at which time funds shall be withdrawn from the escrow
account and placed in the general account of the city for payment of plan
review charges. Any funds remaining in escrow after review shall be returned to
the applicant. (Ord. 1447, 2-15-2010)
3-10-5: SUBMISSIONS TO BUILDING INSPECTOR:
All property owners or contractors applying for a building permit for new
residential construction in the city of Spring Valley shall be required to
submit to the Spring Valley building inspector, prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, a certification from the general contractor that the
home has been built in accordance with all construction codes adopted by the
city of Spring Valley. If the general contractor hires subcontractors to
perform any work for the general contractor, the general contractor must also
provide a certificate from any carpentry subcontractor, concrete subcontractor,
drywall subcontractor, EFS, drivit and plastering subcontractor, electrical
subcontractor, excavation subcontractor, plumbing subcontractor, HVAC
subcontractor, masonry subcontractor, sewer and drainage subcontractor,
swimming pool or hot tub subcontractor, demolition subcontractor and/or
wrecking subcontractor certifying that the subcontractor has performed its work
in accordance with all applicable building codes adopted by the city of Spring
Valley. Failure to submit the certifications required by this chapter may
result in the denial of a certificate of occupancy by the city of Spring
Valley. (Ord. 1370, 3-3-2008)
3-10-6: NOTICE TO THE BUILDING INSPECTOR:
In addition to the contractor and subcontractor certificates of compliance
required by the immediately preceding section of this chapter, the owner or
general contractor for any new residential construction project within the
corporate limits of the city of Spring Valley must provide at least forty eight
(48) hours' notice to the Spring Valley plumbing inspector so as to allow the
plumbing inspector to review the plumbing work leading into the basement of the
structure prior to the pouring of the basement or floor slab and prior to
covering the rough-in plumbing construction with drywall or plaster. The owner
or general contractor shall also provide at least forty eight (48) hours'
notice to the Spring Valley building inspector so as to allow the inspector to
review the work at the following milestones: a) the structural framing,
electrical and HVAC rough-in construction prior to covering the construction
with drywall or plaster; and b) a final inspection upon completion of
construction. The Spring Valley building inspector shall obtain written
confirmation from the appropriate contractor, subcontractor and/or tradesman at
each inspection verifying that the work to date has been performed in
compliance with all building codes adopted by the city of Spring Valley. (Ord.
1448, 2-15-2010)
3-10-7: COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   All new commercial or industrial construction must include, as part of
the application for a building permit, design plans certified by a licensed
architect and/or professional engineer as appropriate indicating that the
commercial or industrial construction complies with all applicable building
codes adopted by the city of Spring Valley.
   (B)   In addition to the inspections required by this chapter for any new
residential construction, all new commercial and industrial construction in the
city of Spring Valley will be subject to the same minimum number of inspections
as required for residential construction and, if deemed necessary by the city
engineer for the city of Spring Valley, additional inspections to ensure
compliance with the architectural plans submitted to the city of Spring Valley
as part of the building permit application. Additionally, all certifications
required by this chapter from the general contractor and the subcontractors for
residential construction shall be required from the general contractor and
subcontractors for all new commercial and industrial construction. (Ord. 1370,
3-3-2008)
   (C)   For new commercial or industrial construction, the owner, developer,
general contractor, or construction manager applying for the building permit
shall pay in addition to permit fees and other fees that may be charged, a fee
of six hundred dollars ($600.00) for the building inspections required by this
chapter for new commercial or industrial construction.
   (D)   The owner, developer, general contractor, or construction manager
applying for the building permit for new commercial or industrial construction
shall pay the city of Spring Valley the cost of reviewing the architectural
plans for the project. An estimated plan review fee based on: 1) one percent
(1%) of the project construction cost for the first fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) of construction costs; 2) three-fourths of one percent (0.75%) of
the next two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) of project construction
costs between fifty thousand one dollars ($50,001.00) and two hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($250,000.00); and 3) one-half of one percent (0.5%) of
project construction costs over two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00) shall be paid at the time the developer requests a permit
application or requests a plan commission hearing whichever occurs first and
shall be placed by the city clerk into an escrow account to cover plan review
costs. Upon completion of review, the city engineer shall present a summary of
charges to the city and at which time funds shall be withdrawn from the escrow
account and placed in the general account of the city for payment of plan
review charges.
Any additional fees shall be paid by the owner, developer, general contractor
or construction manager before a certificate of occupancy may be issued. If the
owner, developer, general contractor, or construction manager fails or refuses
to pay the review charges incurred for plan review, the city of Spring Valley
shall deny a request for a certificate of occupancy upon completion of
construction until the fees are paid in full. Any funds remaining in escrow
after review shall be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 1487, 6-6-2011)
3-10-8: ANNUAL REGISTRATION FOR CONTRACTORS:
   (A)   All contractors performing construction or home repair work within the
corporate limits of the city of Spring Valley shall annually register with the
Spring Valley city clerk and shall pay an annual registration fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per year to the city of Spring Valley. All
contractors performing work within the corporate limits of the city of Spring
Valley shall verify to the Spring Valley city clerk that the contractor is
aware of all applicable state of Illinois regulations and city of Spring Valley
building codes and standards, and the contractor's work will comply with the
applicable state of Illinois regulations and city of Spring Valley building
codes and standards.
   (B)   If a contractor fails to register with the Spring Valley city clerk in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, either the Spring Valley
building inspector, the Spring Valley city engineer or the Spring Valley police
department shall be authorized to stop any work performed by the contractor
until the contractor registers with the city of Spring Valley in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Any contractor performing work within the corporate limits of the city
of Spring Valley which does not comply with all applicable state of Illinois
regulations and all city of Spring Valley building codes and standards will
result in the termination of the contractor's registration and the contractor
will not be allowed to perform any further work within the city of Spring
Valley.
   (D)   As part of the registration required by this chapter, any contractor
performing work within the corporate limits of the city of Spring Valley must
maintain a general liability insurance policy in an aggregate amount of not
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and workers' compensation
insurance coverage for any employees. Any contractor registering with the city
of Spring Valley shall be required to submit a certificate of insurance
evidencing proof of the required insurance to the city of Spring Valley as part
of the registration process.
   (E)   Vehicles owned or used by a contractor, construction equipment that is
capable of being self-propelled or any construction equipment capable of being
towed shall display on the side of the equipment the name of the company for
which it is employed. The name shall be in letters at least two inches (2")
tall and one-half inch (1.5") wide. This Section shall not apply to any motor
vehicle upon which is affixed the insignia required under Section 18c-4701 of
the Illinois Commercial Transportation Law. Any person or company convicted of
violating this Section shall be subject to a fine not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and to exceed seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00).
(Ord. 1418, 5-26-2009; amd. Ord. 1920, 8-4-2025)
3-10-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
In addition to the denial of a certificate of occupancy, any violation of this
chapter shall subject the owner, general contractor, developer or construction
manager signing the building permit application to a fine of not less than
seventy five dollars ($75.00) per day nor more than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per day for residential construction and a fine of not less than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per day nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) per day for commercial or industrial construction. Each day a
violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense subjecting the
owner, general contractor, developer or construction manager signing the
building permit application to an additional fine. (Ord. 1370, 3-3-2008)
CHAPTER 11
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
3-11-1: Purpose
3-11-2: Definitions
3-11-3: Inspection Rights And Penalties
3-11-4: License Required
3-11-5: License Application
3-11-6: Inspection Requirements
3-11-7: Enforcement
3-11-8: Violations
3-11-9: License; Suspension And Revocation
3-11-10: Owner Responsibility
3-11-11: Inspection Access
3-11-12: Severability
3-11-13: Penalty
3-11-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted to prevent the deterioration of property and to require
the owner of rental real estate to correct any Building Code violations on the
property which, if not repaired or abated, could result in the property
deteriorating to the point where the property becomes a public nuisance.
Attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated by reference as if
set out in full herein are examples of safety conditions which, if not
corrected or repaired can develop into public nuisances. Exhibit A is on file
in the City and is an example of conditions which, if not repaired or abated
can result in property deteriorating to the point where the property becomes a
public nuisance, but exhibit A is intended to be an example, but not an
exhaustive list, of possible conditions leading to public nuisances. (Ord.
1643, 10-10-2016)
3-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CODE OFFICIAL: The building inspector or designee.
DWELLING: A building, or a portion thereof, used exclusively for human
habitation.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms containing individualized cooking, sleeping
and sanitary facilities which is designed, occupied or intended for use by one
household.
HOTEL: A building in which lodging with accompanying bathrooms is provided and
offered to temporary guests for compensation and in which ingress and egress to
all rooms is provided through an interior lobby or office supervised by a
person in charge at all hours. Maid service, linen laundering, telephone and
secretarial or desk service are also provided for lodgers in contradistinction
to a motel or a rooming house which are separately defined within this chapter.
LANDLORD: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
owning, operating, maintaining, or offering to rent within the City of Spring
Valley a rental residential property whether vacant or occupied.
MOTEL: A building or group of buildings in which lodging rooms with
accompanying bathrooms are provided and offered primarily for temporary guests
for compensation in contradistinction to a hotel or a rooming house which are
separately defined within this chapter. A motel also furnishes services such as
maid service and linen laundering and provides secretarial and desk service.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: A rental residential property with
two (2) or more dwelling units.
PROPERTY AGENT: A person, operator, firm, partnership, corporation, or other
legal entity designated in writing by the property owner to the Code official
to manage a rental residential property including the authority to receive
notices or citations.
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses and
rooming units let or intended to be let for rent or lease.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building containing rooming units in which meals may or may
not be served in contradistinction to a hotel or motel which are separately
defined within this chapter.
ROOMING UNIT: A room rented or leased as sleeping and living quarters, but
without cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a
suite of rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping
facilities shall be counted as one rooming unit for the purpose of this
chapter.
SINGLE-FAMILY RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Rental residential property with one
dwelling unit.
TENANT: Shall mean any adult lessee and/or adult occupant who is a resident of
rental residential property other than a lessee who occupies the rental
resident property pursuant to the lease of the lessee with the owner. (Ord.
1643, 10-10-2016; amd. Ord. 1842, 6-6-2022)
3-11-3: INSPECTION RIGHTS AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   The remedies provided by this chapter are also in addition to remedies
provided and available to the City of Spring Valley and law enforcement
agencies in reference to alleged violations of other ordinances and/or alleged
violations of criminal laws of the State of Illinois and/or the United States
of America. This chapter shall not be construed as to restrict the right of
this City to inspect any property nor to seek penalties for violations of other
provisions of the other City ordinances, State and/or Federal law and/or State
and/or Federal regulations.
   (B)   In addition to the provisions regarding fees charged in regard to
applications as provided within section
3-11-5 of this chapter, there shall henceforth be the following additional fees
and charges.
      1.   In regard to fees in connection with inspections required and/or
allowed by this chapter, the following additional charges shall be applicable:
         (a)   Initial inspection as provided for in this chapter: fifty
dollars ($50.00); plus an additional twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per unit for
dwelling containing more than two (2) units.
         (b)   First follow-up inspection in respect to compliance with the
recommendations and requirements of the initial inspection: one hundred dollars
($100.00).
         (c)   Subsequent follow-up inspections in regard to compliance
regarding the recommendations and requirements of the initial inspection: two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
         (d)   Additional charge assessed and due from the owner in regard to
any scheduled inspection missed by the owner: fifty dollars ($50.00).
Additionally, it is provided that the above graduated fee for inspection
schedule and related charges shall be reinitiated upon each change of tenancy/
occupancy.
   (C)   This chapter is not intended to and does not affect the rights and
obligations of the parties to a lease, oral or written, for rental residential
property.
   (D)   The City, City Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Official, or their
designee, shall notify the Landlord of the property thirty (30) days in advance
of a scheduled inspection, unless conditions warrant an immediate inspection
given obvious or suspected violations of any section of the city code. The
Landlord shall have seven (7) days to respond to the requested inspection date,
and shall be granted no more than a ten (10) day extension. (Ord. 1643, 10-10-
2016; amd. Ord. 1842, 6-6-2022)
3-11-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other
legal entity to operate, maintain or offer to rent within the City a rental
residential property whether vacant or not without first obtaining a license as
provided in this chapter.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a person to occupy a rental residential property,
or for any owner or property agent to allow anyone to occupy a rental
residential property which is not licensed as provided in this chapter.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other
legal entity to offer for rent or to occupy any vacant dwelling unit or rooming
unit or any dwelling unit or rooming unit that becomes vacant in a rental
residential property for which a license is under suspension.
   (D)   This chapter shall not apply to the following structures:
      1.   Single-family owner-occupied dwellings.
      2.   [Reserved].
      3.   Single-family dwellings which are vacant but which are not intended
to be let for rent.
      4.   Townhouse and condominium owner-occupied dwellings.
      5.   Hotels, motels and bed and breakfast inns.
      6.   Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses licensed and inspected by
the State or the Federal government, including, but not limited to, nursing
homes, retirement centers, rest homes, etc.
      7.   Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses owned by other
governmental agencies and public housing authorities.
      8.   Multiple-family rental residential property in which each dwelling
unit is occupied by a record owner of the property.
      9.   Dwellings subject to an Installment Sale Contract that complies with
the Illinois Installment Sales Contract Act, 765 ILCS 67/1 et seq.
   (E)   A license for a rental residential property cannot be transferred to
another rental residential property nor a succeeding owner. (Ord. 1643, 10-10-
2016; amd. Ord. 1842, 6-6-2022; Ord. 1881, 9-18-2023)
3-11-5: LICENSE APPLICATION:
   (A)   Each applicant for a license or renewal license to maintain a rental
residential property, for the purpose of renting it to others or for the
purpose of allowing others to occupy it as a dwelling unit or a rooming unit
shall file a written application with the Code official stating:
      1.   The full legal name, address, and home and work telephone numbers of
each and every owner of the rental residential property.
      2.   The address of the rental residential property.
      3.   The number of dwelling units or rooming units within the rental
residential property.
      4.   In the case of a rental residential property owner who does not
reside within a twenty five (25) mile radius of Spring Valley City Hall (215
North Greenwood Street, Spring Valley, IL), the name, address and phone number
of his or her agent with authority for receipt of service or notice of a
violation of the provisions of this chapter and/or for receipt of service or
notice related to compliance and/or enforcement of this chapter and/or the
building or zoning ordinances of the City of Spring Valley.
      5.   Whenever there is a change in the ownership of a rental residential
property or the owner's property agent, the owners shall, within thirty (30)
days of such changes, file an updated written notice with the Code official
indicating such changes.
      6.   Approval must be obtained from the Code official prior to any change
being made in the number of dwelling units or rooming units within a licensed
rental residential property. Application for such change shall be made on a
form provided by the Code official. The Code official will review the proposed
change and respond to the property owner within thirty (30) days of the filing
of the application. Any and all changes must meet all Zoning and Building Code
requirements of the City of Spring Valley.
      7.   The full legal name of the adult tenant and/or adult tenants of the
rental residential property. Additionally, the owner shall provide written
notice to the City of any change in the tenant and/or pursuant to the
definition of tenant as provided herein, adult occupant of the rental
residential property.
   (B)   Each application for a new license or a renewal of an existing license
shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for single family
residential rental property, multiple family dwelling residential rental
property, or rooming house residential property. in addition, an additional
dwelling unit and a rooming unit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) will be assessed
for each dwelling unit(s) and rooming unit(s) in excess of one. All such fees
shall be required to be paid with any new license application. Additionally,
the fee(s) for any prior years where a license for residential rental property
was required by this Code but not obtained shall be due and payable at that
time. Any newly issued license shall be valid unless suspended and/or revoked,
as provided herein, from the date of issuance up to and including December 31
of the year of issuance. All residential rental licenses shall expire on
December 31 of each year. The charge for any license renewal after an initial
license has been issued shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). in the event
that any license application fee due in regards to a renewal of an existing
license shall not be paid by December 31 of any given year, then, in that
event, there shall be an additional late charge assessed in the amount of fifty
dollars ($50.00). All fees and charges required by this Subsection shall be due
and payable at the Office of the Spring Valley City Clerk and Billing
Department. (Ord. 1643, 10-10-2016; amd. Ord. 1661, 1-30-2017; Ord. 1842, 6-6-
2022; Ord. 1914, 4-7-2025)
3-11-6: INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   All rental residential property shall be subject to an inspection as a
condition to the issuance of the license and prior to offering the property for
occupancy by a tenant and prior to the issuance of the initial license and/or
after any change in tenancy, which per the definition of tenant in this chapter
includes a change of adult occupancy. Additional inspections shall be allowed
to the City upon a request of a tenant or Landlord, or upon the City
determining that probable cause exists for a violation of the provisions of
this chapter and/or any other City code for the purpose of determining whether
the residential rental property is in compliance with all Spring Valley
Building Codes, and further in compliance with the City's zoning ordinance, and
all other applicable provisions of this Code. Any such inspection shall also
within the discretion of the building inspector include a physical inspection
of the residential property including the building exterior, common areas,
basement, and all individual units of the rental residential property.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provision within subsection (A) of this section,
in the event that the Landlord shall have provided written notice to the City
of Spring Valley of a request for initial inspection and/or request for
inspection based upon change of tenancy/occupancy as provided herein by either
certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the City of Spring
Valley Building Inspector, 215 N. Greenwood Street, Spring Valley, IL 61362 or
to the email address of the building inspector at
rentalregistry@springvalleyil.us and in the further event that following
receipt of said notice by the City shall not within fifteen (15) days perform
the inspection then in that event the premises may be leased and occupied by
tenants without the issuance of the license, with the City however retaining
the right to reasonably inspect the premises regarding said initial issuance
and/or change of occupancy within ninety (90) days of said written notice.
   (C)   Compliance time frame will be set by the Code official. In
establishing a compliance time frame, the Code official shall determine the
reasonable minimal time necessary to correct the violations based upon the
number and severity of the violations. In the event that the property is
unoccupied at the time that an inspection of a rental residential property
reveals any violations of applicable ordinances, the building inspector shall
have the discretion to require, depending upon a circumstance as deemed
appropriate within the appropriate exercise of discretion by the building
inspector that corrections in regard to the full remediation and compliance be
made prior to the residential rental property being allowed to be reoccupied.
The Code official shall send notice to the property owner or the listed
property agent by regular U.S. mail at the last address provided on the most
recent license application. The notice shall include the following:
      1.   Description of the property sufficient for identification;
      2.   A statement listing the violations of applicable ordinances;
      3.   A statement of the date upon which the licensing re-inspection will
occur; and
      4.   An explanation that if upon completion of the licensing re-
inspection that the requirements of applicable City ordinances have not been
met, a written denial of the license application revoking the temporary
certificate will be issued.
   (D)   A licensing re-inspection will be conducted as provided above in the
event of change of tenancy, which per the definition of this chapter shall
include change in adult occupancy. The license shall remain in effect upon the
successful completion of a licensing re-inspection that determines the rental
residential property meets the requirements of applicable City ordinances. If
the Code official finds that the requirements of applicable City ordinances
have not been met, or that any information provided in the license application
is false, the license shall be suspended or revoked in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
Applications for license renewals shall be made in the same manner as for new
applications except that such applications shall state thereon such fact. (Ord.
1643, 10-10-2016; amd. Ord. 1738, 1-28-2019; Ord. 1842, 6-6-2022)
3-11-7: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the department of the building inspector to enforce the
provisions of this chapter as authorized by the City of Spring Valley and the
Building, Electrical and Plumbing Codes as adopted and amended by the City. The
Code official referred to in this chapter shall be the building inspector of
the City of Spring Valley and/or any other representative of the City that may
be specifically designated by the City Council to be the Code official for
purposes of this chapter unless and until such time as the City Council
appoints a different representative, the building inspector shall be the Code
official. Additionally, the Appeals Board referred to herein shall be the body
of officials of the Zoning Board of Appeals of the City. Any final decision of
the Zoning Board of Appeals may be pursued through the Circuit Court of Bureau
County pursuant to the law and provisions made in respect to appeals of
administrative decisions in administrative review. (Ord. 1643, 10-10-2016)
3-11-8: VIOLATIONS:
The following shall constitute violations of this chapter:
   (A)   Failure of the owner or owners of the rental residential property to
license such property with the Code official;
   (B)   Failure of the occupants of the rental residential property to vacate
such property within sixty (60) days after receiving notice from the Code
official that such property is not properly licensed or that the license or
temporary certificate has been revoked;
   (C)   Failure of the owner of the rental residential property to vacate all
tenants from said property within sixty (60) days after the license or
temporary certificate has been revoked;
   (D)   Failure of the owners of the rental residential property to maintain
the structure and premises in compliance with applicable building, property
maintenance and zoning ordinances;
   (E)   Any person other than an inspector from the department who removes or
defaces any notices which have been posted pursuant to this chapter without the
approval of the Code official shall be liable for the penalties provided for by
this chapter;
   (F)   Failure of the owner of the rental residential property to comply with
any other applicable provision of this chapter or other City ordinances. (Ord.
1643, 10-10-2016)
3-11-9: LICENSE; SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   (A)   Suspension: A license may be suspended when violations of applicable
City ordinances have been identified by the department and the property owner
has been properly notified of the violations and given a reasonable period of
time in which to correct violations, but has failed to do so. A license may
also be suspended when any information provided in the license application is
determined by the Code official to be false.
   (B)   Violation Notice: When an inspection of a licensed rental residential
property reveals any violations of applicable ordinances, a compliance time
frame will be set by the Code official using the standard as set forth in
subsection
3-11-6(C) of this chapter. The Code official shall send notice to the property
owner or the listed property agent by regular U.S. mail at the last address
provided on the most recent license application. Said notice shall include the
following:
      1.   Description of the rental residential property sufficient for
identification;
      2.   A statement listing the violations of applicable ordinances;
      3.   A statement on the date upon which re-inspection will occur; and
      4.   An explanation that if upon completion of the re-inspection that the
requirements of applicable City ordinances have not been met, that the license
for rental residential property will be suspended.
   (C)   Re-Inspection: A re-inspection will be conducted at the end of the
compliance time frame. In the discretion of the City Building Inspector, Code
Enforcement Official, or their designee, the property owner may submit
photographic evidence of compliance that may avoid the need for reinspection if
provided within the compliance time frame. If the Code official finds that the
requirements of applicable City ordinances have not been met upon the
completion of such re-inspection, the license for the rental residential
property shall be suspended.
   (D)   Suspension Notice: When a license is suspended, the Code official
shall send notice to the property owner or the listed property agent at the
last address provided on the most recent license application. Said notice shall
be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personally served upon
the property owner or the property agent listed on the most recent license
application. The notice shall include the following:
      1.   Description of the property sufficient for identification;
      2.   A statement of the reasons for the suspension;
      3.   An explanation of the property owner's right to appeal the
suspension;
      4.   If the property owner changes his or her address or changes property
agents and fails to notify the department, such notice shall be sufficient if
sent by certified mail to the owner or his or her property agent's last address
provided on the last license application.
   (E)   Re-Inspection Prior To Revocation: A property owner whose license has
been suspended may request a re-inspection prior to revocation. If, upon re-
inspection, the department finds that the licensed rental residential property
in connection with which the notice was issued is now in compliance with this
chapter, the Code official may reinstate the license. The request for a re-
inspection shall not stay the revocation of the license unless the Code
official grants such request pursuant to a showing of good cause by the
property owner.
   (F)   Appeal: Any person whose license has been suspended shall be entitled
to appeal the suspension by filing a petition with the Spring Valley City Clerk
who shall refer the appeal to the Spring Valley Zoning Board of Appeals for
consideration of such petition and recommendation by the Spring Valley City
Council to either affirm or reverse the suspension or revocation. Such an
appeal shall operate as a stay of the suspension or revocation until such time
as the Spring Valley Zoning Board of Appeals and the Spring Valley City Council
render a decision on the appeal. A hearing shall be scheduled in accordance
with the provisions of this Code and the rules and regulations of the Spring
Valley Zoning Board of Appeals. The Spring Valley Zoning Board of Appeals
considering any such petition may recommend to the Spring Valley City Council
immediate revocation of the license, continuance of the suspension to a
definite compliance date with revocation being the penalty for noncompliance,
or dismissal of the charges and reinstatement of the license. The Spring Valley
Zoning Board of Appeals shall make its recommendations in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and its rules and regulations and its
recommendations shall be promptly forwarded to the Spring Valley City Council
for final action to either accept or reject the recommendation of the Spring
Valley Zoning Board of Appeals by the Spring Valley City Council.
   (G)   Revocation: A license may be revoked when a petition for appeal has
not been filed within twenty (20) days following the date of issuance of an
order of suspension, or, if the suspension is sustained after appeal. A license
may also be revoked when in the opinion of the Code official emergency
conditions exist in a rental residential property that require the immediate
vacating of a structure due to the condition in the structure which threatens
imminent harm to occupants of the structure.
   (H)   New License: A license which has been properly revoked as herein
provided shall not be reinstated. The property owner may, however, obtain a new
license after all violations have been corrected and by following the
procedures for obtaining a new license as set forth in this chapter, including
the payment of all applicable fees.
   (I)   Revocation Appeal: If a license is revoked without having the
opportunity of a suspension hearing, the property owner has the right to appeal
that revocation. Said appeal shall conform to subsection (F) of this section.
Such an appeal shall operate as a stay of the revocation until such time as the
Appeals Board renders a decision on the appeal.
   (J)   Notification - Revocation Of License:
      1.   Whenever a license is revoked, the Code official shall send notice
to the property owner or the listed property agent at the last address provided
on the most recent license application. The notice shall be sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested. The Code official shall also notify all tenants
and occupants of the rental residential property by posting a notice on all
entrances to the rental residential structure. The notice to the tenants and
occupants shall include the following:
         (a)   "You are hereby notified that the license for this structure has
been revoked pursuant to the Spring Valley, Illinois Residential Rental
Licensing ordinance.
         (b)   You must vacate this structure within sixty (60) days of the
date of this notice.
         (c)   If you fail to vacate this structure, you will be in violation
of the Spring Valley, Illinois Residential Rental Licensing Ordinance of the
City of Spring Valley and subject to penalties of fines with a minimum of
$50.00 and a maximum of $500.00 for each day you are in violation."
      2.   Any tenant of the rental residential property may appeal the
revocation of the license. Said appeal shall conform with subsection (F) of
this section. Such an appeal shall operate as a stay of the revocation until
such time as the Appeals Board renders a decision on the appeal.
   (K)   Notification - Failure To License:
      1.   Whenever an owner or property agent of a rental residential property
fails to license said property with the department, the Code official shall
notify all tenants and occupants of the rental residential property by posting
a notice on all entrances to the rental residential property indicating the
following:
         (a)   "You are hereby notified that the owner or agent of this
structure has failed to license this rental residential property with the
department in violation of the Spring Valley Illinois Residential Rental
Licensing Ordinance.
         (b)   You must vacate this structure within sixty (60) days of this
notice.
         (c)   If you fail to vacate this structure, you will be in violation
of the Spring Valley, Illinois Residential Licensing Ordinance adopted by the
City of Spring Valley and subject to penalties and fines with a minimum of $50
and a maximum of $500 for each day you are in violation."
      2.   Any tenant of the rental residential property may appeal the Code
official's order to vacate the structure because the owner has failed to
license said property with the department. Said appeal shall conform with
subsection (F) of this section. Such an appeal shall operate as a stay of the
order to vacate the structure until such time as the Appeals Board renders a
decision on the appeal. (Ord. 1643, 10-10-2016; amd. Ord. 1842, 6-6-2022)
3-11-10: OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
   (A)   The owner of a rental residential property shall maintain a record for
each property with the full legal names of every tenant or occupant residing in
each dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   (B)   The owner or property agent of a rental residential property shall
provide each tenant or occupant with the name and telephone number of a
responsible person who, in emergency situations, will be available on a 24-hour
basis and who has the authority to make repairs as needed. The owner shall also
cause said information to be posted and maintained within the main entryway of
every rental residential structure.
   (C)   The owner of a rental residential property shall make available to the
City official, upon request, the tenant and occupant records required to be
maintained under this section. (Ord. 1643, 10-10-2016)
3-11-11: INSPECTION ACCESS:
If any owner, property agent, tenant, occupant or other person in control of a
rental residential property or a dwelling unit or a rooming unit contained
therein fails or refuses to consent to free access and entry to the property or
dwelling unit or rooming unit under his or her control for any inspection
pursuant to this chapter, the Code official or his or her designee may apply to
the Circuit Court for a search warrant or other appropriate court order
authorizing such inspections. However, except in an emergency situation, no
application for such a search warrant shall be made without first making a
reasonable effort to secure access and entry to the property or dwelling unit
or rooming unit through the owner or the owner's property agent as identified
pursuant to subsection
3-11-5(A)1 or (A)4 of this chapter. (Ord. 1643, 10-10-2016)
3-11-12: SEVERABILITY:
If any provisions, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter
or application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall for any reason be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or
invalid, said judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of
this chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or
circumstances, but shall be confined in its operation to the provision, clause,
sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and to the person
or circumstance involved. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of
the City Council that this chapter would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional or invalid provisions, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or
part thereof had been included. (Ord. 1643, 10-10-2016)
3-11-13: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, in
addition to other legal and equitable remedies available to the City of Spring
Valley, shall be fined as provided below.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with
any of these mandatory requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense. Except in cases where a different penalty is prescribed by any
ordinances of the City of Spring Valley, any person convicted of an offense
under this chapter of the City of Spring Valley shall be punished by a fine of
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than a fine of seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (B)   Each day during which a violation of this chapter continues or is
permitted to exist shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
   (C)   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created
by different clauses or sections of this chapter, the prosecuting officer may
proceed to hearing under any and all such sections and clauses; but not more
than a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be had
against the same person or entity for the same day of the same offense;
provided that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be the same day
of the same offense; provided that the revocation of a license or permit shall
not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being
enforced.
   (D)   The levy and/or payment of any penalty or fine provided in this
chapter shall not be deemed a waiver of the power of the City of Spring Valley
to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any license or permit for cause. (Ord.
1643, 10-10-2016)
CHAPTER 12
VACANT BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY
SECTION:
3-12-1: Declaration Of Policy
3-12-2: Other Ordinances
3-12-3: Definitions
3-12-4: Determination
3-12-5: Appeal Of Determination
3-12-6: Obligation To Register
3-12-7: Other Enforcement
3-12-8: Certification
3-12-9: Boarding Of Buildings
3-12-10: Inspection Access
3-12-11: Enforcement And Penalties
3-12-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare by enactment of this chapter which:
   (A)   Establishes a program for identification, registration, and regulation
of buildings which are or become vacant on and after the effective date of this
chapter.
   (B)   Determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings.
   (C)   Provides for administration, enforcement, including abatement of
public nuisances, and imposition of penalties.
This chapter shall be construed liberally to effect its purposes. (Ord. 1648,
11-7-2016)
3-12-2: OTHER ORDINANCES:
This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other
applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations which prescribe
standards other than are provided herein, and in the event of conflict, the
most restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 1648, 11-7-2016)
3-12-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly indicated by the context, the
following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings
indicated in this section:
BOARDED BUILDING: A building which has had, in a manner intended to be
temporary or permanent, any or all openings, which openings are windows or
doors which were present for the purpose of light, ventilation or egress, some
material whether opaque, solid or transparent, affixed to such openings, from
the interior or exterior of the building, for the purpose of securing or
preventing access or damage to the building or its components.
BUILDING: Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any
occupancy.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The City of Spring Valley building inspector, or his or her
designee, deputy building inspector, or any employee of the engineering firm
chosen by the City of Spring Valley to serve as City Engineer.
DANGEROUS BUILDING: A building defined as a "dangerous building" in the City of
Spring Valley Building Code, as it may be amended. Such buildings are public
nuisances.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
State, County, or Municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON: Includes a corporation, a partnership, or other entity as well as an
individual.
PREMISES: A lot, plot, or parcel of land including any structure thereon.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Includes the following:
   (A)   The physical condition, or uses of any building regarded as a public
nuisance at common law, under the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or under this
chapter or any other Spring Valley ordinance; or
   (B)   Any physical condition, use or occupancy or any building or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences
or structures; or
   (C)   Any building which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; or
   (D)   Any building designated by the building inspector as unsafe for human
habitation or use; or
   (E)   Any building which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or
manifestly unsafe or insecure as to endanger life, limb or property; or
   (F)   Any building which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish or
garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
   (G)   Any building that is dangerous, in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; faulty construction; open or vacant and the doors,
windows, or other openings are boarded up or secured, by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new
construction of similar type; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide
shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and dangerous to anyone on or near
the premises; or
   (H)   Any building defined as a "dangerous building" by this chapter or by
any other ordinance duly adopted by the City of Spring Valley, as it may be
amended.
UNOCCUPIED BUILDING: A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual
presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises,
including buildings ordered vacated by the building inspector pursuant to
authority granted to him by this Code.
   (A)   In determining whether a building is "unoccupied", the building
inspector may consider these factors, among others:
      1.   A building at which substantially all lawful residential or business
activity has ceased.
      2.   The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied to
unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied units shall
be considered.
      3.   The building is substantially devoid of contents. The condition and
value of fixtures or personal property in the building are relevant to this
determination.
      4.   The building lacks utility services, i.e., water, sewer, electric or
natural gas.
      5.   The building is the subject of a foreclosure action.
      6.   The building is not actively for sale as part of a contractual
agreement to sell the building, the building lacks "for sale", "for rent" or
similar signage.
      7.   The presence or recurrence of uncorrected code violations.
VACANT BUILDING:
   (A)   A building or portion of a building which is:
      1.   Unoccupied and unsecured; or
      2.   Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means; or
      3.   Unoccupied and a dangerous structure; or
      4.   Unoccupied and condemned by the building inspector pursuant to
applicable provisions of this Code; or
      5.   Unoccupied and has multiple code violations; or
      6.   Unoccupied and the building or its premises has been the site of
unlawful activity within the previous six (6) months; or
      7.   Condemned by the building inspector and unlawfully occupied; or
      8.   Unoccupied for over one hundred eighty (180) days and during which
time the building inspector has issued an order to correct public nuisance
conditions and same have not been corrected in a code compliant manner; or
      9.   Unoccupied for over two (2) years.
      10.   An "abandoned residential property", as defined in 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-15.1 as a residential dwelling unit that has been
unoccupied by any lawful occupant or occupants for at least ninety (90) days,
and for which after such ninety (90) day period the City of Spring Valley has
made good faith efforts to contact the legal owner or owners of the property
or, if known, the agent of the owner, and no contact has been made.
   (B)   But not including: Unoccupied buildings which are undergoing
construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and which are in compliance with
all applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations, and for which
construction, renovation or rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to
completion. (Ord. 1648, 11-7-2016; amd. Ord. 1921, 8-4-2025)
3-12-4: DETERMINATION:
Within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this chapter, the building
inspector shall evaluate all buildings in the City of Spring Valley he believes
to be unoccupied on the effective date of this chapter and make a determination
for each as to whether the building is a "vacant building" within the meaning
of this chapter. The building inspector may determine that a building which
meets any of the criteria set forth in this section is not to be regulated
under this chapter for a stated period, if upon consideration of reliable,
substantiated and sufficient evidence, he or she determines that regulation of
the building under this chapter would not serve the public health, welfare, and
safety and makes written findings in support of this decision. The
determination shall be in writing and shall state the factual basis for the
determination. For buildings the building inspector determines to be "vacant
buildings", notice of the determination will be sent to the last taxpayer of
record listed on the most recent Bureau County tax roll. The notice of
determination shall be sent first class United States mail. Failure of delivery
shall not excuse a person from complying with this chapter. The building
inspector may personally serve or cause personal service of the notice of
determination. Any person making such service shall execute an affidavit
attesting to the facts of service. The building inspector shall maintain a
record of such mailing for each notice of determination sent.
The notice shall specify a date and time on which the owner shall allow for a
code compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant building to determine
the extent of compliance with City of Spring Valley Property, Building Codes,
Health, Fire, Water and Sewer Codes. The owner shall pay the five hundred
dollar ($500.00) inspection fee to the City of Spring Valley within thirty (30)
days of the inspection; provided, however, that for all vacant buildings
existing upon the date of the adoption of this chapter the owner shall pay a
one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) inspection fee to the City of Spring Valley
within thirty (30) days of the inspection. An unpaid fee shall be a lien upon
the premises.
The notice shall contain a statement of the obligations of the owner of a
building determined to be a vacant building, a copy of the registration form
the owner is required to file pursuant to this chapter, and a notice of the
owner's right to appeal the building inspector's determination. (Ord. 1648, 11-
7-2016)
3-12-5: APPEAL OF DETERMINATION:
   (A)   An owner of a building determined by the building inspector to be a
vacant building as provided for in this chapter may appeal that determination
to the building inspector. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed
with the building inspector within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of
the notice of determination. The filing of an appeal stays the owner's
obligation to register his building as required by this chapter. The appeal
shall contain a complete statement of the reasons the owner disputes the
building inspector's determination, shall set forth specific facts in support
thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to support the
appeal. The building inspector shall decide the appeal on the basis of facts
presented by the owner in his or her written appeal and the building
inspector's written determination.
      1.   The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to
persuade the building inspector that had the evidence been known to the
building inspector at the time the building inspector made the determination,
the building inspector would more likely than not have determined that the
subject building was not a "vacant building" within the meaning of this
chapter.
      2.   The building inspector shall send written notice of his decision to
the owner within ten (10) days of his or her receipt of the appeal. The
building inspector may, but is not required to, seek additional information
from the owner. The building inspector may, upon written notice thereof to the
owner, take no more than ten (10) additional days, to decide the appeal if he
or she determines that such additional time is required for consideration of
the appeal.
      3.   An owner who wishes to challenge applicability of this chapter to
his/her building without the building inspector's determination having been
made, shall set forth specific facts to support nonapplicability in a writing
to the building inspector. In the event the building inspector determines that
the subject building is a "vacant building", the owner shall have the right to
appeal the building inspector's determination to the building inspector as
provided for herein. (Ord. 1648, 11-7-2016)
3-12-6: OBLIGATION TO REGISTER:
   (A)   The owner of a building who knows, or from all the facts and
circumstances should know, that his or her building is or has become a "vacant
building" within the meaning of this chapter after the effective date of this
chapter or the owner of a building which the building inspector determines at
any time to be a "vacant building", or the owner of a building whose appeal
from the building inspector's determination has been denied by the building
inspector shall take the actions provided for in this section within fifteen
(15) days after either the date of the building inspector's notice of
determination or occurrence of the facts which would cause a reasonable person
to believe that the building was a "vacant building", or denial of the appeal,
whichever is applicable. Registration does not exonerate the owner from
compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances, including this chapter,
nor does it preclude any of the actions the City of Spring Valley is authorized
to take pursuant to this chapter or other Spring Valley statutes.
      1.   Registration Requirements:
         (a)   Register the building with the building inspector, on a form
provided by the building inspector and pay the two hundred dollar ($200.00)
annual nonprorated vacant building registration fee. The form shall include, as
a minimum, the name, street address, and telephone number of the owner; the
case name and number of any litigation pending concerning or affecting the
building, including bankruptcy cases; and the name, street address, and
telephone number of all persons with any legal interest in the building or the
premises. The form shall require the owner to identify a natural person twenty
one (21) years of age or older who maintains a permanent address in Bureau
County, Illinois or LaSalle County, Illinois, to accept service on behalf of
the owner with respect to any notices the building inspector sends pursuant to
this chapter or service of process in any proceeding commenced to enforce any
provision of this chapter, and file with the building inspector on the
registration form, the name, address, telephone number, of said person. A
street address is required. A post office box is not an acceptable address.
         (b)   Renew the vacant building registration each year on the
anniversary date of the first filing for the time the building remains vacant
and pay the required two hundred dollar ($200.00) annual fee; and
         (c)   File an amended registration within fifteen (15) days of any
change in the information contained in the annual registration. A new
registration is required for any change in ownership whatsoever.
      2.   Notice; Inspection: The form shall require the owner to indicate his
or her "acceptance of notice by posting" consenting to service of notices sent
or required to be sent, pursuant to this chapter, by posting on the building if
the owner fails to renew the registration if required, or maintain as current
with the building inspector the information required regarding the person
designated to accept notice and service of process.
The owner shall allow for a code compliance inspection of the interior of the
vacant building and shall pay the five hundred dollar ($500.00) fee therefor
within thirty (30) days of the inspection; provided, however, that for all
vacant buildings existing upon the date of the adoption of this chapter the
owner shall pay a one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) inspection fee to the City
of Spring Valley within thirty (30) days of inspection. Such inspection will
determine the extent of compliance with City of Spring Valley Property,
Building Codes, Health, Fire, Water and Sewer Codes. The City of Spring Valley
shall send the inspection report to the owner within thirty (30) days.
      3.   Insurance: Obtain liability insurance and maintain such insurance
for as long as the building is vacant, and file evidence of such insurance with
the building inspector, as follows: five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
for a vacant residential building of one to three (3) units; seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars ($750,000.00) for a vacant residential building of four
(4) to eleven (11) units; one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for a vacant
residential building of twelve (12) to forty eight (48) units; two million
dollars ($2,000,000.00) for a vacant residential building of more than forty
eight (48) units; and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for a vacant
manufacturing, industrial, storage, or nonresidential commercial building.
      4.   Vacant Building Plan: At the time a building is registered as
required herein, the owner shall submit a vacant building plan. The building
inspector may prescribe a form for the plan. If the owner fails to submit the
plan as provided for by this chapter, the building inspector may determine the
plan. The plan shall contain the following as a minimum:
         (a)   A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings
which are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than conventional
methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction or
similar type. The proposed repair shall result in openings being secured by
conventional methods used in the design of the building or by methods permitted
for new construction or similar type with board removed. Boarding shall be
accomplished with materials and methods described by the building inspector.
The owner shall maintain the building in an enclosed and secure state until the
building is reoccupied or made available for immediate occupancy. If the owner
demonstrates that securing of the building will provide adequate protection to
the public, the building inspector may waive the requirement of an enclosure.
         (b)   For buildings and premises thereof which are determined by the
building inspector as being or constituting a public nuisance, as defined in
section
3-12-3 of this chapter, then the vacant building plan shall contain a plan of
action to remedy such public nuisance(s).
         (c)   A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of repair and
date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening and nuisance
identified by the building inspector.
         (d)   When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then
the owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.
         (e)   A plan of action to maintain the building and premises thereof
in conformance with this chapter.
         (f)   A plan of action, with a time schedule, identifying the date the
building will be habitable and occupied or offered for occupancy or sale. The
time schedule shall include date(s) of commencement and completion of all
actions required to achieve habitability. No plan which provides for compliance
with this chapter or, which will not, as determined by the building inspector,
achieve such compliance, within six (6) months, in the case of a vacant boarded
building, and two (2) years, in the case of a vacant, unboarded, and code
compliant building will be approved.
         (g)   All premises upon which unoccupied or vacant buildings are
located and the exteriors shall at all times be maintained in compliance with
this Code.
         (h)   Exterior lighting according to standards established by the
building inspector and available from the building inspector.
      5.   Security Guard Service: On written notice of the building inspector,
provide bonded, licensed, and insured security guard service at the building
between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
Such service to remain in place until the building inspector gives written
notice that the service is no longer required. Such service shall be required
when the building inspector makes a written determination that the vacant
building is a fire hazard, is otherwise dangerous to human life or the public
welfare, involves illegal or improper use, occupancy, or maintenance, under
such conditions that boarding and securing the building are insufficient to
prevent the actual or threatened harm.
      6.   Signage: Affixed to any building which is boarded, no smaller than
two feet by two feet (2' x 2') and compliance with the City of Spring Valley's
sign regulations and providing the following information: The name, address,
and telephone number of the owner, and in addition, for buildings which are the
subject of a foreclosure action, the name, address, and telephone number of the
plaintiff and the plaintiff's attorney, if any, in the foreclosure action. The
sign must be placed so that its message is legible from the public way.
      7.   Approval Of Plan:
         (a)   Review Building Plan: The building inspector shall review the
proposed vacant building plan in accordance with the standards below. The
building inspector shall send notice to the owner of the vacant building of his
determination.
         (b)   Standards For Plan Approval: In considering the appropriateness
of a vacant building plan, the building inspector shall include the following
in his or her consideration and shall make written findings as to each:
            (1)   The purposes of this chapter and intent of the City of Spring
Valley City Council to minimize the time a building is boarded or otherwise
vacant.
            (2)   The effect of the building and the proposed plan on adjoining
property.
            (3)   The length of time the building has been vacant.
            (4)   The presence of any public nuisances on the property.
            (5)   The likelihood that the plan or portion(s) thereof will
prevent or ameliorate the condition it is designed to address.
      8.   Authority To Modify Plan, Right Of Appeal: The building inspector
shall, upon notice to the vacant building owner, have the right to modify the
vacant building plan by modifying the dates of performance, the proposed
methods of action, or by imposing additional requirements consistent with this
chapter he or she deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, or
welfare.
      9.   Failure To Comply With Plan: Failure to have an approved plan within
thirty (30) days of filing the registration form or failure to comply with the
approved plan shall constitute a violation of this chapter subjecting the owner
of the building to penalties as provided in this chapter and to any remedies
the City of Spring Valley may avail itself of as provided for herein or in
other Spring Valley ordinances, including, but not limited to, an action to
compel correction of property maintenance violations. (Ord. 1648, 11-7-2016)
3-12-7: OTHER ENFORCEMENT:
The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the City of
Spring Valley to demolish or to take other action against the building pursuant
to other provisions of this chapter, the other ordinances adopted by the City
of Spring Valley, or other applicable legislation. (Ord. 1648, 11-7-2016)
3-12-8: CERTIFICATION:
A certificate of code compliance for vacant buildings issued by the City of
Spring Valley and payment in full of all fees imposed pursuant to this chapter
are required prior to any occupancy of a vacant building. (Ord. 1648, 11-7-
2016)
3-12-9: BOARDING OF BUILDINGS:
It is the policy of the City of Spring Valley that boarding is a temporary
solution to prevent unauthorized entry into a vacant building and that boarded
buildings are a public nuisance. A vacant building may not remain boarded
longer than six (6) months unless an extension of that time is part of a plan
approved by the building inspector. A vacant building which is unboarded and
code compliant and for which boarding is determined by the building inspector
on the basis of police reports, citizen complaints, and other information of
other type considered reliable by reasonable persons, to not require boarding
to prevent unauthorized entry may not remain vacant for more than two (2) years
without an approved plan for occupancy, sale, demolition, or other disposition
of the building. (Ord. 1648, 11-7-2016)
3-12-10: INSPECTION ACCESS:
If the owner of any vacant building or other person in control of a vacant
building fails or refuses to consent to free access and entry to the vacant
building under his or her control for any inspection pursuant to this chapter,
the building inspector or his or her designee may apply to the Circuit Court
for a search warrant or other appropriate court order authorizing such
inspections. However, except in emergency situations, no application for such
search warrant shall be made without first making a reasonable effort to secure
access and entry to the vacant building through the owner or the owner's
property agent identified by the owner of the vacant building. (Ord. 1663, 2-
13-2017)
3-12-11: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), in
addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to the City of
Spring Valley. Such other remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive
relief, application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a receiver,
demolition, or condemnation, contracting for the repair or purchase of the
premises, or foreclosure of any lien the City of Spring Valley may have
thereon.
   (B)   A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which
such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the City of Spring Valley from
immediately condemning as provided for in this Code a building or taking other
immediate action upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance or
poses an imminent danger to the occupants of the building, or the public
health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1663, 2-13-2017)
CHAPTER 13
WINDOW DISPLAYS
SECTION:
3-13-1:    Window Displays - Vacant Buildings
3-13-2: Window Displays - Occupied Buildings
3-13-3:    Construction Vacancies
3-13-4:    Prohibited Actions
3-13-5:    Signs
3-13-6:    Penalties
3-13-1: WINDOW DISPLAYS - VACANT BUILDINGS:
Any commercial property located on the first or ground floor that remains
vacant for more than thirty (30) days must, within thirty (30) days from the
initial vacancy, erect a decorative window display depicting a cultural,
educational, historical, municipal, or other community related theme in all
windows facing the street, public right-of-way, or any sidewalk. Any decorative
window display shall have as its backdrop a screen, blind, curtain, partition,
or some other object preventing a clear view into the interior of the building.
The City will cooperate in facilitating compliance with this requirement, if
requested, and will provide guidance as to appropriate themes. (Ord. 1879, 8-7-
2023)
3-13-2: WINDOW DISPLAYS - OCCUPIED BUILDINGS:
Any commercial property located on the first or ground floor of a building must
maintain a clean and professional appearance. Unsightly views, such as stacked
supplies, building materials, hanging cords or wires, garbage, or other
detritus shall not be allowed. (Ord. 1879, 8-7-2023)
3-13-3: CONSTRUCTION VACANCIES:
Any commercial property located on the first or ground floor that will be
vacant due to construction on the property and where a valid building permit
has been obtained and is displayed must, within thirty (30) days from the
initial vacancy, either erect window displays pursuant to subsection
3-13-1 of this section or erect temporary backdrops in all windows, consisting
of either screens, blinds, curtains, partitions, or other objects preventing a
clear view into the interior of the building. (Ord. 1879, 8-7-2023)
3-13-4: PROHIBITED ACTIONS:
No windows of any vacant commercial building shall be covered with butcher
block paper or black paper, plastic garbage bags, plastic sheeting, or any
other similar materials. No soaping of the windows shall be permitted. (Ord.
1879, 8-7-2023)
3-13-5: SIGNS:
All signs on vacant commercial properties must be maintained in good order and
shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 7, Signs, of Title 14, Land Development Code. Any exterior business
signs and window signs relating to a closed business must be removed within
thirty (30) days of the closing of the business. Any signs yellowed or damaged
from excessive age or exposure to sunlight, heat, cold, water, or other liquids
shall be removed immediately. Additionally, "For Lease" signs and signs
advertising future tenants shall be permitted to be displayed on vacant
commercial properties, subject to the same conditions and provided they contain
clear and accurate contact information. (Ord. 1879, 8-7-2023)
3-13-6: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), in
addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to the City of
Spring Valley
   (B)   A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which
such person or persons shall violated the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Noting contained herein shall prohibit the City of Spring Valley from
taking other action upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance
or poses an imminent danger to the occupants of the building or the public
health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 1879, 8-7-2023)
TITLE 4
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Creation
4-1-2: Supervision Over Department; Equipment
4-1-3: Command At Fires
4-1-4: Records
4-1-5: Duties
4-1-6: Obedience To Orders
4-1-7: Duties Of Spectators
4-1-8: Enforcement Of Ordinances
4-1-9: Entering Firehouses
4-1-1: CREATION:
   (A)   There is hereby created and established a fire department, consisting
of a chief of the department and such other officers appointed by the fire
chief with the approval of the mayor and the city council. The fire chief shall
be recommended by the volunteer firemen and approved by the mayor and city
council of the city of Spring Valley. Members of the Spring Valley fire
department shall be accepted by the volunteer firemen currently comprising the
department, with the approval of the mayor and city council, and subject to the
bylaws established by the Spring Valley, Illinois, volunteer fire department.
In the event that the city of Spring Valley hires any full time employees to
serve as members of the Spring Valley fire department in any capacity, the full
time employees shall be appointed to their position by the provisions
applicable to the appointment of policemen and subject to the appointment
process established by the board of fire and police commissioners of the city
of Spring Valley, as per the provisions of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord.
1408, 2-2-2009; amd. Ord. 1482, 3-28-2011)
   (B)   The position of fire chief emeritus is created. The position of fire
chief emeritus shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, with the advice and
consent of the city council. The fire chief emeritus shall serve at the
pleasure of the mayor. (Ord. 1482, 3-28-2011)
4-1-2: SUPERVISION OVER DEPARTMENT; EQUIPMENT:
The fire chief shall have the control, subject to the order and direction of
the council, of the fire department and all fire apparatus belonging to the
city. (1972 Code)
4-1-3: COMMAND AT FIRES:
In case of fire, the fire chief and his assistants shall rank in the order
named and the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the
fire department and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the
fire, in the best manner possible; and when it may become necessary for the
protection of other property and to prevent the spread of the conflagration,
the officer in command may cause buildings to be removed, torn down or
destroyed in the best manner possible. (1972 Code)
4-1-4: RECORDS:
The fire chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all activities of the
department and of all fires occurring in the city, with information as to their
cause and the estimated damage done. (1972 Code)
4-1-5: DUTIES:
It shall be the function and duty of the fire department and every member
thereof to extinguish accidental or destructive fires, to prevent the
occurrence or spread of such fires. (1972 Code)
4-1-6: OBEDIENCE TO ORDERS:
Every fireman in attendance at a fire shall obey the orders of the officer in
command at such fire. (1972 Code)
4-1-7: DUTIES OF SPECTATORS:
Every male person above the age of eighteen (18) years who shall be present at
a fire shall be subject to the orders of the officer in command at such fire
and shall render all assistance in his power, and in such a manner as he may be
directed in the extinguishment of the fire, and in the removal of and
protection of property, and any person refusing to obey such orders, shall upon
conviction be fined in any sum not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00),
provided no person shall be bound to obey any such officer, unless such
officer's official character shall be made known to such person. (1972 Code)
4-1-8: ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCES:
It shall be the duty of all members of the fire department to see that the
provisions of this code relating to the fire department and its work are
enforced, and to that end all such members are hereby vested with the usual
power and authority of police officers. (1972 Code)
4-1-9: ENTERING FIREHOUSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to enter the fire department
station or any place where the equipment and apparatus of the fire department
is stored, at any time except on business pertaining to the fire department or
other city business. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Adoption Of Fire Prevention Code
4-2-2: Establishment And Duties Of Bureau Of Fire Prevention
4-2-3: Definitions
4-2-4: Establishment Of Limits Of Districts (Rep. by Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
4-2-5: Amendments
4-2-6: Establishment Of Fire Lanes On Private Property Devoted To Public Use
4-2-7: Establishment Of Motor Vehicle Routes For Vehicles Transporting
Explosive And Blasting Agents
4-2-8: Modifications
4-2-9: Appeals
4-2-10: Penalties
4-2-11: Repeal Of Conflicting Ordinances
4-2-12: B1 Downtown Commercial District Construction
4-2-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the city of Spring Valley for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion, those certain fire prevention codes known as the
international fire code, latest edition, American Insurance Association fire
prevention code, latest edition, and National Fire Protection Association,
codes and standards, latest edition, including any amendments, deletions or
additions thereto incorporated into said international fire code, American
Insurance Association fire prevention code, or National Fire Protection
Association codes and standards after the passage of the ordinance codified
herein or any revisions or subsequent modifications thereof made after the
passage of the ordinance codified herein. If the international fire code, the
American Insurance Association fire prevention code or the National Fire
Protection Association, codes and standards, allow for more than one option for
construction or design, the most restrictive option shall apply, unless
permission to deviate from the most restrictive option is granted to the
applicant by the Spring Valley city council, after review and recommendation by
the Spring Valley city engineer, the Spring Valley building inspector or the
Spring Valley fire chief, as appropriate. (Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
4-2-2: ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION:
   (A)   The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire
prevention of the fire department of the city of Spring Valley which is hereby
established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of
the fire department.
   (B)   The chief (or fire marshal) in charge of the bureau of fire prevention
shall be appointed by the mayor of the city on the basis of examination to
determine his qualifications. His appointment shall continue during good
behavior and satisfactory service and he shall not be removed from office
except as provided by the municipal code of the state of Illinois.
   (C)   The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire
department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of
the fire department shall recommend to the mayor and city council the
employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall
be selected through and examined to determine their fitness for the position.
The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the fire department,
and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with
removal only for cause.
   (D)   A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and
transmitted to the chief executive officer of the municipality; it shall
contain all proceedings under this code, with such statistics as the chief of
the fire department shall also recommend and any amendment to the code which,
in his judgment, shall be desirable. (1972 Code)
4-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code,
it shall be held to mean the city of Spring Valley, Illinois.
   (B)   Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the fire prevention
code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city of Spring Valley,
Illinois. (1972 Code)
4-2-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
4-2-5: AMENDMENTS:
The fire prevention code, adopted by section
4-2-1 of this chapter is amended and changed in the following respects: (1972
Code)
1.14. Permit Fee Schedule For The Examination Of Plans.
(Rep. by Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
11.3. Lighting Of Exit Ways. a. Adequate emergency lighting shall be installed
in all assembly, educational, industrial, institutional, mercantile, office,
storage, and multi-family occupancies. All emergency lighting shall have an
alternate source of power such as automatic generators, battery powered systems
or two (2) separate power feeds from different generating stations. The
emergency lighting system shall be installed so as to sufficiently illuminate
all means of egress such as corridors, stairwells, exit doors and any other
means of travel that leads to an exit, except as provided for in section 11.3b,
11.3c and 11.3d. b. If it is a mercantile occupancy with less than seven
thousand (7,000) square feet, one floor, and at ground level with adequate
outside light provided by windows or other means, then emergency lights shall
not be required. c. If it is an industrial or storage occupancy with less than
seven thousand (7,000) square feet, one floor, and at ground level with
adequate outside light provided by windows or other means, then emergency
lights shall not be required.
14.2. Survey Of Premises And Specifications Of Equipment. a. The chief of the
bureau of fire prevention shall survey each assembly educational, industrial,
institutional, mercantile, storage and residential occupancy, except individual
dwellings (private homes), and shall specify suitable fire extinguishing
appliances and fire detecting devices as may be necessary to provide reasonable
safety to persons and property. b. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention
shall specify suitable fire extinguishing appliances and fire detecting devices
as may be necessary to provide reasonable safety to persons and property in all
proposed new dwelling units of multi-family buildings and dwellings.
(1972 Code)
14.4. Automatic Sprinkler System.
(Rep. by Ord. 1454, 3-29-2010)
14.5. Standpipes. a. Approved standpipe systems shall be installed in all
buildings exceeding two (2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height, excepting
in buildings with existing systems having four inch (4") or larger standing
pipes or in one and two-family dwellings. b. Standpipe systems shall be
installed so as to provide reasonable safety to persons and property. Evidence
that standpipe systems have been installed in accordance with the applicable
standard specified for in this section 14.5b in article 31 of this code shall
be evidence that such standpipe systems provide reasonable safety to person and
property.
27.1. Definitions. a. Decorative material shall include all such material as
curtains, draperies, streamers, surface coverings applied over the building
interior finish for decoration, acoustical or other effect, and also cloth,
cotton, batting, straw, vines, leaves, trees and plastics used for decorative
effect, this shall also include all floor coverings, and all materials one-
fortieth of an inch (1/40") or less in thickness applied directly to and
adhering tightly to a noncombustible base. b. Place of assembly shall mean a
room or space used for assembly or educational occupancy for one hundred (100)
or more occupants or which has a floor area of one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet or more used for such purposes. Such room or space shall
include any similar occupied connecting room or space in the same story, or in
a story or stories above or below, where entrance is common to the rooms or
spaces.
(1972 Code)
4-2-6: ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE LANES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY DEVOTED TO PUBLIC USE:
The fire lanes referred to in the fire prevention code are hereby established
as follows: Whenever the chief of the bureau shall find that a fire lane is
required to provide access to building or structures or fire hydrants for
firefighting vehicles or equipment in order to prevent or eliminate a dangerous
or hazardous condition, he shall designate such fire lane or lanes as may be
necessary. (Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
4-2-7: ESTABLISHMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE ROUTES FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING
EXPLOSIVE AND BLASTING AGENTS:
The routes referred to in the fire prevention code for vehicles transporting
hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles are hereby established as
follows: U.S. Route 6 and Illinois Route 89 only. No stopping or parking of
vehicles of interstate shipment shall be allowed within the limits of the city
of Spring Valley, except for the purpose of inspection by the fire protection
bureau to ensure compliance with this code. (Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
4-2-8: MODIFICATIONS:
The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the code hereby adopted upon application in writing by the owner
or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties
in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the
spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial
justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and
the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon
the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the
applicant. (1972 Code)
4-2-9: APPEALS:
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the chief of the fire department to the council within thirty (30)
days from the date of the decision appealed. (1972 Code)
4-2-10: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted
or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any
order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by the council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The
imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or
permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not
otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of the above
penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions. (1972 Code)
4-2-11: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
All former ordinances or parts thereof conflicting or inconsistent with the
provisions of this ordinance or of the code hereby adopted are hereby repealed.
(1972 Code)
4-2-12: B1 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT CONSTRUCTION:
All buildings erected or constructed within any B1 downtown commercial district
shall be constructed such that all exterior walls and interior load bearing
walls consist of masonry design adequate to support all structural elements and
provide the required fire ratings as indicated in the building codes adopted by
the city of Spring Valley. Modifications to this type of construction will not
be permitted unless the property owner and contractor first obtain written
permission from the Spring Valley city council to modify the restrictions
provided herein, after review and recommendation by the Spring Valley city
engineer, the Spring Valley building inspector or the Spring Valley fire chief,
as appropriate. (Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
CHAPTER 3
BURNING RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Rubbish Burning
4-3-2: Burning Allowed
4-3-3: Burn Barrels
4-3-4: Recreational Fires
4-3-5: Penalty
4-3-1: RUBBISH BURNING:
It shall be unlawful to burn any materials other than small and dried
quantities of branches, leaves, weeds, or grass at any time other than as
specifically allowed by Section
4-3-2  of this Chapter. The burning of any other material such as rubber,
tires, tar paper, leather, batteries, or any other material which emits an
offensive odor when burned is unlawful within the City limits of the City of
Spring Valley, Illinois. (Ord. 1875, 7-17-2023)
4-3-2: BURNING ALLOWED:
Limited amounts of yard waste material may be burned, provided that the
material is dry and does not create an offensive odor, nuisance, or fire hazard
due to high winds, at specific times of the year. Combustible yard waste
material may be burned from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00)
P.M., but only in the Spring (April 1 - May 31) and Fall (September 1 -
November 30). No burning shall be allowed on, or adjacent to, any asphalt or
any paved street. No burning shall be allowed on any day when Hall Township
High School is hosting home football games. All fires must be constantly tended
by a competent person until such fire is properly extinguished. The continued
smoldering of slow-burning combustible yard waste outside of those specified
hours and times of year is a nuisance, and anyone kindling such a fire will be
considered to be performing an unlawful act. (Ord. 1875, 7-17-2023)
4-3-3: BURN BARRELS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have or keep within the City limits a
burn barrel, fine wire mesh, or concrete block enclosure, or any other
structure or device which could be used for the burning of garbage, rubbish, or
any other combustible material. (Ord. 1875, 7-17-2023)
4-3-4: RECREATIONAL FIRES:
It shall not be unlawful to have an outdoor fire burning materials other than
garbage or rubbish where the fuel being burned is contained in an incinerator,
outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill, or barbeque pit and has a total fuel area of
three feet (3') or less in diameter and two feet (2') or less in height for
pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth, or similar purposes. (Ord.
1875, 7-17-2023)
4-3-5: PENALTY:
Any person or persons who violate any provisions of this Chapter shall be fined
not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred and
fifty ($750.00) dollars for each offense. (Ord. 1875, 7-17-2023)
CHAPTER 4
GASOLINE FILLING STATIONS AND UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definition
4-4-2: License Required
4-4-3: Application
4-4-4: Regulations And Inspections
4-4-5: License Fee; Gasoline Stations (Rep. by Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
4-4-6: Testing Of Underground Flammable Liquid Storage Tanks Of Filling
Stations
4-4-7: Verified Inventory Record
4-4-8: Time Requirements For Testing
4-4-9: Underground Storage Tanks At Other Locations
4-4-10: Application; Storage Tank At Other Locations
4-4-11: Regulations And Inspections At Other Locations
4-4-12: License Fee; Other Than Filling Stations (Rep. by Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
4-4-13: Testing Of Underground Liquid Storage Tanks
4-4-14: Verified Inventory Record Of Underground Storage Tanks At Other
Locations
4-4-15: Time Requirements For Testing Underground Storage Tanks At Locations
Other Than Filling Stations
4-4-16: Disposal Of Abandoned Underground Storage Tanks
4-4-1: DEFINITION:
A "filling station" means any building, structure or premises wherein a
container or tank, either portable or stationary, containing ether, carbon,
bisulfite, gasoline, naphtha, benzene, hydrocarbon, liquefied petroleum gas,
acetone, kerosene, turpentine or other flammable liquids having a flashpoint
below one hundred sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (165°F), are kept for the
purpose of sale or distribution. (1972 Code)
4-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a filling station without first having obtained a
license therefor. (1972 Code)
4-4-3: APPLICATION:
The application for a filling station license shall specify the location of the
filling station, the capacity, in gallons, of the tanks, and the liquids to be
contained therein.
Each application shall be referred to the chief of the fire department, and
approved by him, before the license is issued, expressly provided, however,
that the chief of the fire department may not approve an application for the
initial license or the annual renewal of said license unless the applicant
furnished proof of compliance with the testing regulations as provided in
section
4-4-6 of this chapter. Persons operating such filling stations are required
annually on May 1 of each year to apply for renewal application pursuant to
provisions of this chapter. (1972 Code)
4-4-4: REGULATIONS AND INSPECTIONS:
Each filling station shall be erected and maintained in accordance with the
state statutes and the rules of the state fire marshal. The chief of the fire
department or some person authorized by him, shall inspect each filling station
at least twice every year. It shall be the duty of the person making such
inspections to see that the premises are maintained in compliance with the
provisions of this code and the rules of the state fire marshal, and to
determine that there is no dangerous accumulation of waste or other combustible
material on the premises. (1972 Code)
4-4-5: LICENSE FEE; GASOLINE STATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
4-4-6: TESTING OF UNDERGROUND FLAMMABLE LIQUID STORAGE TANKS OF FILLING
STATIONS:
   (A)   Any person intending to use underground flammable liquid storage tanks
in conjunction with a gasoline filling station, or for private use, shall have
the same tested if a leak is suspected and if a test is ordered by the fire
chief of the city of Spring Valley. The test to be performed is the Kent Moore
test or a test of equal physical nature. It shall be within the sole and final
discretion of the fire chief of the city of Spring Valley to determine which
tests are of equal physical nature to the Kent Moore test; (Ord., 8-19-1985)
   (B)   A report of such test shall be made to the bureau of fire prevention
and if the report of the test indicates that said storage tank is found to be
in a satisfactory condition, the said tank shall be approved by the fire
prevention bureau and the certificate of inspection issued by said bureau;
   (C)   Should said underground flammable liquid storage tank be found to be
defective as a result of such test, the bureau of fire prevention shall report
such fact to the owner or lessee of the premises on which it is maintained, and
it shall be the duty of such bureau of fire prevention to post a notice
prohibiting the use of such defective storage tank until such defects are
eliminated or corrected. If repairs will not overcome the defects, the future
use of the underground flammable storage tanks and equipment shall be
prohibited;
   (D)   After the posting of such notice, it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to use such defective tank until such time as the defects
are eliminated and corrected to the satisfaction of the bureau of fire
prevention, and said notice so posted removed by said bureau;
   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the fire chief,
in event of emergency where in his opinion gasoline is leaking from an
underground storage tank, may require the immediate closing of the premises and
require immediate testing of any underground storage tank as provided by state
law. (1972 Code)
4-4-7: VERIFIED INVENTORY RECORD:
Each licensee shall annually file a verified inventory record indicating
purchases and sale of fuel, to indicate whether or not there is any abnormal or
unexplained loss of fuel in any underground storage tank on the premises of
such licensee; that in event such records indicate any abnormal or unexplained
loss of fuel, the fire chief may then require a pressure testing of said
underground storage tanks upon giving five (5) days' notice by certified mail
to the owner and/or licensee of said premises. (1972 Code)
4-4-8: TIME REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING:
The pressure testing required of this chapter is applicable to all gasoline
filling stations within the corporate limits of the city, but in event that the
owner or licensee of said station has had an underground storage tank in said
licensed premises tested within the last three (3) year period, he shall not
again be required to have said tanks pressure tested until a period of five (5)
years has elapsed from the date of last testing upon furnishing proof of such
testing to the fire chief. (1972 Code)
4-4-9: UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS AT OTHER LOCATIONS:
Any person, firm or corporation using, maintaining or operating underground
flammable liquid storage tanks on premises other than a gasoline filling
station is hereby required to obtain a license therefor. (1972 Code)
4-4-10: APPLICATION; STORAGE TANK AT OTHER LOCATIONS:
The application for a license for an underground storage facility at a location
other than a filling station shall specify the location of the underground
storage tanks, the capacity, in gallons, of the tanks, and the liquids to be
contained therein.
Each application shall be referred to the chief of the fire department, and
approved by him, before the license is issued, expressly provided, however, the
chief of the fire department may not approve an application for the initial
license or the annual renewal of said license unless the applicant furnishes
proof of compliance with the testing regulations as provided in section
4-4-13 of this chapter. Persons operating such underground storage facility are
required annually on May 1 of each year to apply for a renewal application
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (1972 Code)
4-4-11: REGULATIONS AND INSPECTIONS AT OTHER LOCATIONS:
Each underground storage tank at a location other than a filling station shall
be erected and maintained in accordance with the state statutes and the rules
of the state fire marshal. The chief of the fire department or some person
authorized by him, shall inspect each underground storage tank at least twice
every year. It shall be the duty of the person making such inspections to see
that the premises are maintained in compliance with the provisions of this code
and the rules of the state fire marshal, and to determine that there is no
dangerous accumulation of waste or other combustible material on the premises.
(1972 Code)
4-4-12: LICENSE FEE; OTHER THAN FILLING STATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
4-4-13: TESTING OF UNDERGROUND LIQUID STORAGE TANKS:
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation using, maintaining or operating
underground flammable liquid storage other than filling stations shall have the
same tested if a leak is suspected and if a test is ordered by the chief of the
Spring Valley fire department; such testing shall be performed by a person,
firm or corporation duly qualified to test such underground flammable liquid
storage and be certified by the bureau of fire protection, the costs of such
tests shall be borne by the owner of the premises or lessee. The tests to be
performed shall be the Kent Moore test or a test of equal physical nature, with
the chief of the Spring Valley fire department having the sole and final
decision in determining what other tests may be performed which are of equal or
the same physical nature as the Kent Moore test; (Ord., 8-19-1985)
   (B)   A report of such test shall be made to the bureau of fire prevention
and if the report of the test indicates that said storage tank is found to be
in a satisfactory condition, the said tank shall be approved by the fire
prevention bureau and certificate of inspection issued by said bureau;
   (C)   Should said underground flammable liquid storage tank be found to be
defective as a result of such test, the bureau of fire prevention shall report
such fact to the owner or lessee of the premises on which it is maintained, and
it shall be the duty of such bureau of fire prevention to post a notice
prohibiting the use of such defective storage tank until such defect or defects
are eliminated and corrected. If repairs will not overcome the defects, the
future use of the underground flammable storage tanks and equipment shall be
prohibited;
   (D)   After the posting of such notice, it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to use such defective tank until such time as the defects
are eliminated and corrected to the satisfaction of the bureau of fire
prevention, and said notice so posted removed by said bureau;
   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the fire chief
in event of an emergency, where in his opinion, gasoline is leaking from an
underground storage tank, may require the immediate closing of the premises and
require immediate testing of any underground storage tank as provided by state
law. (Ord., 2-18-1980)
4-4-14: VERIFIED INVENTORY RECORD OF UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS AT OTHER
LOCATIONS:
Each licensee shall keep a verified inventory record indicating purchases and
use of fuel, to indicate whether or not there is any abnormal or unexplained
loss of fuel in any underground storage tank on the premises of such licensee;
that in the event such records indicate any abnormal or unexplained loss of
fuel, the fire chief may then require that a Kent Moore test or a test of equal
physical nature be performed upon the underground storage tanks upon giving
five (5) days' notice by certified mail to the owner and/or licensee of said
premises. The licensee shall also make available to the fire chief a copy of
the verified inventory referred to in this section upon request. (1972 Code)
4-4-15: TIME REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS AT LOCATIONS
OTHER THAN FILLING STATIONS:
The Kent Moore test or a test of equal physical nature required by this chapter
is applicable to all underground storage tanks at locations other than filling
stations within the corporate limits of the city, but said tests shall only be
required if a leak is suspected and if the test is ordered by the fire chief.
The fire chief shall have the sole and final authority in determining what
tests are of equal physical nature to the Kent Moore test. (1972 Code)
4-4-16: DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS:
Any person, firm or corporation, including gasoline filling stations, using,
maintaining or operating underground liquid storage tanks containing materials
defined in section
4-4-1 of this chapter shall be responsible for removing both the underground
liquid storage tank and the piping running from said tank from its site, once
the site has been abandoned. A site shall be considered to be abandoned when
the liquid storage tank has been either unused for one year or unconnected to
dispensing equipment for one year.
Filling the underground liquid storage tank with aggregate fill or other types
of fill and leaving the tank in the ground at the site in question are not
acceptable. (Ord., 8-19-1985)
CHAPTER 5
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL
SECTION:
4-5-1: Hazardous Materials Or Hazardous Substance Incidents Expense Recovery
4-5-1: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE INCIDENTS EXPENSE RECOVERY:
Any person, whether a resident or non-resident of the City of Spring Valley,
causing or permitting a hazardous material incident shall be responsible for
reimbursing the City of Spring Valley as follows:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this Section, the terms used herein
are defined as follows:
 
                             A substance or material in a quantity and form
                             determined by the United States Department of
                             Transportation to be capable of posing an
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL:          unreasonable risk to health and safety or property
                             when transported in commerce and hazardous
                             substance or waste as defined by the Environmental
                             Protection Act.
                             Emergency or non-emergency circumstance involving
                             the sudden release or threatened or potential
                             release of hazardous material which, in the
                             judgment of an appropriate governmental agency,
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL INCIDENT: threatens imminent and irreparable harm to the
                             environment or the health, safety or welfare of
                             any individual other than individuals exposed to
                             the risk associated with hazardous material in the
                             normal course of their employment.
                             Any actual or threatened spilling, leaking,
RELEASE:                     pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging,
                             injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or
                             disposing into the environment.
                             The clean up or removal of released hazardous
                             material or improperly stored hazardous material
                             from the environment; such actions as may be
                             necessary to be taken in the event of the threat
                             of release of hazardous material into the
                             environment; such actions as may be necessary to
REMOVAL:                     monitor, assess and evaluate the release or threat
                             of release of hazardous material, the disposal of
                             removed material or the taking of such other
                             actions as may be necessary to prevent, minimize
                             or mitigate to the public health or welfare or
                             environment which may otherwise result from a
                             release or threat of a release.
 
   (B)   Removal; Abatement: The City of Spring Valley is authorized to remove
or abate the effect of any hazardous material involving the actual or
threatened release, discharge or deposit upon or onto property or facilities
within the City of Spring Valley. The following described persons shall be
jointly and severally liable to the City of Spring Valley for the payment of
all costs incurred by the City of Spring Valley as a result of such removal or
abatement activity:
      1.   Any person or persons whose negligent or willful act or omission
proximately caused such release;
      2.   The person or persons who owned or had custody or control over the
hazardous material at the time of such threatened or actual release without
regard to fault or proximate cause;
      3.   The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the
container or vehicle which held such hazardous material at the time of or
immediately prior to such actual or threatened release without regard to fault
or proximate cause; and
      4.   Any person owning or in control of any real property from which
hazardous material is or may be released.
   (C)   Supervision/Verification By Fire Chief: In the event that any person
undertakes, either voluntarily or upon the order of the fire chief or other
Spring Valley City official to remove or abate the effects of any actual or
threatened release of hazardous material upon or onto any property or facility
within the City of Spring Valley, the fire chief may take such action as is
necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the removal or abatement. The
persons described in subsection (B) shall be liable to the City of Spring
Valley for all costs incurred as a result of such supervision or verification.
   (D)   Qualified Costs: Costs incurred by the City of Spring Valley shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: actual labor costs
of City of Spring Valley personnel, including benefits and administrative
overhead; reimbursement to the City of Spring Valley for the services of
members of the Spring Valley volunteer fire department at rate not to exceed
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per hour and not to exceed seventy dollars
($70.00) per volunteer fire fighter responding to the hazardous materials
emergency; cost of equipment operation; cost of materials obtained directly by
the City of Spring Valley and cost of consultants whose expertise is required
to remove or abate the incident or to assess the nature and extent of the
damage done; cost of equipment operation; replacement cost of vehicles or
equipment which in the determination of the fire chief, is contaminated beyond
reuse or repair; laboratory costs; cost of materials or equipment obtained
directly by the City of Spring Valley; cost of any contact or mutual aid labor
and materials; and attorneys' fees incurred in collecting monies owed to the
City of Spring Valley by liable parties.
   (E)   Remedies: The remedies provided in this section shall be in addition
to any other remedies or penalties provided by law.
   (F)   Burden Of Liability: This section shall be liberally construed to give
effect to its purpose which is to shift the burden of liability for the
aforesaid removal or abatement costs from the citizens of the City of Spring
Valley to those responsible for the incident.
   (G)   State Reimbursement: In the event that the City of Spring Valley is
not reimbursed by the responsible party as required herein, if applicable, the
fire chief shall make application to the emergency response reimbursement fund
of the State of Illinois pursuant to the Hazardous Material Emergency Response
Reimbursement Act (430 ILCS 55/1 et seq.)
(Ord. 1748, 5-20-2019)
CHAPTER 6
FIRE FALSE ALARMS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Prohibited
4-6-2: Fee
4-6-3: Waiver Of Fee
4-6-1: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to report or cause to
be reported to the city any false alarm of fire. (Ord. 1000, 10-2-2000)
4-6-2: FEE:
Any person, firm, or corporation having a fire alarm or fire sensor shall be
charged a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second false alarm
and a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent false alarm of
fire responded to by the Spring Valley fire department during any twelve (12)
month period.
(Ord. 1000, 10-2-2000; amd. Ord. 1756, 7-15-2019)
4-6-3: WAIVER OF FEE:
If the possessor of a fire alarm or fire sensor establishes to the satisfaction
of the Spring Valley City Council a reasonable explanation for why the fee
provided for in section
4-6-2 should not be imposed, the Spring Valley City Council shall have the
authority to waive the fees set forth in section
4-6-2 of the Spring Valley City Code.
(Ord. 1000, 10-2-2000; amd. Ord. 1756, 7-15-2019)
TITLE 5
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TAX
SECTION:
5-1-1: Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
5-1-2: Municipal Service Occupation Tax
5-1-3: Municipal Use Tax
5-1-4: Hotel Tax
5-1-5: Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
5-1-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the City at the rate of one and one-
half percent (1.5%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of
such business while this chapter is in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of section
8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. (1972 Code; amd. Ord. 1653, 12-5-2016,
eff. 7-1-2017)
Every such person engaged in such business in the City shall file on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of
Revenue required by section three of "An Act in Relation to a Tax Upon Persons
Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for
Use or Consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (1972 Code)
5-1-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this Municipality in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of one and one-half percent
(1.5%) of the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by said
servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the
provisions of section
8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code. (1972 Code; amd. Ord. 1653, 12-5-2016,
eff. 7-1-2017)
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for Municipal Service
Occupation Tax for the benefit of this Municipality shall file, on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of
Revenue required by section nine of the Service Occupation Tax Act.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (1972 Code)
5-1-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of section
8-11-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code upon the privilege of using in the
Municipality any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside
Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an
agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%)
of the selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have the
meaning as defined in the Use Tax Act, approved July 14, 1955.
Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois Department of Revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued.
The City Clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the Illinois Department of
Revenue a certified copy of the ordinance codified herein not later than five
(5) days after the effective date hereof. (1972 Code)
5-1-4: HOTEL TAX 1 :
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to generate revenue to be
placed in a fund to increase tourism in the City of Spring Valley through the
promotion of lodging, restaurants, attractions, conventions, expositions, and
theatrical, sport, cultural and other similar activities.
   (B)   Definitions: For the purpose of, and used in this section, unless the
context otherwise requires:
    CITY CLERK: The Spring Valley city clerk.
   DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
   HOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may for a consideration
obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term
includes conference centers, inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging
houses, rooming houses, apartment houses and bed and breakfast houses.
   OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of
any room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to the use or
possession of the furnishing or to the services and accommodations accompanying
the use and possession of the room or rooms.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any man or woman who occupies or has the right to occupy
any room or rooms, regardless of whether or not it is the same room or rooms,
in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days for his or her own
personal use unrelated to the conducting of any business or occupation.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, or receiver, executor,
trustee, conservator or other repetitive appointed by any court.
   RENT OR RENTAL: The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits
and property or services of any kind or nature.
   RENTER: Any person who pays for the privilege of using or occupying a hotel
room for the period for which payment is made.
   ROOM OR ROOMS: Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
   (C)   Tax Imposed:
      1.   There is hereby levied and imposed upon all persons, firms or
corporations engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a
hotel which is located within the corporate limits of the city of Spring
Valley, Bureau County, pursuant to section 8-3-14 of the Illinois municipal
code 2 , a tax at a rate of four percent (4%) of the gross rental receipts from
such renting, leasing or letting for any purpose of each twenty four (24) hour
period or portion thereof. Excluded from the gross rental receipts will be the
proceeds of such rents, leasing or letting to permanent residents. The tax
imposed herein shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and charges
applicable to such hotels, but such other taxes and charges shall not be
construed to be a part of the gross rental receipts upon which this tax is
levied.
      2.   The ultimate incidents of any liability for payment of the tax
levied herein is upon the person, firm or corporation engaged in the business
of leasing, renting or letting said rooms. Such hotel owners and operators may
reimburse themselves for their tax liability for this tax separately stating
such tax as an additional charge to the lessee or renter. The charge may be
stated in combination as a single amount with the state of Illinois tax imposed
under "the hotel operator's occupation tax" 3 . No tax is imposed based upon
receipts from any permanent residents of any hotel.
      3.   No person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of renting,
leasing or letting rooms in a hotel shall reimburse himself or change for the
imposition of this tax at a rate higher than the tax imposed by this section.
      4.   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (C), on or before
the deadlines as required by the state of Illinois for the filing of hotel
operators' occupation tax return, every person, firm or corporation engaged in
the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel within the city of
Spring Valley during the preceding calendar month shall file a return with the
city clerk, on or before the thirtieth day of the month following the month for
which the information provided, on forms to be supplied by the city clerk,
stating:
         (a)   The name of the operator;
         (b)   His residence address and the address of the principal place of
business from which he engages in the business or renting, leasing or letting
rooms in a hotel in the city of Spring Valley;
         (c)   Total amount of rental receipts received by him during the
preceding calendar month from renting, leasing or letting rooms to permanent
residents during such preceding calendar months;
         (d)   Total amount of rental receipts received by him during the
preceding calendar month from renting, leasing or letting rooms to permanent
residents during such preceding calendar months;
         (e)   Gross rental receipts which were received by him during the
preceding calendar month and upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
         (f)   The amount of the tax due;
         (g)   The amount of penalty for late payment due, calculated at the
rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per month with a twenty dollar ($20.00)
minimum penalty;
         (h)   Such other reasonable information as may from time to time be
required by the city clerk.
The persons subject to the tax shall also transmit to the city clerk with the
return required by this subsection (C)4 the amount of the tax and penalties, if
any, due as shown by said return. Such person shall also file the city clerk
copies of all hotel operators' occupation tax returns as are required by the
provisions of 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 145/1 et seq.
      5.   Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of renting,
leasing or letting of hotel rooms shall maintain complete and accurate books
and records, including a daily sheet showing the gross rental receipts for the
hotel rentals for the day reported.
      6.   For the purpose of enforcing and administering this section, the
city clerk or such agents designated by the city clerk shall, after providing
reasonable notice, have access during normal business hours to the books and
records of the person, firms and corporations subject to this section.
The city clerk or such agents as are designated by the city clerk shall at
least annually inspect said books and records and shall file a written report
of his or her findings with the city council no later than April 1 of each
year.
      7.   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided,
the corporation counsel shall, upon the request of the city clerk, bring or
cause to be brought any action to enforce the payment of said tax in behalf of
the city in any court of competent jurisdiction.
      8.   Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this section, except when otherwise specifically
provided, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than
two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for
the first offense and not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second and each subsequent offense
in any one hundred eighty (180) day period. A separate and distinct offense
shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said period shall continue
any such violation, or permit any such violation to exist after notification
thereof.
      9.   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this
section, including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the city of
Spring Valley and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate fund of
the city of Spring Valley to be utilized to increase tourism in the city of
Spring Valley through the promotion of lodging, restaurants, attractions,
conventions, expositions, and theatrical, sports, cultural and other similar
activities. Such expenditures for this purpose shall include, but not be
limited to:
         (a)   Publishing promotional material, such as general brochures,
calendars of events, lodging guides and antique and arts guides;
         (b)   Preparation of an advertising campaign promoting the city of
Spring Valley;
         (c)   Exploring signage needs;
         (d)   Participation in regional tourism organizations;
         (e)   Working with group tour operators to encourage group tour
business;
         (f)   Establishing office facilities and hiring a staff to direct
promotional efforts.
   (D)   Purpose Of Penalties: The purposes of imposing the penalties in
subsection (C)8 of this section is to ensure the integrity of the collection
process established pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1165, 5-16-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-3-14.
2 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-3-14.
3 2. 35 ILCS 145/1, as amended.
5-1-5: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   Tax Imposed; Rate:
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the City at the rate of three
percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that
business.
      2.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
sections
8-11-22, of the Illinois Municipal Code 1.
   (B)   Collection Of Tax By Retailers:
      1.   The tax imposed by this section shall be remitted by such retailer
to the Illinois Department of Revenue (Department). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
      2.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 1763, 9-23-2019)
CHAPTER 2
BILLPOSTING
SECTION:
5-2-1: License Required
5-2-2: Bond
5-2-3: License Application; Fee
5-2-4: Term Of License
5-2-5: Placing Handbills On Vehicles
5-2-6: Posting; Owner's Permission Required
5-2-7: Mutilation Of Lawfully Posted Bills Prohibited
5-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, tack up, exhibit or carry for
distribution along any street any handbills, circulars, sheets, lithographs,
signs, books, pamphlets or advertising samples without having first obtained a
license and given bond in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (1972
Code)
5-2-2: BOND:
The bond shall be in the penal sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) signed by
two (2) good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the council, and among
other things shall be conditional that no obscene, immoral or indecent
handbills, circulars or other advertising matter shall be posted or distributed
upon any of the streets in the city. (1972 Code)
5-2-3: LICENSE APPLICATION; FEE:
The license herein mentioned shall be granted by the mayor and countersigned by
the clerk, upon the proper application thereof, and the payment into the
treasury of the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) in advance, together with the sum
of one dollar ($1.00) to the clerk for his fees for the issuance thereof, and
after the approval of the bond as aforesaid. (1972 Code)
5-2-4: TERM OF LICENSE:
The license shall be in force from the time of its issuance up to, and
including, April 30 next following, and no license shall be granted for any
purpose other than in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (1972 Code)
5-2-5: PLACING HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES:
It shall be illegal and a violation of this chapter for any person to place,
throw or otherwise distribute any handbills, circulars, sheets, lithographs,
signs, books, pamphlets or advertising samples upon any public street, alley or
sidewalk of the city, or to paste, attach or place the same in or upon any
vehicle, or other privately or publicly owned conveyance of any sort, without
the permission of the owner of such conveyance first being had and secured. No
license issued or bond approved hereunder shall be construed to permit the
owner or holder thereof to violate any of the provisions of this section. (1972
Code)
5-2-6: POSTING; OWNER'S PERMISSION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any advertisement, handbill or
placard upon any wall, building, fence, sidewalk or other property, public or
private, without the permission of the owner or person in charge thereof. (1972
Code)
5-2-7: MUTILATION OF LAWFULLY POSTED BILLS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cover, mutilate, deface, tear down or
injure in any manner any poster, bill or advertisement lawfully posted in the
city within ten (10) days after the same has been posted nor until after the
expiration of the date where the same are dated. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ITINERANT MERCHANTS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 8 of this title.
CHAPTER 4
GARAGES AND GAS STATIONS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Written Consent
5-4-2: Penalty
5-4-1: WRITTEN CONSENT:
No public garage or automobile repair shop shall be established within the city
except within the fire limits of the city, without having first secured the
written consent of the owners of land, within one hundred fifty feet (150') of
such public garage or automobile repair shop, and no gas reservoir or gas or
oil refilling station shall be established within the city, except within the
fire limits of the city, without having first secured the written consent of
the owners of land within one hundred feet (100') of the nearest pump of such
reservoir or gas or oil refilling station, and no business whose operation
would disturb the peace and quiet of residents in its vicinity, shall be
established within the city, except within the fire limits of the city, without
having first secured the written consent of the owners of land within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of such place of business. Such consent shall be
filed in the office of the city clerk, and when so filed the clerk shall issue
a certificate that such consent has been filed as aforesaid. In addition
thereto same shall not be established contrary to any provisions of the Spring
Valley land development code (title 14 of this code). (1972 Code; amd. Ord.
1379, 6-9-2008)
5-4-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating this chapter shall upon conviction be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
each and every offense, and each day that said violation shall exist shall
constitute a separate offense. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 5
JUNKYARDS AND JUNK DEALERS
SECTION:
5-5-1: License
5-5-2: Consent Of Residents
5-5-3: Definitions
5-5-4: Application And Bond
5-5-5: Purchase From Minors
5-5-6: Nuisance
5-5-7: Penalty
5-5-1: LICENSE:
No junkyard shall be operated within the city limits without first having
obtained a license from the city. (1972 Code)
5-5-2: CONSENT OF RESIDENTS:
No junkyard shall be established or operated in the corporate limits of the
city unless consent is obtained in writing of seventy five percent (75%) of the
residents within a radius of five hundred feet (500') of the location of said
junkyard. (1972 Code)
5-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
A "junkyard" shall be defined as a plot of ground which may be covered with
buildings, partly covered with buildings, or without any buildings, which plot
is used for the buying, selling, storing and trading of old iron, rags, hides,
furs, old furniture, rubber, wool, used cars, used car parts, old metals,
bottles, old automobile tires, and the like commonly called junk. (1972 Code)
5-5-4: APPLICATION AND BOND:
A license shall be granted to any person of good moral character on written
application being made showing a compliance with this chapter and on payment of
a license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year. A bond in the sum of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) with two (2) sureties conditioned on compliance
with the items of this chapter, shall accompany the application and license
fee. A corporation wishing to engage in such business shall be granted a
license on an application made by its employee, who is to act as manager of
said yard in compliance with this chapter. (1972 Code)
5-5-5: PURCHASE FROM MINORS:
A licensee under this chapter shall not purchase or receive from minors any
article whatsoever without the written consent of their parents or guardian.
(1972 Code)
5-5-6: NUISANCE:
A junkyard established or operated in the city contrary to the terms of this
chapter is hereby declared a nuisance. (1972 Code)
5-5-7: PENALTY:
A person or corporation establishing and operating a junkyard contrary to the
terms of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for every day so operated and each day of such operation is hereby
declared a separate offense. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 6
LAUNDRIES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Necessity
5-6-2: Application For License
5-6-3: Issuance Of License
5-6-4: Regulations
5-6-5: Annual Fee
5-6-6: Other Regulations
5-6-7: Clear View
5-6-8: Attendant
5-6-9: Revocation Of License
5-6-10: Penalty
5-6-1: NECESSITY:
It shall be necessary and conducive to the protection of the public health,
welfare and safety to prohibit from and after the effective date of this
chapter, the operation of public automatic laundries without first securing
from the city a license to operate such establishment or establishments. (1972
Code)
5-6-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Each owner or operator of a public automatic laundry shall procure a license
for the operation of such establishment, and a license for each establishment,
from the city prior to initial operation of any such establishments. In the
event that any public automatic laundry has been in operation prior to the
enactment of this chapter, application for license hereunder shall be made
within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter. Application
for the license shall be made to the clerk on forms prescribed by the
department of public health and safety and shall give the following
information:
   (A)   Name of applicant.
   (B)   Location of plant.
   (C)   Description of facilities including the number of automatic washers
and the number of automatic dryers to be made available to the public.
   (D)   The name of the manager or the supervisor of such establishment if
other than the owner thereof. (1972 Code)
5-6-3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The clerk shall issue such license in the event that the conditions hereinafter
specified shall have been fully met by the applicant for such license. Upon the
filing of such application for a license, the department of public health and
safety, acting through the chief of police, shall take immediate steps to
determine if the establishment for which a license is sought complies in all
respects with the regulations hereinafter specified.
Each license granted hereunder shall be displayed in a prominent place in the
establishment to which granted. (1972 Code)
5-6-4: REGULATIONS:
The regulations and specifications to be complied with shall be as follows:
   (A)   The building in which situated shall be constructed of standard
fireproof construction.
   (B)   The wiring, plumbing and venting of all automatic washing machines and
automatic dryers shall conform in all respects to accepted light industry
building standards.
   (C)   The premises shall be kept free from all refuse and debris at all
times.
   (D)   All benches, tables and stands upon which clothing, or other soiled
materials are to be placed, shall be constructed of such material and finish so
that the same can be easily and readily cleaned and kept in a sanitary
condition. (1972 Code)
5-6-5: ANNUAL FEE:
The annual fee for such license is hereby set at the sum of fifty dollars
($50.00) for each establishment. (1972 Code)
5-6-6: OTHER REGULATIONS:
The department of public health and safety may promulgate and adopt such
further regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
chapter. (1972 Code)
5-6-7: CLEAR VIEW:
No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in
the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such
premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed
premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen,
partition or other obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall
be permitted in or about the interior of such premises from the street, road or
sidewalk, and said premises must be so located that there shall be full view of
the entire interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk. The
premises shall be continuously lighted upon the days open and during business
hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of the
interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view into any
such licensed premises required by the foregoing provisions, shall be wilfully
obscured by the licensee or by him wilfully suffered to be obscured or in any
manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in the
manner herein provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this section the
department of public health and safety shall have the right to require the
filing with the chief of police of plans, drawings and photographs showing the
clearance of the view as above required. (1972 Code)
5-6-8: ATTENDANT:
Any such premises failing to comply with section
5-6-7 of this chapter shall in lieu of compliance with said section
5-6-7 of this chapter, provide that an adult attendant be present on said
premises at all times. (1972 Code)
5-6-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued hereunder may be revoked for any violation of any provision
of this chapter. (1972 Code)
5-6-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than five dollars ($5.00), nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 7
PEDDLERS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 8 of this title.
CHAPTER 8
SOLICITORS AND VENDORS
SECTION:
5-8-1: Definitions
5-8-2: Certificate Of Registration And License Required
5-8-3: Application For Certificate Of Registration And License Required
5-8-4: Revocation Of Certificate
5-8-5: Registration Fee
5-8-6: Occupant Notice Regarding Soliciting
5-8-7: Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited
5-8-8: Duty Of Solicitor To Observe Occupant Notice
5-8-9: Hours When Soliciting Permissible
5-8-10: Restriction On Peddling In Public
5-8-11: Creating Hazard Prohibited
5-8-12: City Of Spring Valley Sponsored Events
5-8-13: Prohibited Act
5-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
HAWKER: A solicitor who seeks to sell or obtain orders for property, who
conducts his or her business from one or more specified locations specifically
advertised or held out for the purpose of the business.
ITINERANT MERCHANT/VENDOR: Any person who transports tangible personal property
for retail sale within the City who does not maintain in this City an
established office, distribution house, in-sales house, warehouse, service
center, or residence from which the business is conducted. However, this
Chapter does not apply to any person who delivers tangible personal property
within this City who is fulfilling an order for the property which was
solicited or placed by mail or other means.
PEDDLER: A solicitor who seeks to sell or obtain orders for property, as set
forth in this Chapter, who travels to the location of the prospective customer
in order to conduct his or her business.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of
registration as hereinafter provided, which certificate is in the possession of
the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting.
RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one
or more persons contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITING: Any one or more of the following activities:
   (A)   Seeking to sell or obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character, or description
whatever for any kind of consideration whatever;
   (B)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers, and every other type or kind of publication; or
   (C)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing, or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization, corporation, or project.
STAND: Any table, showcase, bench, rack, push cart, wagon or other wheeled
vehicle or device which may be moved without the assistance of a motor and
which is not required to be licensed and registered by the Department of Motor
Vehicles, used for the displaying, storing or transporting of articles offered
for sale by a vendor.
STREET VENDOR: Any person engaged in the selling or offering for sale
merchandise in any public place, from a stand, motor vehicle or from his or her
person. For purposes of this Chapter, "public place" means any street,
sidewalk, park, alley, dedicated public right-of-way or any other public
property owned or controlled by the City or any other governmental entity.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail sales
of goods, wares, or merchandise in the City and who, for the purpose of
conducting the business, occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure of any
kind, or vacant lot. However, this does not apply to any person selling goods,
wares, or merchandise which are raised, produced, or manufactured by him or
her, to any person selling vegetables, fruits, or perishable farm products at
any established City market, or to any person operating a stand or booth on or
adjacent to property owned by him or her or upon which he or she resides.
VICTUALS: Food of any kind that is prepared, packaged or is in a form that is
suitable for immediate ingestion, or consumption by human beings, or raw meats.
The definition excludes produce sold in bulk or by weight that has not been
prepared, packaged or served with other prepared foods as part of a menu item.
(Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-8-2: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   Required: It shall be unlawful for any person eighteen (18) years of
age or older, to engage as a hawker, itinerant merchant/vendor, peddler,
solicitor, street vendor, or transient merchant of any merchandise, article,
thing, victuals, or amusement without first having secured a license in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and completed registration in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Mobile Food Vendors, as defined
and regulated in
Chapter 22 of this Title, have their own registration and licensing
requirements and regulations are expressly excluded from the requirements of
this Chapter.
   (B)   Special Events: Any hawker, itinerant merchant/vendor, peddler,
solicitor, street vendor, or transient merchant participating in any special
event for which the sponsor has sought and obtained approval from the City of
Spring Valley may sell and offer for sale any victuals, produce, goods, wares,
or merchandise without first obtaining a license and complying with the
certificate of registration as required by this section, provided that such
participant complies with the following requirements:
      1.   All displays, sales and related activities shall be limited to the
boundaries of the special event for which the City granted approval to the
sponsor;
      2.   All displays, sales and related activities shall be conducted in the
areas designated by the sponsor;
      3.   Participating hawker, itinerant merchant/vendor, peddler, solicitor,
street vendor, or transient merchant shall indemnify and hold the City of
Spring Valley and its employees harmless from and against all claims of any
kind whatsoever related to such participants' conduct occurring at the special
event and shall submit proof of liability insurance to the City of Spring
Valley and the sponsor demonstrating adequate liability coverage which shall be
determined, in the sole discretion of, the City of Spring Valley;
      4.   Participating hawker, itinerant merchant/vendor, peddler, solicitor,
street vendor, or transient merchant shall comply with all rules, regulations
and requirements set out by the City of Spring Valley, the Bureau County Health
Department, and by the sponsor of the event; and
      5.   Participating hawker, itinerant merchant/vendor, peddler, solicitor,
street vendor, or transient merchant shall pay any participation fees to the
sponsor of the event.
   (C)   Municipal Exemption: The City of Spring Valley reserves the right to
waive the certificate of registration and licensing provisions contained in
this Chapter for any school, religious or not for profit organization and to
exempt said organizations from the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 1659, 1-
30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-8-3: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   Application for certificate of registration and license shall be made
upon a form provided by the City of Spring Valley. The applicant shall
truthfully state in full the information requested on the application:
      1.   Name and address of present place of residence, length of residence
at the address, business address if other than present address, and address of
the place of residence during the past three (3) years, if other than the
present residence;
      2.   Age of applicant;
      3.   Physical description of the applicant;
      4.   Name and address of the person, firm, corporation, or association by
whom the applicant Is employed or represents, and the length of time of the
employment or representation;
      5.   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of
the solicitation in which the applicant will engage, and the location or areas
in which the solicitation will take place;
      6.   Period of time for which the certificate is applied;
      7.   The date or approximate date of the latest previous application for
certificate under this Chapter, if any;
      8.   Has a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under this
Chapter ever been revoked;
      9.   Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of a felony
under the laws of the State or any other state or Federal law of the United
States;
      10.   Sales tax identification number;
      11.   Tax exemption number (if any);
      12.   Number and kind of vehicles to be used;
      13.   Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, or the Ordinance of any other Illinois municipality
regulating soliciting;
      14.   Also shall provide such additional information as the Chief of
Police reasonably may deem necessary to process the application.
   (B)   Each applicant must submit with the application required certificates
and approvals from all County, State and Federal regulatory agencies for the
products the applicant is seeking to sell or obtain orders for.
   (C)   All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in
connection therewith shall be under oath.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall cause to be kept in its office an accurate record
of every application received and acted upon, together with all other
information and data pertaining thereto, all certificates of registration
issued under the provisions of this Chapter, and all denials of applications.
Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order, as filed,
and every certificate issued and any renewal thereof shall be Identified with
the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. The Chief of
Police shall require every applicant to submit to photo identification and
finger print identification in connection with the application for a
certificate to perform a background check.
   (E)   No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has
been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State or any
other state or Federal law of the United States within five (5) years of the
date of application, nor to any person who is a registered sex offender in this
or any other state, nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of
any of the provisions of this Chapter, nor to any person whose certificate of
registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided.
   (F)   Application for a certificate under this Chapter shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk at least three (3) business days prior to the time
that the applicant desires to commence such business.
   (G)   The application under this section shall be accompanied by a bond in
the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to the City, such bond to be
executed by good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the City Clerk, and
to be conditioned that all goods, wares and merchandise will be as represented,
and that the purchase price will be refunded on any article sold which is not
as represented, and that final delivery of goods ordered will be made in
accordance with the terms of such order, and, failing therein, the advance
payment on such order will be refunded. Any person aggrieved by the action of
any such peddler or itinerant merchant/vendor shall have the right of action on
the bond for the money paid or damages, or both.
   (H)   The application under this section shall be accompanied by proof of
general liability insurance in an amount of not less than five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) to be provided by any peddler, itinerant merchant/vendor,
street vendor, and registered solicitor. Any solicitor seeking to obtain gifts
or contributions of money, clothing, or any other valuable thing for the
support or benefit of any charitable or not-for-profit association,
organization, corporation or project shall not be require.d to provide proof of
liability insurance. Any solicitor who does not fall within this exception must
provide proof of liability insurance in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-8-4: REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
   (A)   Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by
the Chief of Police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a
violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, or has made a false
material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for
the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this Chapter.
   (B)   Immediately upon the revocation, written notice thereof shall be given
by the Chief of Police to the holder of the certificate in person or by
certified United States mail addressed to his or her residence address set
forth in the application. (Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-8-5: REGISTRATION FEE:
   (A)   All hawkers, itinerant merchants/vendors, peddlers, solicitors, street
vendors, or transient merchants shall pay to the City Clerk of the City of
Spring Valley an annual registration fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
year, commencing on January 1 of each year. Any itinerant merchant/vendor,
peddler, street vendor or mobile vendor or solicitor who represents an agency
or business which maintains a physical location (e.g., office, store or service
center) within the corporate limits of the City of Spring Valley for a term of
at least twelve (12) months, shall be exempt from the one hundred dollar
($100.00) annual registration fee.
   (B)   The City of Spring Valley will refund to any charitable, religious or
not-for-profit association, organization, or project the registration fee
required under this section upon completion of the solicitation project;
provided that the charitable, religious or not-for-profit association,
organization, or project completes its solicitation without violating any of
the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874, 7-17-
2023)
5-8-6: OCCUPANT NOTICE REGARDING SOLICITING:
   (A)   Every person desiring to secure the protection provided by the
regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this Chapter shall comply
with the following rules and directions.
   (B)   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to
solicitors or the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any residence shall be
given in the following manner.
      1.   A weatherproof card approximately three inches by four inches (3" x
4") in size shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the
applicable words, as follows:
         (a)   Only Solicitors Registered with the City of Spring Valley
Invited; or
         (b)   No Solicitors Invited or No Solicitors.
      2.   The letters shall be at least one-third inch (") in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to
persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
      3.   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereof. (Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874, 7-17-
2023)
5-8-7: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful, and shall constitute a nuisance, for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound or motion in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of the residence, for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in "soliciting" as herein defined
in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the
provisions of section
5-8-6 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-8-8: DUTY OF SOLICITOR TO OBSERVE OCCUPANT NOTICE:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going into any premises
in the Municipality upon which a "residence" as herein defined is located to
first examine the notice provided for in this Chapter, if any is attached, and
be governed by the statement contained on any notice. If the notice states
"Only Solicitors Registered with the City of Spring Valley Invited", then the
solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of registration as herein provided
shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises and if the notice
states "No Solicitors Invited" or "No Solicitors", then the solicitor, whether
registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant. (Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874, 7-
17-2023)
5-8-9: HOURS WHEN SOLICITING PERMISSIBLE:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person, whether registered under this Chapter or not, to go upon any premises
and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound or motion in
any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of a
residence located thereof and engage in "soliciting" as herein defined prior to
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or up to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. of any weekday or a
Saturday, and at no time on a Sunday, or on a State or national holiday. (Ord.
1659, 1-30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-8-10: RESTRICTION ON PEDDLING IN PUBLIC:
No hawker, itinerant merchant/vendor, peddler, solicitor, street vendor or
transient merchant shall ply his or her vocation on any street, sidewalk, park,
parkway, or in any other public place or any public right-of-way unless his or
her certificate of registration specified that solicitation in public places is
permitted thereunder. (Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-8-11: CREATING HAZARD PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No hawker, itinerant merchant/vendor, peddler, registered solicitor,
street vendor or transient merchant shall be allowed to ply his or her vocation
at any location, whether public or private, if in so doing he or she causes, or
contributes to the causing of, any hazard to the general public including, but
not limited to, creation of traffic congestion or the distracting of the
operators of motor vehicles from the hazards of the roadway. No hawker,
itinerant merchant/vendor, peddler, registered solicitor, street vendor or
transient merchant may use loud speakers or amplifiers to conduct their
business. (Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-8-12: CITY OF SPRING VALLEY SPONSORED EVENTS:
The licensing provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any activities
sponsored by the City of Spring Valley or supported by the City of Spring
Valley in an effort to boost commercial retail activity within the City of
Spring Valley. The City of Spring Valley reserves the right to waive the
licensing fee required by this Chapter and to suspend any other regulatory
provisions contained in this Chapter at the request of any group promoting a
commercial activity aimed at increasing Sales Tax revenue and commercial
exposure for the City of Spring Valley. Any applicant wishing to receive a
waiver from the licensing and regulatory regulations contained in this Chapter
must apply to the Spring Valley City Council for a waiver in lieu of applying
for a license pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874,
7-17-2023)
5-8-13: PROHIBITED ACT:
Any person or business licensed as a hawker, itinerant merchant/vendor,
peddler, solicitor, street vendor, or transient merchant under the provisions
of this Chapter found guilty of any fraud, cheating, misrepresentation or
imposition while engaged in commercial activities authorized by this Chapter,
or any other violation of the licensing and regulatory provisions contained in
this Chapter shall be subject to the following punishment: a) revocation of any
license issued pursuant to this Chapter; b) the imposition of a fine, excluding
court costs, in an amount of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00); c) no license issued to a
hawker, itinerant merchant/vendor, peddler, solicitor, street vendor, or
transient merchant shall be transferable by that vendor to any third party.
(Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
CHAPTER 9
TOBACCO
SECTION:
5-9-1: Application For License
5-9-2: Drugs
5-9-3: Annual Fee
5-9-4: License Revocation Or Suspension; Hearing
5-9-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for retail tobacco dealers' licenses shall be referred to the
license committee of the city who shall cause to be made by the Spring Valley
police the necessary inspections of the applicant and the premises where same
is to be sold and kept for retail, and the said committee or a majority
thereof, shall report thereon within ten (10) days from the time of receiving
such application.
Any person licensed to sell or deal in the sale of tobacco, cigarettes or
cigars, at retail under the provisions of this chapter may sell tobacco,
cigarettes and cigars, either manually or by vending machines on the premises
mentioned in the application. (1972 Code)
5-9-2: DRUGS:
It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, give away or offer to give away,
or keep or possess for any purposes any tobacco, cigarettes or cigars which
might be harmful to human health, or adulterated in any manner contrary to the
state and federal statutes, and to sell, offer for sale, give away or offer to
give away, or keep for any purpose, any tobacco, cigarettes or cigars which
contain any marihuana, opium or other harmful drug or plant or material. (1972
Code)
5-9-3: ANNUAL FEE:
The annual fee for any person selling tobacco, cigarettes or cigars at retail
shall be ten dollars ($10.00). (1972 Code)
5-9-4: LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION; HEARING:
   (A)   The mayor of the city of Spring Valley has the power to either suspend
for a period not in excess of thirty (30) days or revoke any tobacco license
issued to a city of Spring Valley licensee who is found to be selling or
distributing any controlled substance as defined in the Illinois
methamphetamine control and community protection act 1 , the methamphetamine
precursor retail sale control act 2 , the methamphetamine precursor control act
3 , the Illinois cannabis control act 4 , the Illinois controlled substances
act 5 , and the Illinois tobacco accessories and smoking herbs control act 6 .
   (B)   If the mayor determines that it is appropriate to either suspend or
revoke any tobacco license issued by the city of Spring Valley, the mayor shall
send a letter to the license holder notifying the license holder of the city of
Spring Valley's intention to either suspend or revoke the license holder's
tobacco license, and giving the license holder the opportunity to request a
hearing to determine whether the license holder has violated any of the
criminal statutes of the state of Illinois set forth in this section dealing
with the sale and distribution of prohibited substances. A licensee desiring to
request a hearing must notify the city of Spring Valley by sending a written
request for a hearing to the Spring Valley city clerk within ten (10) days of
the notification of suspension or termination of the licensee's tobacco
license.
   (C)   If a hearing is requested, the hearing shall be conducted by the mayor
of the city of Spring Valley. The licensee shall be entitled to appear at the
hearing and provide testimony to the mayor supporting the licensee's contention
that the tobacco license should not be revoked or suspended. The mayor may
consider any written reports prepared by the Spring Valley police department or
any other law enforcement agency or any other investigatory materials prepared
by a law enforcement agency evidencing violations of the sale of substances
prohibited under the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes as set forth
in this section in reaching a decision regarding the licensee's appeal of the
license suspension or revocation.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the mayor shall send a letter
notifying the licensee as to whether the action instituted by the mayor either
suspending or revoking the tobacco license of the licensee is either upheld or
rescinded.
   (E)   If the licensee does not request a hearing within the time period
provided for in this section, the original notification of suspension or
termination shall deem to be uncontested and in full force and effect from the
date when sent to the licensee. (Ord. 1545, 9-30-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 646 et seq.
2 2. 720 ILCS 647 et seq.
3 3. 720 ILCS 648 et seq.
4 4. 720 ILCS 550 et seq.
5 5. 720 ILCS 570 et seq.
6 6. 720 ILCS 685 et seq.
CHAPTER 10
AMUSEMENTS; GENERAL
SECTION:
5-10-1: Application
5-10-2: Licenses
5-10-3: Street Shows
5-10-4: Athletic Exhibitions
5-10-5: Medicine Shows
5-10-6: Order; Crowding
5-10-7: Inspections
5-10-8: Indecent Shows
5-10-9: Exhibitions Of Criminals
5-10-10: Riots
5-10-11: Smoking
5-10-12: Signs
5-10-13: Exit Lights
5-10-1: APPLICATION:
The provisions of this chapter, except as to licensing and fees, shall apply to
all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the city,
whether specifically licensed in another chapter in this code or not. (1972
Code)
5-10-2: LICENSES:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the
public and for admittance to which a fee is charged without having first
secured a license, provided that the provisions of this section shall not be
held to apply to those amusements which are specifically licensed by any other
provision of this code.
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the clerk and shall comply with
all of the general provisions of this code relating to such application. For
such licenses the following fee shall be paid:
 
Carnivals                        $10.00 per day
Exhibitions of inanimate objects 5.00 per day
Menageries                       5.00 per day
Other amusements                 10.00 per day
 
(1972 Code)
5-10-3: STREET SHOWS:
No permit shall be granted or given for any carnival, exhibition, show or other
amusement to be given on any public street or sidewalk or in such place that
the only main accommodation for the public or the audience will be in a public
place, except on order of the council. (1972 Code)
5-10-4: ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or exhibit any race between persons,
animals or vehicles, or any baseball games, boxing or wrestling matches or any
other athletic contest or exhibition for admission to which a fee is charged
without having first procured a license therefor.
The proprietor of such exhibition shall submit to the clerk a statement
verified under oath of the gross receipts of each such game, contest or race,
within one week after such exhibition. At the same time the proprietor or
person exhibiting or operating such exhibition shall pay to the clerk a sum
equal to three percent (3%) of the gross receipts.
Sufficient members of the police department shall be admitted free of charge,
to all such exhibitions for the purpose of preserving and maintaining order;
and the clerk may post a person or any number of persons at the box office of
each such performance; and may examine all the books pertaining to such
performance showing or tending to show the gross receipts. (1972 Code)
5-10-5: MEDICINE SHOWS:
It shall be unlawful to give or conduct any medicine show or performance in
connection with or for the purpose of attracting prospective buyers of, or
crowds for the purpose of lectures or on demonstrations of any tonic, medicine,
remedy or alleged specific for human ailments without having first secured a
permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall state thereon the name,
nature and contents of the article to be promoted or offered for sale; such
applications shall be referred to the chief of police and no permit shall be
issued where such tonic, medicine or remedy is harmful for use without the
advice of a physician, or consists in whole or part of harmful habit forming
drugs or narcotics.
The fee for such permits shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per day. (1972 Code)
5-10-6: ORDER; CROWDING:
The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical must be orderly and quiet at
all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending such amusement,
show or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience.
It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any such
amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or other
risks. (1972 Code)
5-10-7: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the fire marshal to see that
every exhibition, amusement, theatrical or other public show or amusement is
inspected by a member of the police and of the fire department, and to ensure
conformity with the provisions concerning such amusements. (1972 Code)
5-10-8: INDECENT SHOWS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to present, exhibit, conduct or take part
in any indecent show, theatrical, play, motion picture, exhibition or other
form of public amusement or show. (1972 Code)
5-10-9: EXHIBITIONS OF CRIMINALS:
It shall be unlawful to exhibit any criminal or the body of any criminal or any
person who shall have become notorious because of the commission of a crime, in
any theatrical, exhibit, carnival or other public place. (1972 Code)
5-10-10: RIOTS:
It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any kind which
tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or disturbance. (1972
Code)
5-10-11: SMOKING:
It shall be unlawful to smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe on or
beneath the stage or in a dressing room of any building used as an assembly
hall with seating accommodations for more than one hundred (100) persons or in
which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures or other entertainments are
offered, presented, operated or exhibited. (1972 Code)
5-10-12: SIGNS:
It shall be the duty of the owner of such premises or of the occupant in
charge, to provide and place printed signs on which the words "No Smoking"
shall appear in letters at least four inches (4") high, in conspicuous places,
at least two (2) signs being upon the stage or in the wings thereof and one in
each dressing room. (1972 Code)
5-10-13: EXIT LIGHTS:
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of any building or hall
used as an assembly hall with accommodations for one hundred (100) persons or
more in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures and other entertainment
is offered, operated or presented to provide and place a sign on which the word
"Exit" shall appear in letters at least six inches (6") high, over every door
or other opening from such hall to every means of egress therefrom, and a light
shall be provided with a red globe and placed at or over such sign, which light
shall be kept burning during the entire period that the hall is open to the
public and until the audience has left the hall. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 11
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
SECTION:
5-11-1: Terms Defined
5-11-2: Proprietor's License Fee
5-11-3: Application For License
5-11-4: Minors
5-11-5: Machines Kept In Open View
5-11-6: Revocation Of License
5-11-7: Penalty
5-11-1: TERMS DEFINED:
The following terms as used in this chapter hereby are defined as follows:
BOWLING ALLEY MACHINE: Any coin operated machine or table or game used for the
purpose of miniature bowling.
JUKEBOX: A coin operated machine for the purpose of playing music on records
contained in said device.
PINBALL MACHINE: Any pinball or pin table machine, or marble machine or any
other similar type of game or machine or table in which any ball, sphere,
missile, arm, crane, appliance, rod or plunger is struck, released, impelled,
controlled or manipulated directly or indirectly for the purpose of amusement
or skill and in which a test of skill is involved, and for the playing of which
a fee is charged; provided, however, that the definition of pinball machine
shall not include any machine or table or other game which may be defined as a
"bowling alley machine".
PROPRIETOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club who
is the owner, lessee or proprietor of any establishment in or at which such
bowling alley machine or pinball machine is placed for use or play or where it
is on exhibition for the purpose of use or play. (1972 Code)
5-11-2: PROPRIETOR'S LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for each "proprietor" as herein defined shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per year for each pinball machine used or played or exhibited
for use or play, and twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year for each bowling
alley machine used or played or exhibited for use or play, payable annually in
advance. No license shall be issued for less than one year. In no event shall
any portion of said license fee be repaid to the licensee. The license fee
shall be payable September 1 of each year. In event that an applicant makes
application for any portion of a calendar year prior to September 1, pro rata
deposit shall be made computed on the basis of each calendar month. (1972 Code)
5-11-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for license hereunder shall be filed in writing with the clerk and
shall specify:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant, and, if a firm, corporation,
partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and shall specify
their addresses.
   (B)   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States.
   (C)   The place where the business of the applicant is to be carried on.
   (D)   The name of the manufacturer of the machine and the type of machine
and, if the applicant is a proprietor, the number of machines to be used.
Said application shall then be referred to the license committee of the council
for investigation of the character of the applicant, the premises in which it
is proposed to carry on the business of the applicant, and the type of machine
to be used, said license committee to report to the mayor by whom the license
shall be issued. All license fees shall be paid over by the city clerk to the
city treasurer. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the
establishment of the licensee. Such license shall be nonassignable and
nontransferable and in the case of a proprietor shall apply only to the
premises for which such license is issued. (1972 Code)
5-11-4: MINORS:
No proprietor shall permit any person under his legal age to play, operate or
use any such machine. (1972 Code)
5-11-5: MACHINES KEPT IN OPEN VIEW:
All such machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of all
persons who may be in or frequent any place of business or other place where
such machines are kept or used.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any
slot machine or any gambling device of any kind or nature whatsoever which is
prohibited by the provisions of this code or by the laws of the state of
Illinois. (1972 Code)
5-11-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The mayor shall have the right to revoke any license issued hereunder for the
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (1972 Code)
5-11-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating this chapter or any of the provisions thereof shall be
fined in a sum not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for each offense and each day or fraction of a day that this
chapter is violated shall constitute and be considered a separate and distinct
offense. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 12
MECHANICAL MUSICAL DEVICES
SECTION:
5-12-1: Definition
5-12-2: Coin Operated Device
5-12-3: Prohibited Hours
5-12-4: Nuisance
5-12-5: Application
5-12-6: Revocation
5-12-7: Penalty
5-12-1: DEFINITION:
The term "mechanical musical devices" hereby is defined to be any automatic or
coin controlled/operated music box, jukebox, Victrola, radio or any other
similar device, or any combination thereof, from which music or other
entertainment may be obtained by the deposit of payment of money or other
token. (1972 Code)
5-12-2: COIN OPERATED DEVICE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, install, keep, maintain or use,
or permit the location, installation, maintenance or use upon his premises of
any automatic or coin controlled or coin operating music box or device which
furnishes what is commonly called "canned music", without first having obtained
a license therefor, and such license shall be issued upon the payment of a fee
of twenty five dollars ($25.00) annually; all licenses shall be paid yearly on
September 1 in advance, and no license shall be issued for less than one year.
In no case shall any portion of said license fee be repaid to the licensee.
(1972 Code)
5-12-3: PROHIBITED HOURS:
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of such automatic or coin
controlled or coin operating music box or device between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on weekdays, and between
the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Sundays.
(1972 Code)
5-12-4: NUISANCE:
It shall be unlawful to use such coin controlled musical devices in the city in
a manner which interferes with the health, peace and comfort of any person in
the neighborhood thereof; such use is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1972
Code)
5-12-5: APPLICATION:
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club desiring to
secure a license for a musical device shall file with the clerk an application
in writing setting forth the name and address of the applicant, and the
location at which it is proposed to operate such device. Such application shall
be signed by the applicant. The mayor shall issue the license upon compliance
with all the terms of this chapter and all other provisions of this code. No
license shall be issued until the fees are duly paid. All licenses shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee. Such
license shall be nonassignable and nontransferable. (1972 Code)
5-12-6: REVOCATION:
Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the mayor or by the council
whenever in the judgment of either the public welfare requires such revocation.
The acceptance of any license under this chapter shall constitute an agreement
between the parties to such license, even though the license itself does not
state such fact, that the same may be revoked. (1972 Code)
5-12-7: PENALTY:
A person who shall violate any section or provision of this chapter shall be
fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense and the
license herein provided for may be revoked by the mayor. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 13
BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS
SECTION:
5-13-1: Application
5-13-2: Nonliquor Fee
5-13-3: Liquor Fee
5-13-4: Minors
5-13-5: Prohibited Hours
5-13-1: APPLICATION:
No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard parlor or poolroom open
to the public without having first obtained a license therefor as herein
required. All applications for such license shall state thereon the intended
location of the place of business, the number of billiard or pool tables to be
used therein, and whether or not a liquor license has theretofore been issued
for said location or place of business. (1972 Code)
5-13-2: NONLIQUOR FEE:
The annual fees for such license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each table
located in such premises if no liquor license has been issued for such
locations. (1972 Code)
5-13-3: LIQUOR FEE:
The annual fees for such license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each
table located in such premises if a liquor license has been issued for such
location. (1972 Code)
5-13-4: MINORS:
Minors under the age of eighteen (18) years shall under no circumstances
frequent, loiter, go or remain in any hall licensed hereunder at any time,
unless it be with the consent of and knowledge of the parent, guardian or other
person having the lawful custody of such minor; and it shall be unlawful for
the proprietor of any hall so licensed to allow or permit any such minor to
frequent, loiter or remain within the hall in violation of this section. (1972
Code)
5-13-5: PROHIBITED HOURS:
No such place shall be open for business between the hours of twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 14
BOWLING ALLEYS
SECTION:
5-14-1: License Required
5-14-2: Fee
5-14-3: Minors
5-14-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or maintain a bowling alley open to the public without
having first secured a license therefor as is herein required. Applications for
such licenses shall be made to the clerk and shall be in writing and state
thereon the intended location of the place of business and the number of alleys
to be used. (1972 Code)
5-14-2: FEE:
The annual fee for such licenses shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
location. (1972 Code)
5-14-3: MINORS:
Minors under the age of eighteen (18) years shall under no circumstances
frequent, loiter, go or remain in any hall licensed as a bowling alley except
upon an errand when sent by or with the knowledge and consent of the parent or
guardian of such child; and it shall be unlawful for the proprietor of any
bowling alley to allow or permit any such minor to frequent, loiter or remain
within such place of business in violation of the provisions of this section.
(1972 Code)
CHAPTER 15
ICE CREAM PARLORS
(Rep. by Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017)
CHAPTER 16
CIRCUSES
SECTION:
5-16-1: License Required
5-16-2: Application
5-16-3: Fee
5-16-4: Sideshows And Concessions
5-16-5: Provisions To Be Obeyed
5-16-6: Inspection
5-16-7: Parades; Bond
5-16-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct or operate a circus in the city without having first
obtained a license as is provided in this chapter. (1972 Code)
5-16-2: APPLICATION:
The applications for such licenses shall be made to the clerk and shall specify
the place in or on which the circus is to be conducted. (1972 Code)
5-16-3: FEE:
The fee for circus license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each
license. (1972 Code)
5-16-4: SIDESHOWS AND CONCESSIONS:
The license fee for such sideshow and concession operated in connection with a
circus shall be five dollars ($5.00) per day. (1972 Code)
5-16-5: PROVISIONS TO BE OBEYED:
It shall be the duty of every person licensed under this chapter to obey the
provisions of this code relating to circuses or the premises occupied. (1972
Code)
5-16-6: INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the fire marshal to see that
inspections as provided for in this code shall be made of all circuses, circus
performances and of the premises used. (1972 Code)
5-16-7: PARADES; BOND:
It shall be unlawful to conduct any parade connected with a circus in or on any
public street, alley or other public way or place in the city, unless a permit
therefor is first obtained from the chief of police. Such permit shall specify
the route to be followed, and shall be accompanied by a bond in the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss,
damage or liability incurred or caused by the conduct of such parade. (1972
Code)
CHAPTER 17
TRAILER COACHES AND TRAILER PARKS
(Rep. by Ord. 1408, 2-2-2009)
CHAPTER 18
ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS
SECTION:
5-18-1: Definitions
5-18-2: Designation Of Local Liquor Control Commissioner
5-18-3 Duties Of Local Liquor Control Commissioner
5-18-4: Local Liquor Commissioner To Issue Licenses
5-18-5: Hearings
5-18-6: Hearing Procedures
5-18-7: Decisions Of Local Liquor Control Commissioner And Penalties
5-18-8: Appeals
5-18-9: Authority To Close Establishments When In Violation
5-18-10: Emergency Closing
5-18-11: Authorized Agents
5-18-12: Licence Required
5-18-13: Application For License
5-18-14: Restrictions On Licenses
5-18-15: Site Approval
5-18-16: Investigation Of Applicant
5-18-17: Display Of License
5-18-18: Term Of License
5-18-19: Renewal Of License
5-18-20: Insurance/Bond
5-18-21: Separate License Required For Each Location
5-18-22: Change Of Location Or Classification
5-18-23: Change Of Form Of Ownership
5-18-24: Transfer Of License
5-18-25: Sale Of Licensed Premises
5-18-26: Continuous Operation
5-18-27: License Classifications
5-18-27.1: Class A
5-18-27.2: Class A-1 Craft Distillery
5-18-27.3: Class A-2 Brewer’s License
5-18-27.4: Class B
5-18-27.5: Class C-Club License
5-18-27.6: Class D
5-18-27.7: Class E
5-18-27.8: Class “SE” Special Event Permits
5-18-27.9: Class “RL” Restricted License
5-18-27.10: Class TE Temporary Extension Of Premises Liquor License
5-18-28: License Fees
5-18-29: Hours Of Operation
5-18-30: Conditions For Operating A Beer Garden
5-18-31: Qualifications Of Employees
5-18-32: Occupancy
5-18-33: Persons Permitted To Enter On Licensed Premises
5-18-34: Purchased, Acceptance, Possession Or Consumption Of Alcoholic Liquor
By Minors
5-18-35: Sale And Delivery Of Alcoholic Liquor To Minors And Certain Other
Persons
5-18-36: Proof Of Age; Misrepresentation Of Age
5-18-37: Assisting Minor In Misrepresentation Of Age Or Identity
5-18-38: Regulations On Licensees And Licensed Premises
5-18-39: Warning Signs Required
5-18-40: Liability Of Owner Of Premises And Licensee In Certain Instances
5-18-41: Absolute Liability Offenses
5-18-42: Entertainment Restrictions
5-18-43: Happy Hours Prohibited
5-18-44: Training Required
5-18-45: Adoption Of State Law By Reference
5-18-46: Set-Up Establishments Prohibited
5-18-47: Adult Responsibility
5-18-48: Restrictions On The General Public
5-18-49: Nuisance Declared
5-18-50: Duty To Report Disturbances
5-18-51: Failure To Maintain The Peace
5-18-52: Penalty
5-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth in this section unless the context clearly requires
otherwise:
For purposes of this article the use of the masculine noun or pronoun includes
the feminine.
AGENT: Every officer, associate, member, representative, manager, partner,
director, shareholder, employee or other person acting with the knowledge of
and on behalf of a licensee.
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified
or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol.
APPLICANT: The person or persons required to sign the application for a liquor
license under this article.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
BEER GARDEN: An open, unroofed or partially roofed area where beer and other
alcoholic beverages are served or consumed by the general public.
BOTTOMLESS: Being without clothing or substantially without clothing or other
covering on an area of the body from the waist downward to an area on the body
which area would cover the buttocks or genital area of the body.
BOWLING ALLEY: Every establishment or building, or part of an establishment or
building, as the case may be, wherein the game of bowling played with
composition balls and ten wooden pins, is played.
BUSINESS DAY: Any calendar day except a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday;
provided that whenever a legal holiday is observed on a Monday, that Monday
also shall be deemed a legal holiday.
CATERER or CATERER RETAILER: A person who serves alcoholic liquor for
consumption, either on-site or off site, whether the location is licensed or
unlicensed, as an incidental part of food service. Prepared meals and alcoholic
liquors are sold at a package price agreed upon under contract.
CHANGE OF FORM OF OWNERSHIP: Any change by a licensee in the legal form in
which it does business.
CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP: Any gift, sale, exchange or transfer, whether voluntary or
involuntary, of any interest in the amount of ten percent or more in any
business entity holding a license under this article.
CHRONIC NUISANCE PREMISES: Any premises which has generated two or more calls
within any 30-day period for police service for nuisance activities. Any such
premises has received more than adequate police service and has placed an undue
and inappropriate burden on the taxpayers of the city.
CHURCH: Any building where regular public worship is held or those functions
and facilities normally associated with a church are conducted or available.
CITY: The City of Spring Valley.
CITY PARKS: Kirby Park, Savitch Park, Baltikauski Park, Coal Miner s Park,
Noles Park, Casford Park, Mini Park, City Hall Park and other lands which the
city shall hereafter lease for park purposes.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the law of this state, not for pecuniary
profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members
through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or
space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants
and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members
and their guests; provided, that such club files with the local liquor control
commissioner at the time of its application for a license under this article
two copies of a list of names and residences of its officers, and similarly
files within ten days of the election of any change in officer positions, his
or her name and address; and, provided further, that its affairs and management
are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body
chosen by the members at their annual meeting and that no member or any
officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly
receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the
distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club
or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as may be
fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of
directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
CONVENIENCE STORE: Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food
items, household items, and goods commonly associated with the same with or
without the sale of gasoline.
DELIVERY: Any act of giving or transferring in any manner or by any means
alcoholic liquor from one person to another, whether as principal, proprietor,
agent, servant or employee. In addition, delivery shall include any act or
omission to act by a licensee or any agent, servant or employee of a licensee
whereby any person to whom any alcoholic liquor is originally given or
transferred is subsequently suffered or permitted to give or transfer the
alcoholic liquor to another person.
DRUG STORE: Any establishment which regularly and usually employs a full-time,
registered pharmacist and where the principal business is the sale of
cosmetics, drugs, medicines and pharmaceutical prescriptions.
EMPLOYEE PARTY: An assembly of persons at a licensed establishment, composed
solely of employees of that establishment and spouses and immediate family
members of employees, or guest; at which assembly alcoholic liquor permitted to
be sold during regular hours, may be consumed, possessed or made available, but
not sold.
GROCERY STORE: Any establishment whose principal business is the retail sale of
bakery goods, dairy products, fresh or frozen meat, and other packaged
foodstuffs.
GROSS BUILDING AREA: The total area of each floor of a structure as measured
from the exterior.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed
and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and
guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which rooms are used
for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public
dining rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping
accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or
buildings in connection therewith and such building or buildings, structure or
structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity.
INTENTIONALLY: Conduct engaged in by a person with the conscious objective to
accomplish that result or engage in that conduct.
KNOWINGLY: Conduct engaged in by a person when he is consciously aware of the
nature or attendant circumstances of his conduct which constitutes an offense
under this section.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: Any foster parent, person appointed guardian or given custody
of a person of nonage by a circuit court of this state, or person appointed
guardian or given custody of a person of nonage under the Illinois Juvenile
Court Act, but shall not include any person appointed guardian only to the
estate of a person of nonage.
LICENSE YEAR: The period between May 1 of the current calendar year and April
30 of the succeeding calendar year.
LICENSED PREMISES: The area as described in an application where alcoholic
liquor is served, stored or sold and other areas located within the same or an
adjoining building or structure which areas are integrally related to the
operation of the licensed establishment. Licensed premises shall not include
any area located outside any building or structure, and upon or adjoining the
licensed premises, unless such exterior area is specifically designated in a
license issued for such premises.
LICENSEE: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity holding a
license under the terms of this chapter.
LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER, LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONERS, LIQUOR
COMMISSIONER or COMMISSIONER: The mayor of the city unless the city council has
made a local liquor control commissioner appointment that complies with the
requirements of Section 4-2 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act.
LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER AUTHORIZED AGENTS: Those individuals authorized to
act as agents of the local liquor commissioner. These individuals include, but
are not limited to, members of the Spring Valley Department of Police.
NEGLIGENCE: Conduct engaged in by a person where such person fails to be aware
of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or that a
result will follow which constitutes an offense under this chapter and where
such failure constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care
which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
NET BUILDING AREA: The area of a structure open to and accessible to the
general public. The gross floor area minus any restroom, service area, bar,
office, kitchen, etc., not accessible to the public.
NUISANCE: Any act, occupation, or use of property or premises or equipment, or
structure of any kind which: (a) annoys, injures or endangers the safety,
health, comfort or repose of others; (b) offends public decency; or (c)
unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous
for passage any public place, park, square, alley, highway, or street.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or
other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and convey any
alcoholic liquor.
PACKAGE SALES: Any sale or offer to sell at retail any alcoholic liquor, in the
original package, and not to be consumed or in fact consumed in whole or part
on the premises where sold.
PARENTS: Includes the father and mother of a child, whether by birth or
adoption, or shall be deemed the parent having legal custody of the child in
the event the parents are divorced or separated. The term parent as used in
this article shall also be deemed to mean legal guardian .
PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited
liability company, decedent s estate, trust estate, unincorporated association
or other entity.
PERSON OF NONAGE: Any person not yet 21 years of age.
POSSESSION (and any form of the word possess as used in this chapter): Means
and includes actual or constructive possession. A person has actual possession
when he has immediate and exclusive control over a thing. A person has
constructive possession when he lacks actual possession of a thing but he has
both the power and ability to exercise control over a thing, either directly or
through another person. If two or more persons share the immediate and
exclusive control over a thing or share the ability and the power to exercise
control over a thing, then each person has possession.
PRIVATE PARTY: An assembly of persons at a licensed establishment, composed
solely of individuals, with such party to occur in lieu of the licensed
establishment being open to the public and at which party alcoholic liquor may
be sold to members of such assembly during regular hours.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any real estate owned, controlled or managed by the city of
Spring Valley, the County of Bureau, Hall Township, the State of Illinois, the
Spring Valley City Hall, the Spring Valley Public Library, the Spring Valley
Elementary School District #99 or the Hall Township High School District #502.
Any street, alley, sidewalk, public parking lot, parkway, school grounds,
commons, park, square, public playground or other similar location which is
generally open to use by the public at large shall be prima facie evidence that
is be considered public property.
RECKLESSLY: Conduct engaged in by a person in conscious disregard of a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or that a result
will follow which constitutes an offense under this chapter, and where such
disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and
regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
RESIDENT: Any person who has established residency in the city and shall
maintain such residence for the duration of the license period. Proof of such
residency shall be shown through continued payment of utilities, etc.
RETAILER: A person who sells, or offers to sell, alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever for a consideration, and means and includes all sales made by any
person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee, and
includes, but is not limited to, any of the following acts when done for
consideration:
   (1)   The sale of alcoholic liquor;
   (2)   The gift of alcoholic liquor;
   (3)   The dispensing of alcoholic liquor;
   (4)   The pouring of alcoholic liquor;
   (5)   The serving of alcoholic liquor;
   (6)   The providing of mix, ice, water or glasses for the purpose of mixing
drinks containing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the same premises;
   (7)   The storage of any alcoholic liquor.
SELL AT RETAIL or SALE AT RETAIL: Sales for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form.
SET-UP ESTABLISHMENT: Any person who:
   (1)   Not holding a liquor license under this chapter sells, gives away,
pours, stores, or otherwise dispenses alcoholic liquor and/or glasses, mix,
ice, water and soft drinks for the purpose of consumption of alcoholic
beverages on the premises; or
   (2)   Holds a liquor license under this chapter and after the hours of
permitted operation under this chapter, engages in any of the activities
described in subsection (1) immediately preceding.
   (3)   Set-up establishments are prohibited.
SPECIAL EVENT PERMITTEE: An educational, fraternal, political, civic,
religious, or nonprofit organization which sells or offers to sell beer or
wine, or both, only for consumption at the location and on the dates designated
by a special event permit.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise with alcohol or other substances.
TEMPORARY EXTENSION OF PREMISES: An authorization to sell or serve alcohol
temporarily at a location other than the premises that the licensee is licensed
to operate.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the natural contents
of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages when
fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits. (Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024; amd.
Ord. 1919, 7-21-2025)
5-18-2: DESIGNATION OF LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   The mayor of the city shall be the local liquor control commissioner unless
the city council has made a local liquor control commissioner appointment that
complies with the requirements of Section 4-2 of the Illinois Liquor Control
Act.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-3: DUTIES OF LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   The local liquor control commissioner shall have the following powers,
functions and duties:
   (A)   To receive applications for liquor licenses under this chapter, to
cause applicants to be investigated, and to grant or renew liquor licenses;
   (B)   To receive complaints from citizens of the city that the provisions of
this chapter or state law have been or are being violated and to investigate
and act upon such complaints;
   (C)   To enter or authorize any law enforcement officer or other to enter at
any time upon any premises licensed under this chapter to determine whether any
provisions of this chapter or state law have been or are being violated and at
such time to examine the premises of the licensee;
   (D)   To appoint deputies or other persons to assist him in the performance
of his duties and responsibilities as local liquor control commissioner;
   (E)   To require any licensee at any reasonable time to produce such
licensee’s books and records of his operations under his liquor license for
inspection and examination;
   (F)   To require any licensee at reasonable times, and from time to time, to
file reports or provide information concerning such licensee’s operation of his
licensed establishment as may be convenient to permit proper enforcement of
this chapter or state law;
   (G)   To promulgate rules and regulations under this chapter and state law
consistent therewith;
   (H)   To convene and conduct hearings upon complaint or upon information
that a violation of this chapter has occurred; to conduct hearings concerning
the fitness of any person to receive, continue to hold or renew any license
issued under this chapter; to administer oaths, issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents or other
evidence; to receive testimony and take proof; to make findings of fact and
determinations of law; to enter written orders and decisions;
   (I)   To represent the city on any appeal of any action taken under this
chapter;
   (J)   To prescribe penalties for violations of this chapter and state law
and enforce such penalties. Permissible penalties shall include:
      1.   A written reprimand;
      2.   A fine of up to $1,000.00 for each violation but not more than
$10,000.00 against any licensee during any license year;
      3.   To suspend any licensee’s license for not more than 30 days for any
violation;
      4.   To revoke any license issued under this article for cause.
   (K)   To keep and maintain in his office, or shall cause to be maintained
under his direction and supervision, books and records concerning applications
for licenses, investigations, minutes of meetings, records of hearings and
other relevant information relative to his duties, functions and
responsibilities under this article;
   (L)   To receive license fees, fines and other moneys under this chapter and
to promptly forward such funds to the city clerk;
   (M)   To cause legal proceedings to be initiated on behalf of the city
regarding the duties, functions and responsibilities under this chapter;
   (N)   To declare the existence of an emergency and thereafter to alter the
hours of operation of any licensee and take all other actions that may be
necessary or proper due to such emergency;
   (O)   To notify the Illinois Secretary of State where a club incorporated
under the General Not For Profit Corporation Act or a foreign corporation
functioning as a club in Illinois under a certificate of authority issued under
that Act has violated the Illinois Liquor Control Act or this chapter by
selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquor without a license;
   (P)   To take any and all actions necessary and incidental to the
furtherance of his duties and functions as set forth in this chapter or by
state law.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-4: LOCAL LIQUOR COMMISSIONER TO ISSUE LICENSES:
   Upon receipt of a properly completed application and such other supporting
documents as the commissioner may require and after a complete and thorough
investigation the commissioner may issue a license under this chapter to any
person properly qualified and pursuant to the terms, conditions and
restrictions of this chapter. The chief of police will be provided a duplicate
of the record of retail liquor licenses as they are issued.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-5: HEARINGS:
   The commissioner may convene and conduct a public hearing into any matter
relating to this chapter whenever in his discretion he deems appropriate. In
addition, public hearings shall be held in the following instances:
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a new license or for renewal of an
existing license when the commissioner determines that receipt of formal
evidence is necessary or the applicant requests a hearing;
   (B)   Upon denial of an application for a new license, for renewal of an
existing license if the applicant requests a hearing;
   (C)   Upon complaint or report of a violation by a licensee under this
chapter or state law.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-6: HEARING PROCEDURES:
   The commissioner shall observe the following procedures in conducting
hearings under this chapter:
   (A)   At all times every licensee shall be afforded due process which shall
be construed to include the right to appear personally before the commissioner
or any hearing officer; the right to demand written specification of any
charges against him a reasonable time in advance of any hearing; the right to
employ and be represented by counsel during all proceedings; the right to
testify in his own behalf or refuse to testify; the right to present witnesses
in his behalf and to request that subpoenas be issued to compel the attendance
of witnesses; the right to hear the witnesses and evidence against him; the
right to cross-examine witnesses.
   (B)   Prior written notice shall be given to a licensee of any hearing under
this chapter.
   (C)   All witnesses that appear and testify shall be sworn.
   (D)   All hearings shall be informal in nature and strict rules of evidence
shall not apply to hearings under this article. Evidence determined by the
commissioner to be irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious may be
excluded. Evidence may be admitted if it is of a type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
   (E)   The liquor commissioner will reduce all evidence to writing and
maintain an official record of the proceedings, by a certified court or
shorthand reporter at the city’s expense.
   (F)   Review of any proceedings conducted by the commissioner shall be
limited to a review of the official record of such proceedings. No new or
additional evidence shall be admitted or considered by the reviewing tribunal,
however; the commissioner may reopen any hearing to receive new evidence not
discovered or available at the original hearing.
   (G)   No transcript of any public hearing need be prepared except for
purposes of appeal or as required by the commissioner. In the event of an
appeal from any public hearing by a licensee, the licensee shall pay the cost
to transcribe the official record for purposes of such appeal.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-7: DECISIONS OF LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER AND PENALTIES:
   The commissioner shall observe the following procedures in conducting
hearings under this chapter:
   (A)   In all cases presented to the commissioner wherein a licensee is
alleged to have violated this article, state law or applicable rules and
regulations, the commissioner shall within five business days after the
conclusion of the public hearing reduce his findings and reasons to writing and
shall enter and serve upon the licensee a written order.
   (B)   In any case where the commissioner determines that a violation of this
chapter, state law or applicable rules and regulations, has occurred, the
commissioner may proscribe any of the following penalties:
      1.   Direct a written reprimand to the licensee and place a copy of such
reprimand on file in the licensee’s liquor license application file.
      2.   Impose a fine upon the licensee. Any fine imposed shall not exceed
$1,000.00 for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation for which a separate fine may be assessed. No
licensee shall be fined more than $10,000.00 in the aggregate during any
license year.
      3.   Suspend the licensee’s liquor license for a period of not more than
30 days. In the case of a suspension, the suspension shall begin and end as
specified by the commissioner in his written order.
      4.   Revoke the licensee’s liquor license.
      5.   In the case of a class B licensee’s suspension or revocation of
license, all alcoholic liquor must be removed from the licensed premises within
24 hours of such action.
      6.   Revoke the licensee liquor license and have the same reissued as an
“RL” license.
      7.   In all cases where the commissioner determines that a penalty is
appropriate, the commissioner may consider the following criteria in deciding
the nature of the penalty, the amount of any fine or the length of time of any
suspension and whether revocation is warranted:
         a.   The nature of the violation;
         b.   The factual situation and circumstances as presented at the
public hearing;
         c.   Past action by the commissioner in similar situations;
         d.   Facts or circumstances in aggravation or mitigation regarding the
violation;
         e.   Prior violations committed by the same licensee during the three-
license years immediately preceding the year in which the violation occurs.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-8: APPEALS:
   Any decision of the commissioner imposing a penalty on any licensee may be
appealed by the licensee to the state liquor commission provided that written
notice of such appeal is filed with the commissioner and the state liquor
commission within 20 days after service of the commissioner’s written order
upon the licensee. The licensee shall request the commissioner to cause a full
written transcript of the public hearing to be prepared and sent to the state
liquor commission. The commissioner may require the licensee to pay the cost of
preparation of the transcript in advance.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-9: AUTHORITY TO CLOSE ESTABLISHMENTS WHEN IN VIOLATION:
   (A)   If, in the opinion of the local liquor control commissioner or city
council, the public peace is likely to be endangered by the keeping open of
establishments licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, it shall be lawful for the
local liquor commissioner to issue a proclamation, under the seal of the city,
commanding and enjoining all persons licensed by the city to sell alcoholic
liquor, and their servants and agents, to close their shops and places of
business for such time as the local liquor control commissioner shall deem
necessary.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey a proclamation issued
under subsection (A), by keeping open his place of business, or by selling,
giving away, or allowing to be consumed, on or about his premises, any
alcoholic liquor.
   (C)   When a license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall
be granted to any person for the period of one year thereafter for the conduct
of the business of manufacturing, distributing or selling alcoholic liquor in
the premises described in such revoked license; except that any license that
has been revoked for a conviction of the Controlled Substances Act of 1970
(21USC 801 et seq.) or any applicable state statute that regulates the sale or
use of certain controlled substances in a licensed location, will have their
license immediately revoked, and will never hold another liquor license in the
city.
   (D)   Whenever any license hereunder has been revoked as provided for in
this chapter, the licensee shall incur a forfeiture of all monies that have
been paid for said license.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-10: EMERGENCY CLOSING:
   In all cases where, in the opinion of the commissioner, the public peace or
the health or safety of any person, is likely to be endangered by allowing any
licensed establishment to remain open, the commissioner may order any
establishment or establishments licensed under this article to close without
notice or a hearing. The liquor commissioner or his/her agents may, in the
event of a continued breach of the peace, civil disturbance or serious criminal
act, close or cause to be closed, any establishment licensed under this Act to
sell liquor for consumption on the premises. This closure shall be for the
balance of that days’ hours of operation. If said closure is done by the police
department or an agent of the liquor commissioner, a written report containing
the circumstances of the incident leading to the closure will be forwarded to
the commissioner on the next business day after closure. In such event the
commissioner shall enter a written order stating the reason for the closing and
the length thereof, which in no event shall be longer than seven days. In
addition, the commissioner shall provide any licensee affected by a closing
order an opportunity to be heard, as provided in section
5-18-4, during the period of the closing.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-11: AUTHORIZED AGENTS:
   The members of the Spring Valley Department of Police will act as agents of
the Spring Valley Liquor Control Commissioner, and have the authority and a
duty to enforce all aspects of this Act.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-12: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   No person shall sell or offer for sale at retail, or display for sale
within the corporate limits of the city, either personally or through an agent,
any alcoholic liquor without first obtaining a license as provided by this
chapter.
   (B)   No person after purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic liquor at retail
shall resell or offer for resale such alcoholic liquor, either directly or
indirectly in any manner, except pursuant to a license obtained as provided in
this chapter.
   (C)   Any person who violates subsection (A) shall be fined not less than
$250.00 nor more than $750.00. Any person who violates subsection (B) of this
section shall be fined not less than $500.00 nor more than $750.00.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-13: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   (A)   All applications for a license under this chapter shall be made in
writing, on forms provided for that purpose, to the commissioner, signed by the
applicant, if an individual; by all partners, if a general or limited
partnership; by all joint venturers, if a joint venture; by all members, if a
limited liability company; or by a duly authorized officer, if a business or
not-for-profit corporation. Every application shall be verified as to the truth
and accuracy of all statements and information contained therein in such manner
as the commissioner shall prescribe. The commissioner will forward a copy of
each application to the police department for examination, review and
investigation. Applications for a liquor license which are incomplete,
inaccurate or fail to contain the statements or information required shall be
rejected by the local liquor commissioner. The commissioner will require
inaccurate applications to be returned. Every application must be submitted and
filed with the commissioner, and shall contain the following information and
statements:
      1.   The name, age, Social Security number, driver’s license number, date
of birth, current residence address and telephone number of each individual
required to sign the application under this section.
      2.   In the case of a business or not-for-profit corporation, the objects
for which it was formed, the date and place of incorporation, and the names,
ages, Social Security numbers, driver’s license numbers, dates of birth, and
current residence addresses of every officer, director, shareholder holding
five percent or more of the stock, or member.
      3.   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
      4.   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license, and a statement that the applicant
owns such premises or has a lease thereon for the full term for which the
license is requested.
      5.   The class of license applied for by the applicant.
      6.   The length of time that the applicant has resided within the city;
or in the case of a general or limited partnership, the length of time that
each partner has resided within the city; or in the case of a limited liability
company, the length of time that each member has resided within the city; or in
the case of a business or not-for-profit corporation, the length of time that a
proposed resident manager has resided within the city.
      7.   A list of all governmental entities to which applicant has submitted
an application for a liquor license, the dates on which such applications were
submitted, the disposition of such applications, the amount of and reason for
any fine imposed upon applicant under any other liquor license held by him and
the dates, reason and length of any suspension or revocation of any other
liquor license held by applicant.
      8.   A list of all convictions of the applicant for all offenses, other
than a violation of any traffic law of this or any other state, except that
applicant shall also disclose any traffic conviction involving in any manner
drugs or alcoholic liquor and indicating the nature of the offense, date of
conviction and disposition.
      9.   A statement that the applicant will testify under oath and answer
all competent, relevant and material questions propounded to him at any hearing
conducted by the commissioner, or his designated representative, either before
or after the issuance of a license to him and that his failure to so testify
shall be sufficient reason to refuse to issue or renew any license or to
suspend or revoke any license that has been issued.
      10.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of
the State of Illinois or the United States, or any ordinance of the city, in
the conduct of this business.
      11.   Responses to all questions asked of applicant on any forms provided
to applicant by the city.
   (B)   In addition to and at the same time that applicant submits his
application for a license, he shall submit the following supporting documents:
      1.   In the case of a partnership, a copy of the partnership agreement.
      2.   In the case of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of
limited partnership and the partnership agreement.
      3.   In the case of a limited liability company, a copy of the articles
of organization.
      4.   In the case of a corporation, a copy of the certificate and articles
of incorporation.
      5.   For any leased premises, a copy of the lease and any assignment,
sublease or extension.
      6.   A completed request and release of liability for a criminal
background and credit check.
      7.   A copy of any assumed name certificates applicable to the
applicant’s business.
      8.   In the case of a foreign corporation, in addition to the other
documents, a copy of its certificate of authority to operate in the State of
Illinois.
      9.   A copy of the applicant’s certificate of registration under the
Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act.
      10.   A copy of any federal wagering stamp held by applicant.
      11.   Copies of any other documents requested by the commissioner to
support or clarify information contained in the application or any document
submitted with the application.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-14: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES:
   No license shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the city.
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the city.
   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   (D)   A person convicted of:
      1.   Any felony under any federal or state law;
      2.   Having kept or keeping a house of ill fame;
      3.   Pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and
morality.
   (E)   A person whose license under the Illinois Liquor Control Act has been
revoked for cause.
   (F)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued under this article would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   (G)   A partnership, if any partner thereof would not be eligible to receive
a license under this article for any reason other than residence or
citizenship.
   (H)   A limited liability company, if any member or manager thereof would
not be eligible to receive a license under this article for any reason other
than residence or citizenship.
   (I)   A corporation, if any officer, director, manager or any shareholder
owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation
would not be eligible to receive a license under this article for any reason
other than residence or citizenship.
   (J)   A corporation unless it is incorporated under the laws of the state,
or if a foreign corporation, unless it is qualified to transact business in
this state.
   (K)   A limited partnership unless it is organized under the laws of the
state, or if not so organized, unless it has been admitted to transact business
in this state.
   (L)   A limited liability company unless it is organized under the laws of
the state, or if not so organized, unless it is admitted to transact business
in this state.
   (M)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who
has forfeited bond for failure to appear in court to answer charges for any
such violation.
   (N)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is sought.
   (O)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor
control commissions, any mayor, alderperson, or member of the city council
president of a village board of trustees, any member of a village board of
trustees, or any president or member of a county board; and no such official
shall have a direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of
alcoholic liquor, except that a license may be granted to such official in
relation to premises that are not located within the territory subject to the
jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is approved by
the State Liquor Control Commission and except that a license may be granted,
in a city or village with a population of 55,000 or less, to any alderperson,
member of a city council, or member of a village board of trustees in relation
to premises that are located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction
of that official if (i) the sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license is
incidental to the selling of food, (ii) the issuance of the license is approved
by the State Commission, (iii) the issuance of the license is in accordance
with all applicable local ordinances in effect where the premises are located,
and (iv) the official granted a license does not vote on alcoholic liquor
issues pending before the board or council to which the license holder is
elected. Notwithstanding any provision of this paragraph to the contrary, an
alderperson or member of a city council or commission, a member of a village
board of trustees other than the president of the village board of trustees, or
a member of a county board other than the president of a county board may have
a direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor
as long as he or she is not a law enforcing public official, a mayor, a village
board president, or president of a county board. To prevent any conflict of
interest, the elected official with the direct interest in the manufacture,
sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor shall not participate in any
meetings, hearings, or decisions on matters impacting the manufacture, sale, or
distribution of alcoholic liquor. Furthermore, the mayor of a city with a
population of 55,000 or less or the president of a village with a population of
55,000 or less may have an interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution
of alcoholic liquor as long as the council or board over which he or she
presides has made a local liquor control commissioner appointment that complies
with the requirements of Section 4-2 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act.
   (P)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   (Q)   A person convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any of
subsections (A)3. through (A)11. of section 28-1 of, or as proscribed by
Section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of
2012, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory
provisions.
   (R)    A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued
by the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued
a license under the Raffles and Poker Runs Act or the Illinois Pull Tabs and
Jar Games Act.
   (S)   Any applicant that owes any monies to the city, which have remained
unpaid for a period of more than 45 days, whether for bills, taxes, licenses or
otherwise.
   (T)   Any applicant that has had his license revoked by the local liquor
commission for cause cannot, in any way, be involved in the business of
manufacturing, distributing or selling alcoholic liquor in the city.
   (U)   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption
on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability
insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the
maximum liability amounts set out in subsection (A) of section 6-21 of the
Illinois Liquor Control Act.
   (V)   A person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a manufacturer
of beer, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust
or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business
enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer, having any legal, equitable, or
beneficial interest, directly or indirectly, in a person licensed in this state
as a distributor or importing distributor. For purposes of this paragraph (23),
a person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a “manufacturer of beer”
shall also mean a brewer and a non-resident dealer who is also a manufacturer
of beer, including a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or
trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of
business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer.
   (W)   A person who is licensed in this state as a distributor or importing
distributor, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or
trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of
business enterprise licensed in this state as a distributor or importing
distributor having any legal, equitable, or beneficial interest, directly or
indirectly, in a person licensed as a manufacturer of beer by any licensing
authority, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust
or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business
enterprise, except for a person who owns, on or after the effective date of
this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly, no more than five percent of
the outstanding shares of a manufacturer of beer whose shares are publicly
traded on an exchange within the meaning of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934. For the purposes of this paragraph (20), a person who is licensed by any
licensing authority as a “manufacturer of beer” shall also mean a brewer and a
non-resident dealer who is also a manufacturer of beer, including a
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust or any
subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business
enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer.
   (X)   A criminal conviction of a corporation is not grounds for the denial,
suspension, or revocation of a license applied for or held by the corporation
if the criminal conviction was not the result of a violation of any federal or
state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
the offense that led to the conviction did not result in any financial gain to
the corporation and the corporation has terminated its relationship with each
director, officer, employee, or controlling shareholder whose actions directly
contributed to the conviction of the corporation. The commission shall
determine if all provisions of this subsection (B) have been met before any
action on the corporation’s license is initiated.
   (Y)   The local liquor control commissioner shall not require applicants to
report the following information and shall not consider the following criminal
history records in connection with an application for a license under this
ordinance:
      1.   Juvenile adjudications of delinquent minors as defined in Section 5-
105 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, subject to the restrictions set forth in
Section 5-130 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987.
      2.   Law enforcement records, court records, and conviction records of an
individual who was seventeen years old at the time of the offense and before
January 1, 2014, unless the nature of the offense required the individual to be
tried as an adult.
      3.   Records of arrest not followed by a conviction.
      4.   Convictions overturned by a higher court.
      5.   Convictions or arrests that have been sealed or expunged.
   (Z)   The local liquor control commissioner, upon a finding that an
applicant for a license was convicted of a felony or a violation of any federal
or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic
liquor, shall consider any evidence of rehabilitation and mitigating factors
contained in the applicant’s record, including any of the following factors and
evidence, to determine if the conviction will impair the ability of the
applicant to engage in the position for which a license is sought:
      1.   The lack of direct relation of the offense for which the applicant
was previously convicted to the duties, functions, and responsibilities of the
position for which a license is sought;
      2.   Whether five years since a felony conviction or three years since
release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is later, have passed
without a subsequent conviction;
      3.   If the applicant was previously licensed or employed in this state
or other states or jurisdictions, then the lack of prior misconduct arising
from or related to the licensed position or position of employment;
      4.   The age of the person at the time of the criminal offense;
      5.   Successful completion of sentence and, for applicants serving a term
of parole or probation, a progress report provided by the applicant’s probation
or parole officer that documents the applicant’s compliance with conditions of
supervision;
      6.   Evidence of the applicant’s present fitness and professional
character;
      7.   Evidence of rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort during or after
incarceration, or during or after a term of supervision, including, but not
limited to, a certificate of good conduct under Section 5-5.5-25 of the Unified
Code of Corrections or a certificate of relief from disabilities under Section
5-5.5-10 of the Unified Code of Corrections; and
      8.   Any other mitigating factors that contribute to the person’s
potential and current ability to perform the duties and responsibilities of the
position for which a license or employment is sought.
   (AA)   If the local liquor control commissioner refuses to issue a license
to an applicant, then the local liquor control commissioner shall notify the
applicant of the denial in writing with the following included in the notice of
denial:
      1.   A statement about the decision to refuse to issue a license;
      2.   A list of the convictions that the commission determined will impair
the applicant’s ability to engage in the position for which a license is
sought;
      3.   A list of convictions that formed the sole or partial basis for the
refusal; and
      4.   A summary of the appeal process or the earliest the applicant may
reapply for a license, whichever is applicable.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-15: SITE APPROVAL:
   (A)   No license shall be initially issued and no change of location shall
be granted under this article until the proposed location has been investigated
and approved. No location may be approved to be licensed and no license shall
be issued for any premises:
      1.   Within 100 feet of any church, school other than institution of
higher learning, hospital, home for the aged, indigent or veterans or their
spouses or children, or any military, or naval station and with such distance
to be measured from nearest property line to nearest property line.
      2.   Where the majority of the customers are minors or where the
principal place of business to be transacted consists of selling or providing
school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks to minors.
   (B)   The requirements of subsection (A)1. shall not apply to an application
for a hotel, club, restaurant where the principal business is not the sale of
alcoholic liquor, or for establishments that have been licensed prior to the
passage of this chapter.
   (C)   When applying for renewal of a license under this article every
licensee shall satisfy the commissioner that no change of circumstance has
occurred during the previous license year whereby the licensed premises would
violate subsection (A)1., and must comply with Section 5-18-18 of this Code.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-16: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
   Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall be required to
undergo a complete investigation of his background which shall include a
thorough examination of the applicant’s criminal history by appropriate law
enforcement officials and a thorough examination of the applicant’s financial
circumstances and credit history. A fingerprint check by appropriate law
enforcement officials is required. The applicant shall complete all forms, and
cooperate in every respect with the commissioner in such investigation. In the
case of a national corporation applicant, the local manager will comply with
this section. In the event a local manager is transferred or replaced, the new
manager will submit a letter to the local liquor commissioner advising of the
change in management and will submit to the investigative process, including
criminal history and fingerprint submission. Such letter will be delivered to
the liquor commissioner within 30 days of such change. Applicant will be
charged a fee to reimburse the city for all costs associated with the
investigation of the applicant. This fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of
any license.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-17: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
   Every license issued under this chapter shall be prominently displayed upon
the licensed premises by the licensee.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-18: TERM OF LICENSE:
   Every license issued hereunder, unless otherwise specifically provided in
the license, shall be valid from May 1 each year to April 30 of the following
year provided all provisions of this article have been complied with by the
licensee.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-19: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   Any licensee may apply to renew his license at expiration. The original
application filed by such licensee shall remain on file with the commissioner
and constitute an application for renewal provided that the licensee shall
execute an affidavit each year declaring that his original application and all
the information contained therein or supplied therewith is still true and
correct, or is still true and correct in part, and in that event, the licensee
shall specify in what respects the information contained in the original
application or supporting documents is no longer accurate and shall supply
correct information in that regard. Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the commissioner from requiring any licensee to file a
new application where the commissioner deems that such filing is necessary to
act upon the licensee’s request for renewal.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-20: INSURANCE/BOND:
   Every applicant for a license shall furnish to the commissioner with his
application, evidence of liquor liability insurance coverage for that premises
in an amount that is at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set out in
subsection 6-21(a) of the Illinois Liquor Control Act covering the licensee and
the owner of the premises for the entire term of the license. Evidence of
continued coverage shall be provided each year thereafter as a condition of
renewal of any license.
   (A)   Before any license shall be issued, the applicant shall file with the
local liquor control commission, a joint and several bond executed by good and
sufficient sureties which are residents of the county or by a stock surety
company writing business and authorized to do business in the state. The bond
shall be in the penal sum of $5,000.00, for each license, conditioned upon the
true and faithful compliance by the applicant with all ordinances of this city
and of the laws of the state that may be in force during the period the bond is
effective.
   (B)   Accompanying the bond required by subsection (1), shall be a sworn
statement of the assets and liabilities of the sureties signing the bond. If a
surety company executes the bond, a statement of its assets and liabilities
shall accompany the bond.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-21: SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH LOCATION:
   A separate license under this article must be issued for each location
desired by an applicant. No more than one license may be issued for any one
licensed premises.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-22: CHANGE OF LOCATION OR CLASSIFICATION:
   Any licensee desiring to change the location of his licensed premises or to
change the classification of his license under this article shall submit an
appropriate application for such change to the commissioner. An application for
change of location or change of classification shall be subject to the
requirements of this article and specifically to section
5-18-21 and applications for change of form of ownership shall meet the
requirements of section
5-18-22.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-23 :CHANGE OF FORM OF OWNERSHIP:
   Whenever any licensee changes the manner in which it conducts its business
at the licensed premises such licensee shall inform the commissioner of such
change. The licensee’s new business entity shall be required to meet the
requirements of this chapter in order to be eligible to continue to hold the
license issued to licensee.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-24: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
   (A)   Every license issued under this chapter shall be a purely personal
privilege and shall not constitute property, nor shall such license be subject
to attachment, garnishment or execution. No license issued under this chapter
shall be alienable or transferable, either voluntarily or involuntarily, or
subject to be encumbered or hypothecated.
   (B)   No license issued under this chapter shall be subject to transfer by
testate or intestate succession, but shall cease upon the death of the
licensee. Provided however that upon the death of any licensee, the executor or
administrators of such deceased licensee’s estate may continue to operate the
licensee’s business on the licensed premises under order of the appropriate
court and may exercise the privileges of any deceased licensee under such
license until its expiration or for a period of six months after the date of
the licensee’s death, whichever shall first occur.
   (C)   In the event of the bankruptcy or insolvency of any licensee, any
trustee or receiver appointed by an appropriate court for the estate of such
licensee may likewise continue to operate the business of the licensee on the
licensed promises until expiration of such license or for a period of six
months from the date of the licensee’s bankruptcy or insolvency, whichever
shall first occur.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-25: SALE OF LICENSED PREMISES:
   Whenever any licensee under this chapter has entered into a contract to sell
his business and to transfer the licensed premises to such purchaser, the
licensee shall notify the commissioner. The new owners shall file an
application and shall be subject in all respects to the requirements of this
chapter. If the new owner does not meet the qualifications for a license under
this chapter, nothing in this chapter guarantees the issuance of a license
after the sale of a licensed business.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-26: CONTINUOUS OPERATION:
   Any license issued under this chapter shall be kept in continuously in
effect and use in an operative business during the period for which it is
issued and when such business is abandoned, closed, or for any reason becomes
inoperative for a period of 60 days or more, the liquor commissioner, in his
discretion, may revoke the license.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-27: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS:
   All licenses issued under this chapter shall be of the classes specified in
this article.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-27.1: CLASS A:
   A Class A license shall entitle the licensee therein to sell at retail on
the premises specified alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises as well
as other retail sales of such liquor to be carried off the premises in a closed
and sealed container.
   (A)   Only persons whose primary business is the sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the licensed premises as a bar, tavern, restaurant or
similar establishment shall be eligible;
   (B)   The privilege granted by such license shall be to sell alcoholic
liquor at retail by the drink, in pitchers or in open original containers for
consumption on the licensed premises only and to sell at retail in the original
package for consumption off of the license premises;
   (C)   Restrictions applicable to such licenses shall be that only persons 21
years of age or older shall be allowed to enter or remain upon the licensed
premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. This restriction
shall not apply to employees or independent contractors performing services
upon the licensed premises during times at which such persons are actually
engaged in their employment for the licensee, provided that all such persons so
employed must be at least 18 years of age.
   (D)   The annual single payment fee for initial issuance or renewal of a
class A license shall be $500.00.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-27.2: CLASS A-1 CRAFT DISTILLERY:
   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the aforesaid section 5-18-26.1,
Class A, a Class A-1 license shall entitle the licensee therein to all of the
rights and privileges of a Class A license in addition to authorizing the
licensee to operate as a craft distillery.
   A Class A-1 craft distillery license also authorizes the on-site
manufacturing, production and storage of alcohol in quantities not to exceed
100,000 gallons (or higher limits in the event higher limits are authorized
under State of Illinois statutes). Sales of alcohol manufactured outside the
facility are prohibited. Such craft distillery license shall be issued subject
to the following conditions:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a Class A-1 licensee to sell a sealed
container of alcohol for off-premises consumption unless the container is
greater than or equal to 200 milliliters in volume.
   (B)   Class A-1 licensees shall have at least one Bassett-certified person
on premises whenever alcohol is available for on-site consumption. On-site
consumption for a Class A-1 licensee shall permit consumption in the licensee’s
premises and on the property in which the licensee premises is located.
   (C)   A Class A-1 licensee must also obtain a valid craft distiller license
from the State of Illinois.
   (D)   The annual single payment fee for initial issuance or renewal of a
Class A-1 license shall be $500.00. (Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-27.3: CLASS A-2 BREWER’S LICENSE:
   A Class A-2 brewer’s license shall authorize the on-site manufacturing,
storage, retail sale, and consumption of beer products on the licensed
premises. Issuance of a Class A-2 brewer’s license pursuant to this section
shall not relieve the licensee of any responsibility for complying with all
applicable local, state, and federal regulations. A Class A-2 brewer’s license
shall be issued subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   A Class A-2 licensee shall obtain and maintain all applicable state
and federal licenses pertaining to the manufacture, storage, retail sale, and
consumption of beer products.
   (B)   A Class A-2 licensee shall have at least one Bassett-certified person
on premises whenever alcohol is available for on-site consumption on the
licensed premises.
   (C)   The annual fee for the initial issuance or renewal of a Class A-
2 brewer’s license shall be $450.00.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-27.4: CLASS B:
   A Class B license shall entitle the licensee therein to sell at retail on
the premises specified alcoholic liquor, not for consumption on the premises
where sold.
   (A)   Only persons whose business is the sale of alcoholic liquor in and for
consumption off of the licenses premises shall be eligible;
   (B)   No employee, clerk or other person shall sell alcoholic beverages
unless they are at least 18 years of age during hours allowed by this chapter.
   (C)   Cold or chilled beer or wine shall not be sold by the single can or
bottle if less than 16 fluid ounces in size.
   (D)   Drive-up windows for the sale or purchase of alcohol are prohibited.
   (E)   The annual single payment fee for initial issuance or renewal of a
Class B license shall be $500.00, provided, however, the Class B license fee
for any retail establishment containing over 10,000 square feet shall be
$1,000.00.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-27.5: CLASS C-CLUB LICENSE:
   A Class “C” club license shall be issued by the commissioner subject to the
following requirements:
   (A)   Only not for profit corporations organized for fraternal, civic,
veterans, athletic or some other common objective and for whom the sale of
alcoholic liquor to members and guests is an ancillary purpose of such
organization shall be eligible;
   (B)   The privilege granted by such license shall be to sell alcoholic
liquor by the drink or in open original containers for consumption on the
licensed premises only.
   (C)   The facility must have seating for one hundred (100) people or less.
   (D)   The annual single payment fee for initial issuance or renewal of a
class C club license shall be $500.00.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-27.6: CLASS D:
   A Class D license which shall entitle the licensee to sell alcoholic liquors
at retail for consumption on the premises only.
   (A)   Only persons whose primary business is the operation of a video gaming
terminal and the sale of alcoholic liquors represents less than 40 percent of
total sales shall be eligible for a Class D license.
   (B)   The privilege granted by such license shall be to sell alcoholic
liquors by the drink or in open original containers for consumption on the
licensed premises only.
   (C)   The annual single payment fee for initial issuance or renewal of a
class D license shall be $500.00.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-27.7: CLASS E:
   A Class E Beer Garden Supplemental license shall entitle the licensee to
sell alcoholic liquors at retail for consumption on a beer garden.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee holding a Class E beer garden
license to hold a supplemental beer garden license without also holding a valid
Class A or C liquor license.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-27.8: CLASS “SE” SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS:
   Class “SE” permits shall be issued by the commissioner subject to the
following requirements:
   (A)   Only persons who qualify as special event retailers shall be eligible;
   (B)   The privilege granted by such permit shall be to sell beer and wine by
the drink or in open original containers for consumption on the specially
designated permit premises only;
   (C)   Class “SE” permits shall be subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   Such permit shall be issued only for a special community, civic,
educational, fraternal, political, religious or similar events;
      2.   The permit location may be a temporary structure, tent, or outdoor
location provided that ingress and egress to the permit area is subject to
control to assure compliance with the requirements of this chapter;
      3.   No person under the age of 21 years shall be allowed to enter or
remain upon the permitted premises, unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian. This restriction shall not apply to employees or independent
contractors performing services upon the licensed premises during times at
which such persons are actually engaged in their employment for the licensee,
provided that all such persons so employed must be at least 18 years of age;
      4.   No permit of this class shall be issued for a period in excess of
five consecutive days in any one-month. This permit shall not permit the sale
of alcoholic liquor in any place where the same is otherwise prohibited by law;
      5.   A special event permit can allow exemptions to section 5-18-26.6(2)
in that beer may be possessed and/or consumed on a public sidewalk, street,
parking lot or city park when the event is established in one of these
particular areas;
      6.   Person(s) requesting a special event permit must comply with the
city application process.
      7.   The annual single payment fee for initial issuance or renewal of a
class SE permit shall be $10.00 per day.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-27.9: CLASS “RL” RESTRICTED LICENSE:
   The restricted license shall allow the licensee to sell alcoholic liquor in
the same manner as originally licensed (i.e. class A, B, etc.), however, the
hours of operation shall be restricted as defined in subsection
5-18-28(D).
   A business will hold a Class “RL” license until such time as the licensee is
free from violations of this article for a period of one full license year.
   The fee for initial issuance or renewal of a Class “RL” license shall be
equal to the sum of the original license issued.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-27.10: CLASS TE TEMPORARY EXTENSION OF PREMISES LIQUOR LICENSE:
   A Class TE Temporary Extension of Premises liquor license authorizes the
retail sale of alcohol by the current holder of a Class A, Class A-1, Class A-
2, Class C, and Class D liquor license at nonresidential public premises other
than the premises covered by the existing license at locations and on days
approved by the Liquor Control Commissioner. All of the terms and conditions of
the license holder's primary liquor license shall extend and apply to the Class
TE license issued. The license holder must submit proof of adequate Dram Shop
Insurance covering the premises licensed under the Class TE liquor license
prior to being issued such a license. Any violation of the terms of the Class
TE license shall be considered a violation of the license holder's primary
liquor license and shall subject the license holder to penalties and/or
sanctions on the primary liquor license.
   (A)   A liquor license shall permit the sale of alcohol only in the premises
described in the liquor license application and license except that the Liquor
Control Commissioner, or their designee, may issue to the holder of a primary
liquor license a second premises license, a Class TE liquor license, which
authorizes the licensee to operate temporarily at a location other than the
premises at which said licensee is licensed to operate. Any licensee desiring a
Class TE license shall submit an application containing the name of the
licensee, a description of the temporary location, the expected dates and hours
of operation, and any other information relevant to the sale of alcohol at that
location that the Liquor Control Commissioner may request. No Class TE license
will be issued for any premises which is not a proper location for the retail
sale of alcohol under the laws of the State of Illinois or the City Code of
Spring Valley.
   (B)   An application, made on forms provided by the City Clerk, must be
submitted at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the planned event to
allow for the license application to be processed. The application must contain
the following information:
      1.   The legal name of the applicant and any DBA, if applicable;
      2.   Contact information of the applicant, including an address, phone
number, and email address;
      3.   The date and time of the event;
      4.   A description of the event, including the location(s) not contained
in the licensee's current licensed premises that will be considered under the
application as a temporary extension of premises;
      5.   An event site plan, including an identification of the area(s) where
alcohol will be stored and served;
      6.   Proof of adequate Dram Shop Insurance covering the premises proposed
to be licensed under the Class TE liquor license; and
      7.   Any other information or documents determined to be necessary by the
Liquor Control Commissioner.
   C.   The fee for the application for a Class TE liquor license shall be as
established in Section
5-18-28 , License Fees, of this Chapter. (Ord. 1919, 7-21-2025)
5-18-28: LICENSE FEES:
   The fees for the initial issuance and renewal of liquor licenses authorized
under this chapter shall be as follows:
CLASS FEE
CLASS       FEE
CLASS “A�$500.00
CLASS “A-1$500.00
CLASS “A-2$450.00
CLASS “B�$500.00 provided, however, the Class B license fee for any retail
            establishment containing over 10,000 square feet shall be $1,000.00
CLASS “C�$500.00
CLASS “D�$500.00
CLASS “RL�Fee equal to original license issued
CLASS “SE�$10.00/day
CLASS “TE�$10.00/day
 
   Should the license applied for be denied, the fee shall be returned to the
applicant, minus any costs incurred by the city to complete background checks,
fingerprints, and all fees incurred by the city in processing the application.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024; amd. Ord. 1919, 7-21-2025)
5-18-29: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a premises licensed for
the sale of alcoholic liquor to allow the premises to remain open during 2:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on any day.
   (B)   At closing time, all sales and consumption of alcoholic liquor will
cease and all persons, except employees, must depart the premises.
   (C)   No person shall enter upon the licensed premises between the closing
hour set forth in this section and 6:00 a.m. except the licensee and his
agents.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a premises licensed for
the sale of alcoholic liquor with a Class “RL” license to allow the premises to
remain open during the following times:
      1.   From 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on any day other than Saturday and
Sunday.
      2.   From 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday.
   (E)   A premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor, where the
primary business is not the sale of alcoholic liquor, may remain open past the
hours in subsection (A) or (D); however, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold on
the premises after the closing times in subsection (A) or (D).
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-30: CONDITIONS FOR OPERATING A BEER GARDEN:
   No beer garden shall be permitted, maintained or operated except in
conformity with the following regulations:
   (A)   The beer garden area shall be particularly described and adjacent to,
and operated as part of, premises licensed to sell beer or alcoholic beverages
for consumption on the premises.
   (B)   Beer gardens shall be no greater in area than one and one-half the
other floor space of the licensed premises.
   (C)   Beer gardens shall be limited to one person for each ten square feet
and shall have separately posted the maximum capacity.
   (D)   At any part of the beer garden not blocked by a building, there shall
be maintained or constructed a hedge or fence not less than three feet high
surrounding the beer garden area. The fence shall contain the required fire
exit or exits. Each gate or exit shall be not less than three feet high, shall
swing to egress, shall be equipped with proper hardware, and shall swing free
and clear of public sidewalks. The beer garden fence shall comply with all city
ordinances regarding vision clearance and required distances from corners.
   (E)   All electrical wiring shall comply with the national, state and city
electrical codes.
   (F)   All combustible rubbish shall be stored in noncombustible covered
containers.
   (G)   The noise emanating from any beer garden shall not violate any
regulations of the Municipal Code or ordinances pertaining to noise.
   (H)   The licensee or his agent shall be responsible for preventing
violations of the section.
   (I)   No license shall be granted that violates any other provisions of the
liquor code including but not limited to location restrictions, days of
restricted sales, and other standards of operation.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-31: QUALIFICATIONS OF EMPLOYEES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or for any agent of such
licensee to knowingly employ in any licensed premises any person who is
afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any contagious, infectious or sexually
transmitted disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted
with, or a carrier of, any such disease to work in or about any premises or to
engage in the handling, preparation or distribution of any alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or for any agent of such
licensee to employ for work on the licensed premises any person who has been
convicted of murder, attempted murder, a felony sexual offense or any felony
for any law concerning the sale or possession of controlled substance as
defined in the Illinois Criminal Code, for a period of five years preceding
such employment.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or for any agent of any licensee
to employ, with or without compensation, in any way directly or indirectly, any
person under 18 years of age for the purpose of drawing, pouring or mixing any
alcoholic beverages or to tend bar; and it shall be unlawful for any person
under 18 years of age to draw, pour or mix any alcoholic beverage or to tend
bar on any licensed premises.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or for any agent of any licensee
to employ, with or without compensation, in any way directly or indirectly, any
person under 18 years of age to sell or consummate the sale of any alcoholic
liquor or to serve any alcoholic liquor to any other person for consumption;
and it shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to sell or
consummate the sale of any alcoholic liquor or to serve any alcoholic liquor to
any other person for consumption upon any licensed premises.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-32: OCCUPANCY:
   (A)   All premises licensed under the ordinance for consumption of alcoholic
liquor on such premises shall be inspected by the fire chief, or his designated
representative, to determine and fix the maximum permitted occupancy of such
premises. The licensee shall arrange with the fire chief for an inspection and
determination of occupancy prior to conducting any business in the licensed
premises. Existing licensees shall make arrangements to be inspected and
occupancy determined not later than six months from the date of passage of this
chapter.
   (B)   Occupancy limit shall be determined by dividing the net building area
by a factor of 15.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or for any agent of any licensee
to allow the posted occupancy limit of any licensed establishment to be
exceeded. At any time when the commissioner or any law enforcement officer
reasonably believes that the occupancy limit of any licensed premises has been
exceeded, the fire department shall be notified. The fire chief, or his
designated representative, may determine the occupancy on such premises on such
occasion by any reasonable means, including requiring the temporary and orderly
evacuation of the premises in order to obtain a count of the persons present.
   (D)   The fire chief, after finalizing his inspection of the premise, shall
issue a certificate, signed and dated, in a size of eight inch by ten inch with
one inch block letters, that clearly states the maximum occupancy of the
premise. This certificate is to be prominently displayed in plain view at each
entrance to the establishment and above the bar area.
   (E)   The penalty for a violation of this section shall be a fine of not
less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-33: PERSONS PERMITTED TO ENTER ON LICENSED PREMISES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee holding a Class “A”, “C”, “RL”,
or “SE” license to permit or suffer any person under 21 years of age, unless
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, to enter, and after entering, to
remain upon the licensed premises at any time. This restriction shall not apply
to employees or independent contractors performing services upon the licensed
premises during times at which such persons are actually engaged in their
employment for the licensee, provided that all such persons so employed must be
at least 18 years of age.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age, unless
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, to enter, or after entering to
remain, upon any licensed premises licensed under Class “A”, “C”, “RL”, or “SE”
of this chapter.
   This restriction shall not apply to employees or independent contractors
performing services upon the licensed premises during times at which such
persons are actually engaged in employment for the licensee, provided that all
such persons so employed must be at least 18 years of age.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-34: PURCHASED, ACCEPTANCE, POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
BY MINORS:
   (A)   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor
is prohibited because of age shall not:
      1.   Purchase or accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor.
      2.   Have such alcoholic liquor in his possession.
      3.   Consume such alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   Notwithstanding, the other provisions of this section it shall not be
a violation of this article for any person under 21 years of age to possess and
dispense, or consume, any alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious
ceremony or service;
   (C)   The penalty for a violation of this section shall be a fine of not
less than $250.00 nor more than $750.00.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-35: SALE AND DELIVERY OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR TO MINORS AND CERTAIN OTHER
PERSONS:
   (A)   No licensee nor any agent of such licensee shall sell, give, or
deliver, or permit or suffer the sale, gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor to
any person under 21 years of age, or to any intoxicated person or to any person
known by him or her to be under legal disability or in need of mental
treatment.
   (B)   No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor,
shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under 21
years of age, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
   (C)   The fact that a person under 21 years of age is found in possession of
alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises of any licensee under this chapter
shall be prima facie evidence that the licensee or an agent of the licensee
permitted or suffered the sale, gift or delivery of such alcoholic liquor to
such person.
   (D)   The penalty for a violation of this section shall be a fine of not
less than $250.00 nor more than $750.00.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-36: PROOF OF AGE; MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE:
   (A)   Any licensee or agent of any licensee may refuse to sell or serve
alcoholic liquor to any person unable to produce adequate written evidence of
identity and of the fact that he or she is over 21 years of age.
   (B)   At any time that a licensee or any agent of a licensee believes or has
reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited to
any person due to such person’s age, he shall, before making the sale or
delivery, demand presentation of two permanent forms of positive
identification, issued by a public official in the performance of his official
duties: one of which forms of identification shall contain a photograph of the
prospective recipient and proof of age and the other form of identification
shall show the same name.
   (C)   It shall be an affirmative defense that the licensee or his agent did
the following:
      1.   Demanded presentation of identification;
      2.   Was provided written evidence of identification as provided in this
section;
      3.   Reasonably relied upon the written evidence of identification
produced.
   It shall not be a defense to a charge under this section that a licensee or
his agent was shown and accepted a false or fraudulent identification which he
knew to be false or fraudulent.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, or to
present or offer to any licensee or his agent, any written, printed or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not
actually his own for the purpose of entering any licensed premises where access
to such premises is restricted to persons 21 years of age or older under this
chapter.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any
altered, false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of age or
identity or any written, printed or photostatic evidence of age or identity of
another person for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase or
procuring or attempting to procure alcoholic liquor.
   (F)   The penalty for a violation of this section shall be a fine of not
less than $250.00 nor more than $750.00.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-37: ASSISTING MINOR IN MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE OR IDENTITY:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to give, sell or furnish to any
person under 21 years of age any altered, false or fraudulent written, printed
or photostatic evidence of age and identity.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to give, sell or furnish to any
person under 21 years of age any written, printed or photostatic evidence of
age and identity of any other person for the purpose of misrepresenting the age
and identity of the person under 21 years of age.
   (C)   The penalty for a violation of this section shall be a fine of not
less than $250.00 and not more than $750.00. Every licensee under this chapter
and every employee or agent of such licensee who as a part of his duties or
employment with the licensee tends bar, sells, serves or dispenses any
alcoholic liquor or checks identifications of patrons shall receive training in
properly identifying persons and in recognizing false or fraudulent
identification. Training which meets the requirements of this section shall be
training offered or approved by the state. All persons so trained shall receive
supplementary training at least once every three years.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-38: REGULATIONS ON LICENSEES AND LICENSED PREMISES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or his agent to solicit any
other person to purchase the solicitor a drink or drinks on any licensed
premises.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or his agent to serve, give,
deliver or in any manner participate in placing any alcoholic liquor in any
motor vehicle except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or his agent to sell any
alcoholic liquor in return for any payment not authorized by state law.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or his agent or anyone on the
licensee’s behalf to announce the presence of law enforcement officers in or on
the licensed premises, unless requested to do so by a law enforcement officer.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or his agent or anyone acting on
the licensee’s behalf to use any radio, police scanner or other electronic
device for the purpose of intercepting police radio transmissions and
thereafter warning any person on the licensed premises or notifying any other
licensee or his agent of any inspection, check or other action by the police on
any licensed premises.
   (F)   Every licensee and each of his agents shall promptly report to the
police department any crime or other illegal activity occurring on or about the
licensed premises of which any of them have knowledge. No licensee nor any
agent of any licensee shall fail or refuse to aid and cooperate with the police
department in the investigation of any crime or illegal activity or withhold
any information.
   (G)   Every licensee shall maintain on each licensed premises at least one
telephone in proper working order and readily accessible to the bartender or
other responsible person in charge of the licensed premises for purposes of
reporting to the police department incidents that occur on or about the
licensed premises, including but not limited to 9-1-1, medical, police and/or
fire assistance.
   (H)   Every licensed premises, including places of storage, shall be kept
and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and shall comply
with all federal, state and local laws governing health and safety. This also
includes the place of storage for materials and equipment used in the sale of
alcoholic liquor.
   (I)   Sanitary measures for cleaning and caring for all glasses, dishes,
utensils and equipment shall be provided for by all licensees.
   (J)   No playing of dice, or any gambling devices or games of chance, punch
boards or slot machines shall be permitted or used in any premises licensed for
the sale of alcoholic liquors except when authorized under the laws of the
State of Illinois.
   (K)   No person shall operate, keep, own, use, exhibit, rent or lease or
allow or permit the operation, keeping, owning, using, exhibition, renting or
leasing of gambling devices on a premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
liquor except as otherwise authorized under the laws of the State of Illinois,
including, but not limited to, the Bingo License and Tax Act, 230 ILCS 25/1 et
seq., Illinois Lottery Law, 20 ILCS 1605/1 et seq., the Raffles Act, 230 ILCS
15/0.01 et seq., the Charitable Games Act, 230 ILCS 30/1 et seq., the Illinois
Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act, 230 ILCS 20/1 et seq., the Riverboat Gambling Act,
230 ILCS 10/1 et seq., and/or the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
   (L)   Licensees may advertise alcoholic liquor by means of signs on any
sidewalk within the 100 and 200 blocks of East and West St. Paul Street.
   (M)   Failure to comply to all ordinances and orders of the city may result
in a review by the local liquor commissioner and possible suspension of the
license.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-39: WARNING SIGNS REQUIRED:
   Premises licensed under this article where alcoholic liquor is sold there
shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place that is easily viewable by
the public, a printed card which shall be supplied by the city clerk. Of which
the size will not be less than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches, and
printed with a white background and black type and shall read substantially as
follows:
“WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE YEARS. You are subject to a
minimum fine of $100.00 and a maximum fine of $750.00 under the Ordinances of
the City of Spring Valley, Illinois, if you purchase alcoholic liquor or
misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor, or be present in or loiter in any tavern or place where alcoholic
liquor is sold unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.”
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-40: LIABILITY OF OWNER OF PREMISES AND LICENSEE IN CERTAIN INSTANCES:
   (A)   If the owner of any licensed premises, or any person from whom the
licensee derives the right to possession of such premises or the agent of such
owner or person, shall knowingly permit the licensee to use the licensed
premises in violation of this chapter, such person shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this article to the same extent as the licensee and shall be
subject to the same penalties provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   Every act or omission of whatever nature constituting a violation of
any provisions of this article by any agent of any licensee, shall be deemed to
be the act of such licensee or employer. The licensee or employer shall be
punishable to the same extent and in the same manner as if the act or omission
had been done or omitted by the licensee personally.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-41: ABSOLUTE LIABILITY OFFENSES:
   The violation of the following is hereby declared absolute liability
offenses and subject to the general penalty provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   The sale of alcoholic liquor by the holder of a license or permit in
violation of the provisions of the license or permit; and
   (B)   Except in those provisions where a mental state is specifically
required, the violation of any prohibition or requirement contained in this
chapter.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-42: ENTERTAINMENT RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   No licensee shall engage in or permit any of the following on any
licensed premises:
      1.   Any person to engage in any topless or bottomless act,
demonstration, dance or exhibition;
      2.   Any act of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality,
oral copulation, flagellation or any other sexual act which is prohibited by
law;
      3.   Any act of actual or simulated touching, fondling or caressing of
the breast, buttocks, anus, vulva or genitals;
      4.   The display of films or photographs depicting acts, the live
performance of which is prohibited by subsections 1., 2. or 3. above.
      5.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a licensee
from showing any film or video feed having been classified with a rating not
greater than “R” by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) or similar
commercial film industry organization, or which would otherwise meet such
rating standards based on its content.
   (B)   No person shall engage in any of the acts prohibited in subsection (A)
above on any licensed premises.
   (C)   No licensees or their agent(s) shall permit any person to remain on
the licensed premises who violates any of the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-43: HAPPY HOURS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   All licensees shall maintain a schedule of prices charged for all
drinks of alcoholic liquor served and consumed on any licensed premises or part
thereof.
   (B)   Any licensee who operates more than one licensed establishment or who
on any licensed premises operates more than one location where alcoholic liquor
is sold shall maintain a separate schedule of prices for all drinks on each
premises or location.
   (C)   No licensee or his agent shall:
      1.   Sell more than one drink of alcoholic liquor for the price of one
drink of alcoholic liquor;
      2.   Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of
drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the general public or as provided in
235 ILCS 5/6-28;
      3.   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the
size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day;
      4.   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or
      5.   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsections (C)1. through 4.
   A violation of this Section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of
the retailer’s license as provided by 235 ILCS 5/6-28.
   (D)   Nothing in subsection (C) shall be construed to prohibit a licensee
from:
      1.   Offering free food or entertainment at any time;
      2.   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
      3.   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
      4.   Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between
a hotel or multi-use establishment and another group for the holding of any
function, meeting, convention or trade show;
      5.   Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
      6.   Selling pitchers, or the equivalent, including but not limited to
buckets, carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in
such manner and delivered to two or more persons at one time; or
      7.   Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in whole
or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment not
regularly scheduled.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-44: TRAINING REQUIRED:
   (A)   All liquor licensees serving alcohol must have a minimum of one
alcohol server on-duty that has completed Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers
Education and Training (“BASSET”) and obtained BASSET certification.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, “alcohol servers” means persons who sell
or serve open containers of alcoholic beverages at retail and anyone whose job
description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of open
containers of alcoholic beverages at retail or for entry into the licensed
premises including all liquor managers and management personnel at the premises
license for sale of alcoholic beverage for on-premises consumption.
   (C)   BASSET certification shall be obtained from a program licensed by the
State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission and meeting the requirements of 235
ILCS 5/6-27.1 and 77 Ill. Adm. Code 3500, as amended from time to time.
   (D)   A copy of a valid BASSET certification for the on-duty alcohol server
(s) shall be available at the license premises for inspection by the city
police department, the local liquor control commissioner or his designee.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-45: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE:
   Each and every part, provision and section of the Liquor Control Act of 1934
(235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.), as amended, and regulations promulgated hereunder
which relate in any manner to the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor, is hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter, to the same extent and
with the same legal effect as if fully set forth herein except as otherwise
specifically changed or amended in this chapter. Any violation of such
applicable and accepted provisions of said Act shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter and be subject to the penalties provided herein.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-46: SET-UP ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a set-up establishment in the city.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-47: ADULT RESPONSIBILITY:
   (A)   No person 21 years of age or older who owns, possesses, operates,
supervises or controls any premises within the city shall knowingly permit any
person under 21 years of age to possess or consume any alcoholic liquor on such
premises.
   (B)   It shall be an affirmative defense to any action under this section
that the person 21 years of age or older asked for, was shown and reasonably
reliable upon a driver’s license or other written evidence of age and identity
as described in section 6-108.
   (C)   It shall not be a violation of this section to allow a person under 21
years of age to possess, dispense or consume alcoholic liquor as part of a
religious ceremony or service.
   (D)   The penalty for a violation of this section shall be a fine of not
less than $150.00 nor more than $750.00.
   (E)   No parent shall give or deliver alcoholic liquor to his or her child
if that child is of nonage for the child’s consumption, unless the consumption
of alcoholic liquor is in the performance of a religious service or ceremony
under the direction, supervision and approval of the parent of such child in
the privacy of a home.
   (F)   No parent or other person shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly
or negligently give or deliver alcoholic liquor to, or permit possession of
alcoholic liquor by his or her child, or any other person under the age of 21,
unless such child or person under the age of 21 is making a delivery of such
alcoholic liquor in pursuance of his employment as allowed.
   (G)   No parent or other person shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly
or negligently give, deliver, invite or permit the consumption of alcoholic
liquor by any person of nonage on or about any premises owned, leased or
controlled by such parent or person except as otherwise allowed by subsection
(E).
   (H)   Parents shall restrain or prevent their children from consuming
alcoholic liquor where the parent knows, or in the exercise of ordinary care
should know, of a substantial probability that his or her child is or will
consume alcoholic liquor under circumstances which would violate the provisions
of this chapter, the Illinois Liquor Control Act, or any other ordinances,
statutes or amendments thereto.
   (I)   Parents who know, or in the exercise of ordinary care should know, of
a substantial probability that their child has consumed or will consume
alcoholic liquor in violation of this chapter, the Illinois Liquor Control Act,
or any other ordinances, statues or amendments thereto, shall restrain or
prevent their child from operating or driving a motor vehicle on the public
streets and ways of the city in violation of any ordinance, law or statute.
   (J)   Parents who know, or in the exercise of ordinary care should know, of
a substantial probability that their child has consumed or will consume
alcoholic liquor in violation of this chapter, the Illinois Liquor Control Act,
or any other ordinances, statues or amendments thereto, shall restrain or
prevent their child from committing acts which constitute vandalism, theft,
disorderly conduct or the unjustifiable use of force in violation of any
ordinance, law or statute.
   (K)   No parent or other person shall rent, or otherwise permit the use of
any hotel or motel sleeping rooms, or suites, when such person knows, or in the
exercise of ordinary care, should know of a substantial probability that such
space will be used by persons of nonage for the consumption or possession,
either actual or constructive, of alcoholic liquor, except as otherwise allowed
by subsection (E).
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-48: RESTRICTIONS ON THE GENERAL PUBLIC:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor anywhere within the
city.
   (B)   Except as provided in subsection (D), no driver may transport, carry,
possess or have any alcoholic liquor within the passenger area of any motor
vehicle upon a highway in this state except in the original container and with
the seal unbroken.
   (C)   Except as provided in subsection (D), no passenger may carry, possess
or have any alcoholic liquor within any passenger area of any motor vehicle
upon a highway in this state except in the original container and with the seal
unbroken.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to the passengers in a limousine when it
is being used for purposes for which a limousine is ordinarily used, the
passengers on a chartered bus when it is being used for purposes for which
chartered buses are ordinarily used or on a motor home or mini motor home as
defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-145.01. However, the driver of any such vehicle is
prohibited from consuming or having any alcoholic liquor in or about the
driver’s area. Any evidence of alcoholic consumption by the driver shall be
prima facie evidence of such driver’s failure to obey this section. For the
purposes of this section, a limousine is a motor vehicle of the first division
with the passenger compartment enclosed by a partition or dividing window used
in the for-hire transportation of passengers and operated by an individual in
possession of a valid Illinois driver’s license of the appropriate
classification pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/6-104.
   (E)   The exemption applicable to chartered buses under subsection (D) does
not apply to any chartered bus being used for school purposes.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic liquor on
any public property or any other place that is accessible to the general
public, unless for a private function approved by the city, such as reunions or
picnics, during a designated city function, or at a sidewalk table within a
permitted outdoor dining area.
   (G)   The penalty for a violation of this section shall be a fine of not
less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to possess
any beverage whether alcoholic or not, in any glass container in any city park,
unless for a private function approved by the city, such as reunions or
picnics, or during a designated city function.
   (I)   No alcoholic beverage shall be consumed in any of the following city
parks: Kirby Park, Savitch Park, Baltikauski Park, Coal Miner’s Park, Noles
Park, Casford Park, Mini Park, City Hall Park and other lands which the city
shall hereafter lease for park purposes, unless for a private function approved
by the city, such as reunions or picnics, or during a designated city function.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-49: NUISANCE DECLARED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, create or cause to be
made a nuisance.
   (B)   Any premises, licensed or unlicensed, used to conduct the sale of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this article or state law is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance.
   (C)   If a premises is determined to be a chronic nuisance premises as
defined, the owner, operator, and/or owner’s agent of the premises shall be
liable for all of the costs of administration and enforcement of this chapter.
The costs of the enforcement of the third and all subsequent police calls
within any 30-day period, including administrative costs, shall be charged in
full against the premises and real estate on which the nuisance occurred. The
costs so charged shall be a lien upon said premises and may be assessed and
collected as a lien and foreclosed pursuant to Illinois law.
   (D)   Any nuisance under this chapter may be abated by a proper action in
any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-50: DUTY TO REPORT DISTURBANCES:
   Any licensee, manager, or employee present on any premises licensed for the
sale of vinous liquors, malt liquors, spirituous liquors or beer shall
immediately report to the police department disturbances, disorderly conduct,
fights, or other criminal acts occurring on the premises.
   A verified report of an incident occurring on a licensed premises shall be
prima facie evidence of a licensee’s failure to comply with this section. For
purposes of this section, a verified report consists of, but is not limited to,
a police incident report, a third-party complaint verified by an officer, or an
incident viewed by a police officer.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-51: FAILURE TO MAINTAIN THE PEACE:
   Any licensee, manager, or employee present on any premises licensed for the
sale of vinous liquors, malt liquors, spirituous liquors or beer has a duty to
maintain the peace on the premises and report any breach of the peace in
accordance with section
5-18-36.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
5-18-52: PENALTY:
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter and for which another penalty
has not been provided shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $250.00 or
more than $500.00 for each offense.
(Ord. 1890, 5-6-2024)
CHAPTER 20
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
SECTION:
5-20-1: Definitions
5-20-2: Registration Of Telecommunications Providers
5-20-3: Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
5-20-4: Collection, Enforcement, And Administration
5-20-5: Compliance With Other Laws
5-20-6: Existing Franchises And Licenses
5-20-7: Penalties
5-20-8: Enforcement
5-20-9: Severability
5-20-10: Conflict
5-20-11: Waiver And Fee Implementation
5-20-1: DEFINITIONS:
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the city, and
for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid
in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of every
kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the
cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or
service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the
amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the city, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within the
city, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel
provided within the city. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
   (A)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
under: 1) the fee imposed by this section, 2) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, 3)
amounts collected under section
8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code, 4) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 5) 911 surcharges, or 6) the tax imposed by
section 4251 of the internal revenue code;
   (B)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the city
of Spring Valley;
   (C)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
   (D)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   (E)   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the city;
   (F)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
   (G)   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   (H)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunications
devices; or
   (I)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
to the city.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any municipal street, alley, water or public right of way
dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements
wherein the city has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the
location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities. "Public
right of way" shall not include any real or personal city property that is not
specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include city
buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are
situated in the public right of way.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the state of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this state.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air to ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless
telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city
through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: (A) Any telecommunications retailer; and
   (B)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail
as defined in this section. The city may, in its discretion, upon application,
authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer not
maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction of
the city, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the
fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee
upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the city.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
telecommunications act of 1996 (public law no. 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)
(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services, and paging services. (Ord. 895, 10-6-1997)
5-20-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:
   (A)   Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this chapter shall
register with the city within thirty (30) days after the effective date hereof
or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be
provided by the city; provided, however, that any telecommunications retailer
that has filed a return pursuant to subsection
5-20-4(C) of this chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with
this section.
   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the city
pursuant to subsection (A) of this section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by subsection
5-20-4(C) of this chapter, as the case may be, to the city within thirty (30)
days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided
by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent
return on file with the city. (Ord. 895, 10-6-1997)
5-20-3: MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
   (A)   A city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent
(1.0%) of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to
service addresses within the city for telecommunications originating or
received in the city.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this chapter, the city infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public
rights of way within the city by telecommunications retailers. Imposition of
the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this chapter does not,
however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or imposition of any
fees otherwise authorized by law.
   (C)   The city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in
section
5-20-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 895, 10-6-1997)
5-20-4: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the city infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the city the infrastructure maintenance
fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the city not later
than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which a bill is
issued to the customer; provided, however, that the telecommunications retailer
may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%) of the city infrastructure
maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in
accounting for and remitting the fee.
   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the city shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the city, which shall
contain such information as the city may reasonably require.
   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the city. The charge imposed under subsection
(A) of this section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this chapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this chapter, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the city may request, and telecommunications
retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no
claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years after the date of
the erroneous payment unless: 1) the credit is used only to offset a claim of
underpayment made by the city within the applicable statutory period of
limitations, and 2) the credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.
   (F)   Amounts paid under this chapter by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
      1.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the telecommunications excise tax
act;
      2.   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in section
8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code;
      3.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax
as prescribed in section
8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code;
      4.   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the public utilities act.
   (G)   The city shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books
and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this chapter to
determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the
city for the city infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the
amount of the city infrastructure maintenance fee due to the city by the
telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the city plus five percent (5%) of
the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs
incurred by the city in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed five
percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit.
Said sum shall be paid to the city within twenty one (21) days after the date
of issuance of an invoice for same.
   (H)   The city or its designee, may promulgate such further or additional
regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this chapter,
consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time and shall
notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant to section
5-20-2 of this chapter of such regulations. (Ord. 895, 10-6-1997)
5-20-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Generally applicable taxes; and
   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or
repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to
freestanding towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as
provided; and
   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over, or within the right of way. (Ord. 895,
10-6-1997)
5-20-6: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the city entered into before the effective date hereof regarding
the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according to and for their
stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to the extent
waived. (Ord. 895, 10-6-1997)
5-20-7: PENALTIES:
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this code. (Ord.
895, 10-6-1997)
5-20-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
895, 10-6-1997)
5-20-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 895, 10-6-1997)
5-20-10: CONFLICT:
This chapter supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior
hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. (Ord.
895, 10-6-1997)
5-20-11: WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION:
   (A)   The city hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation that
may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the city by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing city franchise, license,
or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the time the
city imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee. This waiver
shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure maintenance fee
provided for in this chapter is subject to being lawfully imposed on the
telecommunications retailer and collected by the telecommunications retailer
from the customer.
   (B)   The city clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
city has a franchise.
   (C)   The city infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this chapter
shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not less than
ninety (90) days after the city provides written notice by certified mail to
each telecommunications retailer with whom the city has an existing franchise,
license, or similar agreement that the city waives all compensation under such
existing franchise, license, or similar agreement during such time as the fee
is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer and remitted
to the city. The infrastructure maintenance fee shall apply to gross charges
billed on or after the effective date as established in the preceding sentence.
(Ord. 895, 10-6-1997)
CHAPTER 21
VIDEO GAMING
SECTION:
5-21-1: License Required
5-21-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   The owner of a video gaming terminal shall obtain a license from the
city for each such device operated within the city of Spring Valley.
   (B)   It shall be lawful for video gaming consistent with the state of
Illinois ordinance to occur within the confines of the municipality.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to deliver video gaming
terminals or to operate video gaming terminals within the city for the use by
any person for any purpose unless a license has been obtained and the license
fee has been paid for each such machine for the current year of operation.
   (D)   The application for license shall be filed with the city clerk and
shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name, address, age and birth of the owner of the video gaming
terminal; the name, address and date of birth of the owner of the establishment
where the video gaming terminal shall be located.
      2.   The place where the video gaming terminal is to be displayed or
operated and the business conducted at that location.
      3.   A description of the video gaming terminal to be covered by the
license, including model number and serial number.
      4.   Evidence that appropriate licenses and authorities have been issued
by the Illinois gaming board or other necessary authorities to the owner of the
video gaming terminal and to the owner of the establishment.
      5.   The fee for operation of a video gaming terminal shall be two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per terminal annually. The cost of this fee
shall be shared equally between the terminal operator and the applicable
licensed establishment. License shall be renewable on January 1 the next year
following issuance and on January 1 each year thereafter. The application fee
is not subject to reimbursement or refund upon denial of a license. Said fees
are not subject to proration or refund and are due prior to issuance of the
license.
   6.   The license required by the state and the municipalities shall be
prominently displayed next to the video gaming terminal.
   7.   The mayor, at any time, may terminate any license issued under this
chapter upon five (5) business days' notice of a violation of any provision of
this chapter by the owner of the video gaming terminal or the owner of the
establishment. After a hearing presided over by the mayor, the mayor may order
the revocation of the license upon a finding that the violation has occurred.
The license shall thereupon be terminated immediately. (Ord. 1509, 8-27-2012;
amd. Ord. 1838, 4-18-2022)
CHAPTER 22
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
SECTION:
5-22-1: Definitions
5-22-2: Certificate Of Registration And License Required
5-22-3: Application For Certificate Of Registration And License Required
5-22-4: Effect Of Cessation Of Business
5-22-5: Business Insurance And Indemnity
5-22-6: Permit Issuance
5-22-7: Registration Fee
5-22-8: Safety And Ordinance Inspections
5-22-9: Location Restrictions
5-22-10: Locations Allowed
5-22-11: Days And Hours Of Operation
5-22-12: Special Events
5-22-13: Additional Taxing Districts Within The City
5-22-14: Reserving Spots
5-22-15: Tax Revenue
5-22-16: Standards Of Conduct
5-22-17: Restriction On Use And Permits
5-22-18: Revocation Of Certificate
5-22-19: Creating Hazard Prohibited
5-22-20: City Of Spring Valley Sponsored Events
5-22-21: Violations And Penalties
5-22-22: Reservation Of Rights
5-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
BEVERAGE: Any non-alcoholic liquid, hot or cold, intended for use in whole or
in part for human consumption. Alcohol beverage sales by Mobile Food Vendor
units is not allowed unless specifically addressed in another section of this
Chapter.
BRICK-AND-MORTAR BUSINESS: A business lawfully operating at a fixed location
within a building in the City limits.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR AND/OR UNIT: A person who sells, serves, offers for sale, or
gives away food or beverages from any self-contained mobile unit, independent
with respect to water, sewer and power utilities, capable of moving or being
moved, is meant to be portable and is not permanently attached to the ground,
consisting of an enclosed truck, trailer, bus, or similar vehicle that contains
equipment used for sale and/or preparation of food or beverage merchandise and
is closed up when not in operation. A mobile ice cream truck, whose route is
residential only, and that does not park or locate in any one place for longer
than ten minutes, is not considered a mobile food vendor unit for purposes of
this Chapter.
NOVELTY MOBILE FOOD VENDOR UNIT: A two (2) wheeled mobile unit that operates
within the City limits of Spring Valley ten (10) times or less a calendar year.
The City of Spring Valley and Clerk will be the sole arbiters whether any
specific vendor qualifies as a novelty Mobile Food Vendor.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: All outdoor areas that are not owned or leased by any
governmental agency or entity, including, but not limited to, streets,
alleyways, sidewalks, plazas, parking lots, or other areas adjacent to
buildings not owned by a governmental agency or entity.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: All outdoor areas that are owned, or leased as lessee, by the
City or one of the City's departments, or upon which the City or one of its
departments has an easement or right of way including, but not limited to,
streets, alleyways, sidewalks, plazas, parking lots or other areas adjacent to
buildings owned by the City or one of its departments.
RESIDENCE: A separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or
more persons contained within any type of building or structure.
RESTAURANT: A place where people pay to sit and eat food that is cooked or
baked and served on premises.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any event so designated by the City of Spring Valley.
STAND: Any table, showcase, bench, rack, push cart, wagon or other wheeled
vehicle or device which may be moved without the assistance of a motor and
which is not required to be licensed and registered by the Department of Motor
Vehicles, used for the displaying, storing or transporting of articles offered
for sale by a vendor.
STREET VENDOR: Any person engaged in the selling or offering for sale, of food,
beverages, or merchandise in any public place, from a stand, motor vehicle or
from his or her person. For purposes of this Chapter, "public place" means any
street, sidewalk, park, alley, dedicated public right-of-way or any other
public property owned or controlled by the City or any other governmental
entity.
VICTUALS: Food of any kind that is prepared, packaged or is in a form that is
suitable for immediate ingestion, or consumption by human beings, or raw meats.
The definition excludes produce sold in bulk or by weight that has not been
prepared, packaged or served with other prepared foods as part of a menu item.
(Ord. 1659, 1-30-2017; amd. Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-2: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to locate a Mobile Food Vendor unit in the City except in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
It is unlawful to locate a Mobile Food Vendor unit in the City without first
having secured a City of Spring Valley permit to do so as provided by this
Chapter.
A separate permit shall be required for each Mobile Food Vendor unit.
The permit period within the City Limits is annual, from January 1 through
December 31.
   (A)   Required: It shall be unlawful for any person eighteen (18) years of
age or older, to engage as a Mobile Food Vendor without first having secured a
license in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and completed
registration in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
   (B)   Special Events: Any Mobile Food Vendor participating in any special
event for which the sponsor has sought and obtained approval from the City of
Spring Valley may sell and offer for sale any victuals or produce without first
obtaining a license and complying with the certificate of registration as
required by this section, provided that such participant complies with the
following requirements:
      1.   All displays, sales and related activities shall be limited to the
boundaries of the special event for which the City granted approval to the
sponsor;
      2.   All displays, sales and related activities shall be conducted in the
areas designated by the sponsor;
      3.   Participating Mobile Food Vendor shall indemnify and hold the City
of Spring Valley and its employees harmless from and against all claims of any
kind whatsoever related to such participants' conduct occurring at the special
event and shall submit proof of liability insurance to the City of Spring
Valley and the sponsor demonstrating adequate liability coverage Which shall be
determined, in the sole discretion of, the City of Spring Valley;
      4.   Participating Mobile Food Vendor shall comply with all rules,
regulations and requirements set out by the City of Spring Valley, the Bureau
County Health Department, and by the sponsor of the event; and
      5.   Participating Mobile Food Vendor shall pay any participation fees to
the sponsor of the event.
   (C)   Municipal Exemption: The City of Spring Valley reserves the right to
waive the certificate of registration and licensing provisions contained in
this Chapter for any school, religious or not for profit organization and to
exempt said organizations from the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 1874, 7-
17-2023)
5-22-3: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person desiring a permit under this Chapter shall submit a fully completed
application form provided by the City of Spring Valley to the City Clerk at
least fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed date of utilizing the Mobile
Food Vendor unit in the City. Applicants may be owners of Mobile Food Vendor
units or private entities. The applicant must also agree to submit to
background checks including photo and fingerprint identification conducted by
the Spring Valley Police Department. The applicant shall truthfully state in
full and have attached the following information as specified:
   (A)   Application for certificate of registration and license shall be made
upon a form provided by the City of Spring Valley. The applicant shall
truthfully state in full the information requested on the application:
      1.   The applicants name and address of present place of residence,
length of residence at the address, business address if other than present
address, and address of the place of residence during the past three (3) years,
if other than the present residence; phone number, email address and date of
birth;
      2.   The name, current physical address, and phone number of the person
or entity the applicant is employed by or represents, and the length of time of
such employment or representation. The name, if any, of the person or entity
that owns or operates the vehicle and/or trailer, if different from the name of
the Mobile Food Vendor unit;
      3.   The type of products to be sold;
      4.   The period of time for which the certificate is applied;
      5.   The place or places where the Mobile Food Vendor unit will operate
and a written statement, if applicable, from the owner of any private business
property authorizing the applicant to use the property;
      6.   Whether a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under
this Chapter has ever been revoked previously, be prepared to explain;
      7.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony violation
under the laws of the State of Illinois, any other state, or the Federal laws
of the United States;
      8.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of the
provisions of this Chapter, or the Ordinance of any other Illinois municipality
regarding soliciting or Mobile Food Vendors. If yes, please provide the name of
the individual convicted, the date of conviction, the nature of the offense,
the punishment proscribed and whether the punishment has been completed;
      9.   Sales tax identification number;
      10.   Tax exemption number (if any);
      11.   The number and kind of vehicles to be used, as well as the license
plate number of the Mobile Food Vendor unit vehicle(s) to be used to serve
customers.
Additionally, proof of the following is required:
      1.   If an application is submitted for a Mobile Food Vendor license,
proof that the operator of the motor vehicle has a valid driver's license
(submit copy);
      2.   Copy of Illinois registration for the Mobile Food Vendor unit,
vehicle, or trailer;
      3.   Proof of registration as a business entity with the Illinois
Secretary of State, if applicable;
      4.   Proof of Employer Tax Identification Number (EIN);
      5.   Proof of insurance in the amount required by this chapter;
      6.   A liability insurance policy covering the subject vehicle and/or
trailer;
      7.   A copy of the Food Handler's Certificate for each employee as
required by the Illinois Department of Public Health; and
      8.   A copy of the proper Mobile Food Vendor unit license from the
Illinois Department of Public Health and/or Bureau County Health Department.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall cause to be kept in its office an accurate record
of every application received and acted upon, together with all other
information and data pertaining thereto, all certificates of registration
issued under the provisions of this chapter, and all denials of applications.
Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order, as filed,
and every certificate issued and any renewal thereof shall be identified with
the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued.
   (C)   No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has
been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State or any
other state or Federal law of the United States within five (5) years of the
date of application, nor to any person who is a registered sex offender in this
or any other state, nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of
any of the provisions of this Chapter, nor to any person whose certificate of
registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided.
   (D)   Application for a certificate under this Chapter shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk at least fourteen (14) business days prior to the
time that the applicant desires to commence such business.
   (E)   The application under this section shall be accompanied by proof of
general liability insurance in an amount of not less than five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) to be provided by Mobile Food Vendor. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-
2023)
5-22-4: EFFECT OF CESSATION OF BUSINESS:
No deductions or rebates shall be allowed from the fee for a permit issued
pursuant to this Chapter for any part of the term of which the permit holder
does not engage in such business. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-5: BUSINESS INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY:
   (A)   Each applicant for a permit shall provide a certificate of insurance
to the City of Spring Valley Clerk, insuring the applicant, and explicitly
naming the City of Spring Valley as co-insured, against liabilities and in the
amounts relative to such activity:
      1.   Commercial general liability of not less than five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00);
      2.   The insurance shall provide for thirty (30) days prior written
notice to the City of Spring Valley if coverage is changed, cancelled or non-
renewed.
   (B)   The City of Spring Valley shall be named as an additional insured on
the permittee's liability policy on a primary, noncontributory basis for any
liability arising directly or indirectly from the operation of a Mobile Food
Vendor Unit, and the permittee shall indemnify, defend and hold the City
harmless from any loss that results directly or indirectly from the permit
issuance. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-6: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
   (A)   The Clerk shall within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the completed
application issue the business permit to the applicant if the Clerk finds the
following:
      1.   Compliance with all provisions of this Chapter; and
      2.   The applicant has not had a prior permit issued under this Chapter,
or any other similar permit or license authorized by a different governmental
entity, suspended or revoked.
   (B)   The Clerk may, upon a finding of appropriateness, issue a permit to an
applicant who has been found to meet the terms of the above subsections.
   (C)   Failure of the Clerk to issue a permit within fourteen (14) days of
completion of the application constitutes denial of the application.
   (D)   A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable.
   (E)   All permits issued by the Clerk under this chapter shall be
prominently displayed on the Mobile Food Vendor unit and shall be shown to any
person who requests to view the permit.
   (F)   Failure to display or exhibit a permit in accordance with this chapter
may be grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-
2023)
5-22-7: REGISTRATION FEE:
   (A)   All Mobile Food Vendors shall pay to the City Clerk of the City of
Spring Valley an annual registration fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
year, commencing on January 1 of each year. Any mobile vendor who represents a
business which maintains a physical location (e.g., office, store or service
center) within the corporate limits of the City of Spring Valley for a term of
at least twelve (12) months, shall be exempt from the one hundred dollar
($100.00) annual registration fee.
   (B)   The City of Spring Valley will require any charitable, religious or
not-for-profit association, organization, or project to obtain a permit under
this chapter, however, will be exempt from having to pay fees, so long as the
proceeds raised are used exclusively for religious, charitable or educational
purposes. The list includes:
      1.   Churches
      2.   Schools
      3.   Fraternal Organizations
      4.   Benevolent Organizations
      5.   Other similarly situated organizations. The City shall be the sole
arbiter of whether an organization or entity is such a similarly situated
organization.
   (C)   Also exempt from paying fees, but otherwise required to obtain a
permit, is any brick-and-mortar restaurant located within the City limits of
Spring Valley, who also operates a Mobile Food Vendor unit.
   (D)   Novelty Vendors, as defined, will pay a one-time yearly permit fee of
one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-8: SAFETY AND ORDINANCE INSPECTIONS:
If, at any time, the City of Spring Valley, or State or County officials
believe that a Mobile Food Vendor unit operating within the City limits of
Spring Valley is not in compliance with the Mobile Food Vendor unit Ordinance
or state or local health regulations, the Mobile Food Vendor unit must allow
inspections as pertains to the following:
   (A)   City Ordinances And Police And Fire Department Regulations: All
health, safety, and parking regulations applicable to Vendors, must be complied
with at all times, as well as Police and Fire department guidelines. City
representatives, police, and fire personnel will be permitted to inspect
Vendors to ensure all Ordinances and Regulations are being complied with while
operating within the City limits, whether on public or private property.
Failure to permit an inspection by a City representative, Police Officer or
Fire Department personnel may result in suspension or revocation of the vendor
Permit.
   (B)   State: Vendors must ensure that they are following the Illinois
Department of Public Health FDA Food Code and all other State Health, safety or
sanitation requirements applicable to Mobile Food, Beverage and Ice Cream
Vendors (NAICS Code 722330).
   (C)   County: Vendors must ensure they are following the Bureau County
Health Department regulations and all other County health, safety or sanitation
code applicable to Mobile Food, Beverage and Ice Cream Vendors (NAICS Code
722330). (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-9: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   Mobile Food Vendor Units:
      1.   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall locate in any City owned parking
lot or parking space unless provided for in this Chapter.
      2.   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall locate in an alleyway.
      3.   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall operate on US Route or State Route
located within the City limits (US Route 6, US Route 89).
      4.   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall locate on the private property of a
business unless the private property business owner has provided the Mobile
Food Vendor unit permission to operate on said property. Written permission
will need to be filed with City.
      5.   No mobile vendor unit shall operate within a one block radius of a
Special Event unless prior approval has been granted by either the operator of
the special event or by the City of Spring Valley.
      6.   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall be located in a manner that would
impede or prevent use of any City of Spring Valley owned property, or which
would endanger the safety or property of the public.
      7.   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall be located within fifteen feet
(15') of any fire hydrant.
      8.   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall locate within any zoning district
except for the following: B1, B2, B3 and B4, unless otherwise provided for
elsewhere in this Chapter.
      9.   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall operate in residential
neighborhoods or on residential lots.
      10.   No Mobile Food Vendor unit operating on private business property
shall displace required parking, or displace landscaping, nor block any drives,
parking access aisles, fire lanes, sidewalks, or accessible routes required for
private parking.
      11.   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall be located more than one foot away
from the curb of the street which it is parked.
      12.   No Mobile Food Vendor shall park near an intersection and in a
manner that blocks the line-of-sight of drivers using adjacent roadways.
      13.   Permit holding Mobile Food Vendor units shall not operate during
additional black-out dates assigned by the City, which are identified on the
City calendar accessed on the City's website.
      14.   No Mobile Food Vendor unit may operate within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of any City sponsored or sanctioned events, unless they are
operating at the event as provided by Section
5-22-12 of this Section.
      15.   No Mobile Food Vendor can set up any freestanding furniture
adjacent to his/her mobile food truck such as chairs, stools, furniture
umbrellas and tables. All Mobile Food Vendors must pick up any trash or refuse
discarded by a customer within sixty feet (60') of the mobile food truck.
      16.   No Mobile Food Vendor shall be allowed to ply his/her vocation
selling victuals within three hundred feet (300') of any business engaged in
the sale of victuals from a permanent location inside of a building.
      17.   No Mobile Food Vendor shall be allowed to ply his/her vocation
selling victuals within one thousand feet (1,000') of any public or private
school or St. Margaret's Healthcare, or any successor occupant in the same
location, unless the Mobile Food Vendor first obtains written permission from
either the school superintendent or the Board of Education of the school
authorizing the Mobile Food Vendor to ply his/her vocation within one thousand
feet (1,000') of the school or first obtain written permission from the CEO of
St. Margaret's Healthcare, or any successor occupant in the same location,
authorizing the Mobile Food Vendor to ply his/her vocation within one thousand
feet (1,000') of St. Margaret's Healthcare. Any public/private school or St.
Margaret's Healthcare, or any successor occupant in the same location, may
place restrictions on the days, hours of operation and any other reasonable
restrictions on a Mobile Food Vendor, if the school or hospital decides to
allow the Mobile Food Vendor to conduct business with one thousand feet
(1,000') of school or hospital property.
18.   No Mobile Food Vendor shall be allowed to ply his or her vocation at any
location, whether public or private, if in so doing he or she causes, or
contributes to the causing of, any hazard to the general public including, but
not limited to, creation of traffic congestion or the distracting of the
operators of motor vehicles from the hazards of the roadway. No Mobile Food
Vendor may use loud speakers or amplifiers to conduct their business.
   (B)   Novelty Food Vendor Units:
      1.   Novelty Mobile Food Vendor units, as defined, are not restricted
from operating on St. Paul Street sidewalks (between Spaulding Street and Terry
Street), but must first notify the City via a special event application, which
must be approved by the City.
      2.   Novelty Mobile Food Vendor units must abide by the hours of
operation, as defined in this Chapter.
      3.   Novelty Mobile Food Vendors are not restricted from operating in the
area, and during the times, when City sponsored or sanctioned events are
occurring, but can only participate by invitation from the event organizer.
(Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-10: LOCATIONS ALLOWED:
Mobile Food Vendor units are allowed to operate in the following locations, and
must conform to the terms and conditions provided in this Chapter:
   (A)   Along the south curb of the 100 block of St Paul Street, at 300 E. St.
Paul Street, and at all City parks.
   (B)   The Mobile Food Vendor unit may enter into a lease agreement with a
business property owner to have their Mobile Food Vendor unit located long-term
on the business owner's property at the location of the business. At the time
of the application, the owner of the business property and the Mobile Food
Vendor unit must notify the City of the arrangement, and the Mobile Food Vendor
unit must follow all conditions and terms of this Ordinance.
   (C)   Mobile Food Vendor units may operate on the private property of a
business as stipulated in subsection
5-22-9(A)4 and on business only property in the zoned areas stipulated in
subsection
5-22-9(A)8, with the permission of the property owner. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-11: DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION:
Mobile Food Vendor units are allowed to operate in the City of Spring Valley
seven (7) days a week, from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M., whether on public property or on the property of a private business
however;
Mobile Food Vendor units that set up at public property locations must not do
so earlier than six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M., and they must stop serving
customers no later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-12: SPECIAL EVENTS:
Special events, as defined, are designated by the City of Spring Valley:
   (A)   From time to time, there may be a business, or a community service-
related organization, that wants to hold a special event on public property
that is not sponsored by the City of Spring Valley where Mobile Food Vendor
unit(s) are preferred. Special events, as such, must first be applied for via a
City of Spring Valley Special Event Application no later than two (2) weeks
prior to the special event, on which the request for a Mobile Food Vendor unit
(s) shall be documented. It is the special event organizer and the Mobile Food
Vendor's responsibility to ensure approval by the City of the special event
before advertising and holding any such special event;
   (B)   Mobile Food Vendor unit limitations regarding locations, alcohol sales
and hours of operation do not apply to special events on public property that
are sponsored by the City of Spring Valley. Mobile Food Vendor units must
comply with all other terms and conditions provided for in this Chapter. (Ord.
1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-13: ADDITIONAL TAXING DISTRICTS WITHIN THE CITY:
Spring Valley Elementary School District, Hall High School District:
   Mobile Food Vendor units are allowed to operate on properties owned and
maintained by the aforementioned taxing bodies, irrespective of zoning, via
invitation and permission of the taxing body, so long as the event occurs on
the property of the taxing body, within the City of Spring Valley, and the
event benefits the taxing body that is hosting the event.
   Mobile Food Vendor units must comply with all other terms and conditions
provided for in this Chapter. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-14: RESERVING SPOTS:
Mobile Food Vendors will be required to reserve a spot for one of the
designated public property location by contacting the City of Spring Valley.
Vendors are encouraged to contact the City at least twenty four (24) hours in
advance, with date and time span of operation, so a spot can be reserved. If a
vendor must cancel a reservation, they must do so as soon as the cancellation
is known so the spot can be re-opened. Reservations will only be taken directly
from the vendor reserving the spot. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-15: TAX REVENUE:
All sales by Mobile Food Vendor units operating anywhere in the City that are
subject to sales and use tax, and that occur while operating within the City
limits of Spring Valley, must be reported with required payment to the Illinois
Department of Revenue, with the City of Spring Valley identified as the point
of sale. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-16: STANDARDS OF CONDUCT:
All Mobile Food Vendor units shall conform to the following Standards of
Conduct:
   (A)   Mobile Food Vendors shall conduct themselves at all times in an
orderly and lawful manner, and shall not make, or cause to be made, any
unreasonable noise of such volume as to be in violation of the City of Spring
Valley Noise Ordinance;
   (B)   A device may not be used that amplifies sounds or draws attention to a
Mobile Food Vendor unit by an aural means or a light producing device such as
bull horns or strobe lights;
   (C)   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall generate power by use of a generator
while operating on public property, unless the generator is manufactured a
silent;
   (D)   No Mobile. Food Vendor unit may be permanently or temporarily affixed
to any object, including but not limited to buildings, trees, telephone poles,
streetlight poles, traffic signal poles or fire hydrants;
   (E)   No Mobile Food Vendor unit may be used to advertise any product which
is not authorized to be sold from that unit;
   (F)   Each Mobile Food Vendor unit shall protect against littering and shall
have both an adequate trash receptacle and a separate receptacle for recyclable
materials:
      1.   The trash and recyclable receptacles shall be emptied sufficiently
often to allow disposal of litter and trash by the public at any time;
      2.   The trash and recyclable receptacles on the Mobile Food Vendor unit
shall not be emptied into trash or recyclable receptacles owned by the City of
Spring Valley;
      3.   Liquid from the Mobile Food Vendor unit shall not be discharged on
or in a City sewer or drain or elsewhere on City property, nor on private
property;
   (G)   Before leaving any location, each Mobile Food Vendor unit shall first
pick up, remove and dispose of all trash, refuse and/or recyclable material,
including products spilt on the ground within twenty feet (20') of the Mobile
Food Vendor unit;
   (H)   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall expose any pedestrian to any undue
safety or health hazards, nor shall it be maintained so as to create a public
nuisance;
   (I)   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall ever be left unattended while on
public property
   (J)   Mobile Food Vendor units shall not be stored, parked or left overnight
on any City property;
   (K)   All Mobile Food Vendor units shall initall an industry approved grease
trap or interceptor. Foods, oils and greases shall never be discharged into the
City's sewer or storm drains, or City owned trash receptacles, nor on any
public or private property;
   (L)   No Mobile Food Vendor shall provide seating for customers while
operating on public property;
   (M)   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall have a drive-thru; and
   (N)   No Mobile Food Vendor unit shall sell alcohol. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-17: RESTRICTION ON USE AND PERMITS:
The City of Spring Valley has exclusive authority to restrict the use of Mobile
Food Vendor units and the issuance of permits for Mobile Food Vendor units
under the following conditions:
   (A)   The City may restrict the use of Mobile Food Vendor units in certain
designated areas of the City at any time in the event of an emergency declared
by the mayor, the chief of police, the fire chief and/or and duly appointed
designee; and
   (B)   Absent an emergency, the City may restrict the use of Mobile Food
Vendor units in areas that would typically allow operation after providing
affected Mobile Food Vendor unit permit holders written notice of the
restriction at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the restriction going
into effect. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-18: REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
Any Mobile Food Vendor unit permit issued under this Chapter may be suspended
or revoked by the Mayor or Chief of Police if the Mayor or Chief of Police find
any of the following to be true:
   (A)   Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked if
the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter or has made a false material statement in the
application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a
certificate of registration under the terms of this Chapter;
   (B)   The Vendor failed to permit an inspection by a City representative,
and/or Police Officer or Fire Department personnel or by the county or state
health department;
   (C)   An inspection reveals that the Vendor is not operating in a manner
that is safe to the health, safety and welfare of the public;
   (D)   The Mobile Food Vendor unit is operating or has operated in a location
within the City that is not permitted;
   (E)   The Mobile Food Vendor unit failed to abide by a City official's or
Police Officer's request to relocate due to the vendor blocking, obstructing or
interfering with vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian flow;
   (F)   An operator of the Mobile Food Vendor unit vehicle is convicted of
moving violations while operating under a Mobile Food Vendor unit permit while
in the City of Spring Valley.
   (G)   The Mobile Food Vendor unit has failed to maintain all the
certificates, licenses and permits required by state, county or local
Ordinances, or is not in compliance with the State, County or City's laws and
regulations, including but not limited to the Illinois Department of Public
Health Food Service Sanitation Code and any other State, County or City
regulations that apply fo Mobile Food Vendor units; and
   (H)   If a Mobile Food Vendor unit fails to report to the Illinois
Department of Revenue, for the purpose of sales tax, that Spring Valley is the
Point of Sale on all transactions that occur while operating in the City of
Spring Valley, which would result in the City of Spring Valley not receiving
due sales tax revenue.
   (I)   The Mobile Food Unit or Unit has otherwise violated or failed to
comply with this chapter.
   (J)   Immediately upon .the revocation, written notice thereof shall be
given by the Chief of Police to the holder of the certificate in person or by
certified United States mail addressed to his or her residence address set
forth in the application.
Appeal. If the Mayor or Chief of Police suspends or revokes the Mobile Food
Vendor unit's permit, City of Spring Valley staff will mail a notice of
suspension or revocation to the address listed on the permit application and
will state the reasons for the suspension or revocation. The Mobile Food Vendor
unit may appeal a decision of the Mayor to the City Council within fourteen
(14) days of the mailing date. The City Council shall hear the appeal within
thirty (30) days, and the decision of the City Council will be final. (Ord.
1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-19: CREATING HAZARD PROHIBITED:
No Mobile Food Vendor shall be allowed to ply his or her vocation at any
location, whether public or private, if in so doing he or she causes, or
contributes to the causing of, any hazard to the general public including, but
not limited to, creation of traffic congestion or the distracting of the
operators of motor vehicles from the hazards of the roadway. No Mobile Food
Vendor may use loud speaker or amplifiers to conduct their business. (Ord.
1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-20: CITY OF SPRING VALLEY SPONSORED EVENTS:
The licensing provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any activities
sponsored by the City of Spring Valley or supported by the City of Spring
Valley in an effort to boost commercial retail activity within the City of
Spring Valley. The City of Spring Valley reserves the right to waive the
licensing fee required by this Chapter and to suspend any other regulatory
provisions contained in this Chapter at the request of any group promoting a
commercial activity aimed at increasing Sales Tax revenue and commercial
exposure for the City of Spring Valley. Any applicant wishing to receive a
waiver from the licensing and regulatory regulations contained in this Chapter
must apply to the Spring Valley City Council for a waiver in lieu of applying
for a license pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-21: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
In addition to suspension or revocation of a permit, any person, partnership,
limited liability company or corporation that violates any provision of this
Chapter, shall also be subject to the following penalties:
   (A)   Operating.a Mobile Food Vendor unit without a valid City of Spring
Valley permit:
 
First Offense                                                 $400
Second Offense within any 12-month period                     $500
Third Offense, or each thereafter, within any 12-month period $750
 
   (B)   Failure to comply with any other provision of this Chapter:
 
First Offense                                                  Written Warning
Second Offense within any 12 month period                      $200
Third Offense within any 12 month period                       $400
Fourth Offense, or each thereafter, within any 12 month period $750
 
If a Mobile Food Vendor is fined a monetary amount under either subsection, the
Mobile Food Vendor unit's permit will be suspended until such time that the
fine is paid in full, or the City's Adjudication Court issues a final ruling on
the citation should the food vendor choose to contest the citation. Should the
Adjudication Court rule in favor of the Mobile Food Vendor, their permit will
be re-instated without further consideration. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
5-22-22: RESERVATION OF RIGHTS:
   (A)   The City of Spring Valley reserves the right to change, modify,
clarify any section and subsection of this Chapter at any time deemed
necessary;
   (B)   If an unforeseen issue presents itself that is not addressed in this
Chapter, the City of Spring Valley reserves its sole right to resolve at its
discretion;
   (C)   Any change or modification or clarification- to any section and
subsection of this Chapter that is deemed to be restrictive to Mobile Food
Vendor units, will go into effect the following January upon passage of an
amendment to this chapter;
   (D)   Any change or modification or clarification to any section and
subsection of this Chapter that is deemed to be beneficial to Mobile Food
Vendor units will go into effect immediately, upon passage of an amendment to
the Chapter;
   (E)   The foregoing notwithstanding, any change or modification that arises
out of a health or safety concern, regardless whether it benefits or further
restricts Mobile Food Vendor units, shall be immediate. (Ord. 1874, 7-17-2023)
TITLE 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Creation
6-1-2: Chief Of Police
6-1-3: Deputy Chief Of Police; Assistant Chief Of Police
6-1-4: Police Lieutenant, Sergeant And Investigator
6-1-5: Oath
6-1-6: Powers
6-1-7: Devote Entire Time, Offenders
6-1-8: Control Of Police Force, Absence
6-1-9: Report Derelict Members, Suspension
6-1-10: Attend Council Meetings
6-1-11: Keep Police Records
6-1-12: Monthly Reports
6-1-13: Care Of Property
6-1-14: Assistant Health Officer
6-1-15: Auxiliary Police
6-1-16: School Training
6-1-17: Leave Of Absence
6-1-18: Part Time Police Officer
6-1-1: CREATION:
The police department of the city shall consist of its chief of police, who
shall have supervision over the department, an assistant chief, lieutenant,
sergeant, investigator and patrolmen, all appointed by the board of fire and
police commissioners, with the exception of the chief of police, who shall be
appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council and with
the exception of the investigator who shall be designated from the rank and
file by the chief of police, but who shall not have any supervisory authority
over other rank and file officers. (Ord. 1178, 9-6-2005)
6-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
There is hereby created in this city the office of chief of police. He shall be
the chief officer of the police department, and shall be appointed and hold
office at the pleasure of the mayor. (1972 Code)
6-1-3: DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE; ASSISTANT CHIEF OF POLICE:
   (A)   The position of deputy chief of police is hereby created. He or she
shall be appointed by the chief of police. The deputy chief of police shall
serve at the pleasure of the chief of police. Anyone with five (5) years of
police service shall be eligible to be considered for the position.
The salary and benefits of the deputy chief of police shall be the same as the
salary and benefits of the assistant chief of police. (Ord. 1442, 12-7-2009)
   (B)   There is hereby created the office of assistant chief of police in the
city. He shall be appointed by the board of fire and police commissioners as
provided by statute, and his powers shall consist of the same powers and duties
held by the chief during any period when the chief is sick, disabled,
unavailable, or in any way incapable of performing his normal duties and
functions. At all other times he shall be subordinate to the chief and render
the same services as those performed by other members of the department. (Ord.,
6-21-1976; amd. Ord., 7-1-1985; Ord. 1442, 12-7-2009)
6-1-4: POLICE LIEUTENANT, SERGEANT AND INVESTIGATOR:
There is hereby created the position of police lieutenant and police sergeant
in the city. The police lieutenants and police sergeants shall be appointed
based upon competitive examination from the next lowest rank by the board of
fire and police commissioners subject to the approval of the mayor and city
council for the funding of these supervisory positions. Lieutenants and
sergeants shall be responsible for handling clerical and administrative duties
assigned to them by the chief of police along with all other duties assigned to
them by the chief of police. The rank of lieutenant shall be superior to the
rank of sergeant. At all other times, the lieutenants and the sergeants shall
render the same services as those performed by other members of the police
department.
The chief of police shall be granted authority to designate one rank and file
police officer as an investigator. The designation of a police officer as an
investigator shall not be deemed a promotion nor shall it be deemed to give the
investigator supervisory authority over other rank and file members of the
department. The investigator shall be responsible for handling investigations
assigned to him by the chief of police along with all other duties assigned to
the investigator by the chief of police. At all other times, the investigator
shall render the same services as those performed by other members of the
department. (Ord. 1178, 9-6-2005)
6-1-5: OATH:
The chief of police, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take
the oath as nearly as may be in the form provided herein for the mayor. (1972
Code)
6-1-6: POWERS:
The chief of police shall possess all of the statutory powers under the
provisions of this code and the statutes of the state, and shall possess the
power and authority of a constable at common law. (1972 Code)
6-1-7: DEVOTE ENTIRE TIME, OFFENDERS:
The chief of police shall devote his entire time and energy to the discharge of
the duties of his office, shall see that the laws and ordinances are enforced,
and that all offenders are properly reported to some proper tribunal for
punishment. (1972 Code)
6-1-8: CONTROL OF POLICE FORCE, ABSENCE:
The chief of police shall be the commanding officer of the entire force of the
city (except the health officer), subject to the rules and regulations
prescribed by the council. He shall assign to all policemen under him their
different beats or districts, their respective hours of service, and shall see
that each officer performs his whole duty, according to law and the ordinances.
(1972 Code)
6-1-9: REPORT DERELICT MEMBERS, SUSPENSION:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to properly suspend any member of
the police department who may be guilty of drunkenness, neglect of duty,
disobedience of orders or violation of the standing rules and regulations of
the police department, and to immediately report such suspension to the city
council and board of fire and police commissioners. (1972 Code)
6-1-10: ATTEND COUNCIL MEETINGS:
The chief of police shall attend, either in person or by his assistant, all
meetings of the council, execute all its orders and all warrants or other legal
process required to be executed by him under any ordinance of the city. (1972
Code)
6-1-11: KEEP POLICE RECORDS:
The chief of police shall keep books or records of the police department and of
all persons arrested or committed by the police showing the time and place of
each arrest, by whom the arrest was made, the offense charged, the proper
officer before whom such person was tried, the disposition of each case, amount
of fine imposed, if any, and amount collected, the amount of city officer's
cost for serving papers collected, if any, and in addition shall record a list
of all money and valuables taken from each prisoner at the time of his
commitment and the disposition thereof. (1972 Code)
6-1-12: MONTHLY REPORTS:
The chief of police shall monthly present his written report showing the number
of arrests made by the police force during the preceding month, the name of
each person arrested, the offense charged, the officer making the arrest, the
proper officer before whom tried, the disposition of the case, the fine
imposed, if any, and the amount of such fine, and city officer's fees for
serving papers therein collected, and in said report he shall give a list of
all dogs killed and buried, if any, during the preceding month, the name of the
owner, if known, the officer by whom killed and the reason therefor. (1972
Code)
6-1-13: CARE OF PROPERTY:
The chief of police shall have the care, custody and control of all books,
records, equipment, and all property belonging to the police department, and of
all stolen goods seized and retained by police authority, provide that said
books at all times be open to public inspection. (1972 Code)
6-1-14: ASSISTANT HEALTH OFFICER:
The chief of police shall be the assistant health officer and shall perform the
duties thereunder, as prescribed by the city health officer. (1972 Code)
6-1-15: AUXILIARY POLICE:
The mayor is hereby authorized to appoint twenty (20) auxiliary policemen as
employees, subject to the advice and consent of the city council. Prior to
appointment, all proposed auxiliary policemen shall be fingerprinted and their
fingerprints shall be checked with the federal bureau of identification,
Washington, D.C., for any possible criminal record. No person shall be
appointed as an auxiliary policeman if he has been convicted of a felony or
other crime involving moral turpitude. The appointment of any or all auxiliary
policemen may be terminated by the mayor subject to the advice and consent of
the city council.
Such auxiliary policemen shall not be members of the regular police department.
Auxiliary policemen shall be residents of the city; provided, however, if the
mayor and chief of police determine that there are not enough qualified or
interested applicants to fill the auxiliary police positions needed by the
city, the residency requirement contained herein may be waived and nonresident
auxiliary police may be hired. Identification symbols worn by such auxiliary
policemen shall be different and distinct from those used by the regular police
department and shall be selected and chosen by the chief of police. Auxiliary
policemen shall at all times during the performance of their duties be subject
to the direction and control of the chief of police. (Ord., 8-5-1985)
Auxiliary policemen shall have the following powers and duties, when properly
assigned and on duty:
   (A)   To aid or direct traffic in the municipality;
   (B)   To aid in control of natural or manmade disasters;
   (C)   To aid in case of civil disorder;
   (D)   To perform normal and regular police duties when assigned by the chief
of police on occasions when it is impracticable for members of the regular
police department to perform normal and regular duties;
   (E)   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all
persons who break the peace or are found violating any municipal ordinance or
any criminal law of the state;
   (F)   To commit arrested persons for examination;
   (G)   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody overnight or
Sunday in any safe place, or until they can be brought before the proper
officer;
   (H)   To exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace that the
corporate authorities may prescribe;
   (I)   To serve and execute all warrants for the violation of municipal
ordinances, or the state criminal law, within the limits of the city, and for
this purpose to have all the common law and statutory power of sheriffs.
Auxiliary policemen shall not carry firearms except with the permission of the
chief of police and then only when in uniform and in the performance of their
duties.
Auxiliary policemen, prior to entering upon any of their duties, shall receive
a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures by the
chief of police. Such course of training shall be determined by the chief of
police. Upon completion of the course of training, the chief of police shall
file a certificate attesting to the auxiliary policeman's completion of said
course with the city clerk. (1972 Code)
6-1-16: SCHOOL TRAINING:
All police officers designated shall attend one week of law enforcement related
school training or seminars annually as so directed by the mayor and city
council. (1972 Code)
6-1-17: LEAVE OF ABSENCE:
A police officer may make application for a leave of absence from the police
department which shall be subject to approval of the board of fire and police
commissioners. (Ord. 420, 10-16-1978)
6-1-18: PART TIME POLICE OFFICER:
   (A)   A "part time police officer" when used herein shall be defined to mean
a member of the Spring Valley police department who is employed by the city of
Spring Valley for less than one thousand five hundred sixty (1,560) hours in
any twelve (12) month period beginning on January 1 of any calendar year and
subject to the training requirements for part time police officers as may be
promulgated by the Illinois law enforcement training and standards board.
   (B)   The chief of police of the city of Spring Valley shall be authorized
to hire part time police officers in order to provide adequate police coverage
for the residents of the city of Spring Valley.
   (C)   The chief of police of the city of Spring Valley is hereby given
discretionary authority to hire part time police officers as the chief of
police deems necessary, subject to the approval of the mayor of the city of
Spring Valley and further subject to the authority of the Spring Valley city
council to control and limit the number of part time police officers, the
salary established for part time police officers and the total hours worked by
all part time police officers.
   (D)   All part time police officers shall deem to be at will employees of
the city of Spring Valley and their employment may be terminated or their hours
diminished at the sole discretion of the chief of police of the city of Spring
Valley.
   (E)   All part time police officers hired under the provisions of this
section shall complete the training required of part time police officers
established by the Illinois law enforcement training and standards board.
   (F)   Any person employed as a part time police officer must meet the
following hiring standards:
      1.   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform the assigned duties.
      2.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   Pass a medical examination.
      4.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      5.   Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
      6.   Have no prior felony convictions.
      7.   Anyone who served in the U.S. military must have been honorably
discharged.
   (G)   All part time police officers employed pursuant to the provisions of
this section shall not be subject to any of the provisions contained in section
10-2.1-1 et seq., of the Illinois municipal code 1  and the provisions
contained therein for the hiring of full time police officers, discipline of
full time police officers and termination of full time police officers shall
not apply to part time police officers hired under the provisions of this
section. (Ord. 1505, 6-4-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq. (2010).
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Advertising
6-2-2: Assault
6-2-3: Barbed Wire And Electric Fences
6-2-4: Battery
6-2-5: Public Intoxication
6-2-6: Escape, Aid In
6-2-7: Escapes
6-2-8: Firearms; Discharge
6-2-9: Hunting
6-2-10: Indecent Exposure
6-2-11: Public Nudity
6-2-12: Urinating Or Defecating In Public
6-2-13: Loudspeakers Or Sound Trucks
6-2-14: Missiles
6-2-15: Unnecessary Noise; Mufflers
6-2-16: Petit Theft
6-2-17: Posting Bills
6-2-18: Property, Malicious Injury To
6-2-19: Prostitution
6-2-20: Prostitution, House Of
6-2-21: Resisting An Officer
6-2-22: Riot
6-2-23: Carrying Concealed Firearm
6-2-24: Trapping
6-2-25: Snowmobiles (Rep. by Ord., 10-19-1981)
6-2-26: Penalty
6-2-27: Sale, Purchase, And Possession Of Tobacco Products To Persons Under The
Age Of 21
6-2-28: Synthetic Cannabis
6-2-1: ADVERTISING:
It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or articles in the city
and it shall be unlawful to injure or deface any lawful advertisement or
notice. (1972 Code)
6-2-2: ASSAULT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "assault" which is hereby defined
as any conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a
battery. (1972 Code)
6-2-3: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence or
any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire or to use barbed wire
as a guard to any parking lot, stairway, entrance to a building or parcel of
land. (1972 Code)
6-2-4: BATTERY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit battery. A person commits battery
if he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification and by any means
causes bodily harm to an individual or makes physical contact of an insulting
or provoking nature with an individual. (1972 Code)
6-2-5: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person in or upon any public street, alley, or
public place to be under the influence of alcohol to a degree that renders the
person incapable of acting in a normal fashion or with an alcohol concentration
in the person’s blood or breath of 0.08 or more based on the definition of
blood and breath units in section 11-501.2 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
It shall also be unlawful for any person in or upon a public street, alley, or
public place to be under the influence of any drug, substance, or compound
resulting from the unlawful use or consumption of cannabis as listed in the
Cannabis Control Act, or of a controlled substance as listed in the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act, or of an intoxicating compound as listed in the use
of Intoxicating Compounds Act.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-2-6: ESCAPE, AID IN:
It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person to escape from
lawful confinement or to assist any person to escape from the custody of any
peace officer. (1972 Code)
6-2-7: ESCAPES:
It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful
custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody. (1972 Code)
6-2-8: FIREARMS; DISCHARGE:
It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm or air gun in the city; provided
that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law
to discharge a firearm in the performance of his duty; nor any citizen to
discharge a firearm when lawfully defending his person or property; nor shall
this provision be construed to prohibit the discharge of any air gun or spring
gun, each commonly known as "BB gun", by those persons participating in any
firing competition which is sponsored by and is under the direction,
supervision and control of the police department, provided that each person
shall be registered with the police department as a competition participant.
(Ord. 548, 9-7-1982)
6-2-9: HUNTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in killing any animal other than
as prescribed by law in the city. (1972 Code)
6-2-10: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
   (A)   For the purpose of this Section, the term “public place” shall mean
any place where the conduct may be reasonably be expected to viewed by others.
   (B)   Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any of the
following acts in a public place commits Indecent Exposure, which are hereby
declared a violation of this Code.
      1.   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct as defined in 720
ILCS 5/11-0.1; or
      2.   A lewd exposure of the body done with the intent to arouse or to
satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
      (C)   The breast-feeding of infants is hereby declared NOT to be an act
of Indecent Exposure.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-2-11: PUBLIC NUDITY:
No person shall appear on any street, avenue, highway, road, boardwalk, breach,
beachfront or waterway located in the City of Spring Valley, or appear in any
public place, store, or business in said City, in a state of nudity or to make
any indecent exposure of their person. A person shall be deemed to be in a
state of nudity when their clothing or absence of clothing completely exposes
to public view a person’s anus, genitals, public area, or breasts, except
breast feeding of infants as provided for in Section
6-2-10 of this Code.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-2-12: URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC:
   It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate:
   (A)   In or on public street, alley, sidewalk, yard, park, building,
structure, plaza, public or utility right-of-way, or other public place, other
than in a restroom; or
   (B)   In public view.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-2-13: LOUDSPEAKERS OR SOUND TRUCKS:
It shall be unlawful to play, operate, or use any device known as a sound
truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph, with loudspeaker or
sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and
raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle unless such person in
charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission from
the chief of police to operate any such vehicle so equipped. (1972 Code)
6-2-14: MISSILES:
It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile on any street, alley
or other public place; and it shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any glass,
nails, tacks, or other similar articles on any street, sidewalk, alley or other
public place in the city. (1972 Code)
6-2-15: UNNECESSARY NOISE; MUFFLERS:
   (A)   Unnecessary Noise: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
motor vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway in the city in such a
manner as to cause or produce unnecessary loud, raucous, excessive or unusual
noise by the racing of the motor, by lack of a muffler or use of a muffler
bypass or cutout, by tire friction upon rapid turning or weaving, by spinning
of the wheels from standing or slow moving position produced by sudden
unnecessary motor acceleration, or by continuous unnecessary sounding of a horn
or other signal device.
   (B)   Mufflers: Every motor vehicle driven or operated upon the streets of
the city shall at all times be equipped with an adequate muffler or exhaust
system in constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive
or unusual noise. No such muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with a
cutout, bypass or similar device. No person shall modify the exhaust system of
a motor vehicle in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise of such
vehicle above that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle,
and such original muffler shall comply with all the requirements of this
subsection. (Ord. 413, 8-7-1978)
6-2-16: PETIT THEFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "petit theft" which is hereby
defined as a theft when the property taken is of a value of less than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (1972 Code)
6-2-17: POSTING BILLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, paint, print or nail any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any curbstone,
flagstone or any other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any tree,
lamppost, hitchpost, telegraph pole, hydrant or upon any private wall, door or
gate, without the consent in writing of the owner of the wall, door or gate;
provided, however, that this section shall not prevent posting by proper city
and county officials of election signs, polling place signs and other signs or
placards necessary under the law to the conduct of elections. (1972 Code)
6-2-18: PROPERTY, MALICIOUS INJURY TO:
It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully and maliciously to injure, deface,
mutilate, remove, pull down, break or in any manner interfere with or molest or
secrete or destroy any real or personal property belonging to or under the
control of any person, or property real or personal, owned by the city. (Ord.
414, 8-7-1978)
6-2-19: PROSTITUTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue or advertise in any manner her
vocation as a prostitute or for any person to advertise the profession of a
prostitute or solicit for a prostitute. (1972 Code)
6-2-20: PROSTITUTION, HOUSE OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or assist in the keeping of a house
of ill fame or prostitution or knowingly to reside therein or knowingly to
rent, lease or permit any person to occupy any house or room owned, leased or
controlled by him for this purpose. (1972 Code)
6-2-21: RESISTING AN OFFICER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere wilfully with, resist, delay,
obstruct, molest or threaten to molest any officer of the municipality in the
exercise of his official duties. (1972 Code)
6-2-22: RIOT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse immediately to disperse
upon an order to do so by a police officer, when two (2) or more persons are
assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of
committing any unlawful act. (1972 Code)
6-2-23: CARRYING CONCEALED FIREARM:
No person shall carry concealed on or about their person a pistol, revolver or
other firearm unless they are in compliance with all State statutes and
requirements. This provision does not apply, however, to the following officers
or their official duties: sheriffs, constables, police officers or other duly
constituted peace officers and wardens, superintendents and keepers of jails
and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted of
crime; or to the following employees or agents while in the discharge of the
duties of their employment: watchmen, special agents and police offers employed
by railroads or express companies; or to persons lawfully summoned by an
officer to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while so engaged in
assisting such officer.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-2-24: TRAPPING:
It shall be unlawful to use any type of device within the corporate limits of
the city for the purpose of trapping animals. (Ord., 1-17-1977)
6-2-25: SNOWMOBILES:
(Rep. by Ord., 10-19-1981)
6-2-26: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of the foregoing offenses shall be fined
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for any single offense. (Ord., 2-7-1977)
6-2-27: SALE, PURCHASE, AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER THE
AGE OF 21:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer or furnish any
cigars, cigarettes, tobacco, cigarette papers, cigarette wrappers, electronic
cigarettes, liquid nicotine, electronic cigarette liquids, smokeless tobacco,
alternative nicotine products, or tobacco in any of its forms to any person
under the age of 21 years.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
purchase and/or possess cigars, cigarettes, tobacco, cigarette papers,
cigarette wrappers, electronic cigarettes, liquid nicotine, electronic
cigarette liquids, smokeless tobacco, alternative nicotine products, or tobacco
in any of its forms, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any
false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products
or alternative nicotine products.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-2-28: SYNTHETIC CANNABIS:
   (A)   Definitions:
    DELIVER OR DELIVERY: Actual, constructive, or attempted transfer of
possession of synthetic cannabis, with or without consideration, whether or not
there is an agency relationship.
   MANUFACTURE: The production, preparation, propagation, compounding,
conversion or processing of synthetic cannabis, either directly or indirectly,
by extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means of
chemical synthesis, and includes any packaging or repackaging of synthetic
cannabis or labeling of its container, except that this term does not include
the preparation, compounding, packaging or labeling of synthetic cannabis as an
incident to lawful research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale.
   POSSESSION: Possession may be either actual or constructive:
      1.   Actual possession means exercising physical domain.
      2.   Constructive possession may be inferred if the defendant has intent
and capacity to maintain control and dominion over the cannabis or drug
paraphernalia.
   SYNTHETIC CANNABIS: An herbal and chemical product which mimics the effect
of cannabis including, but not limited to, synthetic cannabinoids,
cannabioyclohexanol, JWH-018, JWH-073, HU-210, AM-694, CP 47, 497 and C6, C8
and C9 homologues; HU-210; HU-211; JWH-015; JWH-081; JWH-122; JWH-251; RCS-8;
naphthoylindoles; naphthoylpyrroles; naphthylmethlyindenes;
phenylacetylindoles; or cyclohexylphenols.
   (B)   Possession, Sale Or Delivery Of Synthetic Cannabis Prohibited:
      1.   Violation: No person shall possess, sell or deliver any substance
containing synthetic cannabis.
      2.   Penalty: Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty by a court
of law shall be punished by minimum fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      3.   Forfeiture: Any items which may be seized or forfeited pursuant to
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/12, may be forfeited in the same manner as
described therein for a violation of this section. (Ord. 1493, 9-12-2011)
CHAPTER 3
GAMBLING
SECTION:
6-3-1: Prohibition
6-3-2: Devices
6-3-3: Gambling Houses
6-3-4: Penalty
6-3-1: PROHIBITION:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to gamble or to attend or operate a gambling
resort or to make or take any bet, lottery or gambling hazard, or to buy or
sell any chances or tickets, or to have or operate any gambling tickets, or any
other sport gambling tickets, or any punchboard tickets of any kind, or to
operate any gambling arrangement, device, scheme or games of whatsoever kind in
the city; provided, however, that this provision shall not prohibit any game of
bingo conducted in a manner provided by statute of the state of Illinois or
video gaming pursuant to title 5, chapter 21 of this code. (1972 Code; amd.
Ord. 1509, 8-27-2012)
6-3-2: DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful to possess a lottery ticket, punchboard ticket, baseball,
football, basketball, or any other sport gambling tickets, or any gambling
device or article; and any such ticket, device, article or paraphernalia may be
confiscated by any member of the police force of the city. (1972 Code)
6-3-3: GAMBLING HOUSES:
It shall be unlawful to have, operate, maintain or patronize any establishment
maintained for a gambling house, resort or to maintain or operate any
establishment where gambling is permitted. (1972 Code)
6-3-4: PENALTY:
Any firm, person or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall
be fined not less than twenty five dollars (25.00), nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1972
Code)
CHAPTER 4
CURFEW
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: Offenses
6-4-3: Defenses
6-4-4: Enforcement
6-4-5: Penalties
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this section:
               1.   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday;
CURFEW HOURS:  2.   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday; and
               3.   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the
               following day.
               An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for
EMERGENCY:     immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural
               disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to
               prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
               Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public
ESTABLISHMENT: is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or
               entertainment.
               1.   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor;
GUARDIAN:      or
               2.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
MINOR:         Any person under seventeen years of age.
               Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating,
OPERATOR:      managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or
               partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
               A person who is:
PARENT:        1.   A natural parent, adoptive-parent, or step-parent of another person; or
               2.   At least eighteen years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
               have the care and custody of a minor.
               Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and
PUBLIC PLACE:  includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of
               schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and
               shops.
               To:
REMAIN:        1.   Linger or stay; or
               2.   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the
               owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
SERIOUS BODILY Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death,
INJURY:        serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function
               of any bodily member or organ.
 
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-4-2: OFFENSES:
   (A)   A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
   (B)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew
hours.
   (C)   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-4-3: DEFENSES:
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution under Section
6-4-2 that the minor was:
      1.   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      2.   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      3.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      4.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      5.   Involved in an emergency;
      6.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor’s presence;
      7.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar activity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      8.   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion; freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      9.   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Mature Minors Act, as amended.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under Section
6-4-2(C) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-4-4: ENFORCEMENT:
   Before taking any enforcement action under this Section, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender’ s age and the reason for being in the public
place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and
that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in Section
6-4-3 is present.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-4-5: PENALTIES:
   Any person who violates this division shall be fined not less than $10.00
nor more than $750.00 for each violation of this division, or, in the
alternative, a minor may be given community service in lieu of a fine.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
CHAPTER 5
DOGS
SECTION:
6-5-1: License
6-5-2: Tags
6-5-3: Running At Large
6-5-4: Dangerous And Vicious Dogs
6-5-5: Disturbing The Peace
6-5-6: Nuisances
6-5-7: Appointment Of Pound Keeper
6-5-8: Duties Of Pound Keeper
6-5-9: Redemption And Payment Of Fees For Impounded Dogs
6-5-10: Dogs Impounded; How Redeemed
6-5-11: Public Notice
6-5-12: Licensed Dogs Impounded
6-5-13: Dog Bites
6-5-14: Limitation On Number Of Dogs Or Cats Per Residence
6-5-15: Waste Accumulations
6-5-16: Penalties
6-5-1: LICENSE:
   (A)   Every person who harbors or keeps a dog over the age of three (3)
months in the municipality shall pay an annual tax on such dog of five dollars
($5.00), which tax shall be paid in advance on or before May 1 of each year
hereafter. The clerk shall keep a record of all dog taxes paid and shall
furnish to each person paying such tax a tag having stamped thereon numbers
indicating the year for which the tax is paid. A duplicate to replace a lost or
destroyed tag may be issued by the clerk upon the payment of fifty cents
($0.50). The tax required by this chapter shall be paid to the clerk and shall
be by him turned over to the treasurer. In the event the aforesaid tax is not
paid on or prior to May 1 of each year hereafter, a penalty of ten dollars
($10.00) must be paid to the clerk before said license shall be issued.
   (B)   Any person who harbors or keeps a service dog shall be required to
obtain a dog tag from the City of Spring Valley but the City of Spring Valley
will waive the fee set forth in this section for service dogs. It shall be the
responsibility of every person who harbors or keeps a service dog to document
that the dog in question has been trained and is classified as a service dog in
order to avoid paying the license fee established herein.
(Ord. 591, 9-17-1984; amd. Ord. 1471, 8-30-2010; Ord. 1764, 9-23-2019)
6-5-2: TAGS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be on any public street, sidewalk,
alley or other public place unless such dog has a collar firmly attached around
his neck with a license tag from the city of Spring Valley and a licensed tag
from the county of Bureau for the current year attached to such collar. (Ord.
1095, 12-16-2002)
6-5-3: RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful to permit any dog to run at large within the municipality.
For the purposes of this section, the term "running at large" shall be defined
to be the presence of a dog at any place except upon the premises of the owner
of the dog, unless the dog is on a leash and under control of a person
physically able to control it. (1972 Code; Ord. 1826, 11-15-21)
6-5-4: DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS:
   (A)   Definitions:
    ADMINISTRATOR: A veterinarian licensed by the state of Illinois and
appointed pursuant to the animal control act, 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
1 et seq., or his duly authorized representative.
   ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN: Any person appointed by the administrator and
approved by the Bureau County board to perform duties as assigned by the
administrator.
   DANGEROUS DOG: Any individual dog which when either unmuzzled, unleashed, or
unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner's family, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack
upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places.
   DIRECTOR: The director of the department of agriculture of the state of
Illinois or his duly appointed representative.
   ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming
or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may
be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of a vicious dog within the
enclosure. Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed
with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal
from escaping from the enclosure.
   FOUND TO BE VICIOUS DOG: The administrator, an animal control warden, or a
law enforcement officer has conducted an investigation and made a finding in
writing that the dog is a "vicious dog" as defined herein and, based on that
finding, the administrator, an animal control warden, or the director has
declared in writing that the dog is a "vicious dog" as defined herein and has
entered an order based on that finding.
   IMPOUNDED: Taken into the custody of the public pound in the city or town
where the vicious dog is found.
   VICIOUS DOG: Any individual dog that when unprovoked inflicts, bites or
attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property.
Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of
human beings or domestic animals.
Any individual dog that has as a trait or characteristic and a generally known
reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked attacks upon human
beings or other animals, unless handled in a particular manner or with special
equipment.
Any individual dog which attacks a human or domestic animal without
provocation.
Any individual dog which has been found to be a "dangerous dog" upon three (3)
separate occasions.
   (B)   At Large: No vicious, dangerous, ferocious dog or dog sick with or
liable to communicate hydrophobia or other contagious or infectious disease
shall be permitted to run at large in the city.
   (C)   Keeping A Vicious Dog: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or
maintain any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog unless such dog is at
all times kept in an enclosure. The only times that a vicious dog may be
allowed out of the enclosure are: 1) if it is necessary for the owner or keeper
to obtain veterinary care for the dog or 2) to comply with the order of a court
of competent jurisdiction, provided that the dog is securely muzzled and
restrained with a chain having a tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds
and not exceeding three feet (3') in length, and shall be under the direct
control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog.
   (D)   Subject To Enclosure: If a dog is found to be a vicious dog, the dog
shall be subject to enclosure.
   (E)   Public Nuisance: It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public
nuisance by permitting any dangerous dog or other animal to leave the premises
of its owner when not under control by leash or other recognized control
methods.
   (F)   Sell Or Give Away: No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or
give away the dog.
   (G)   Declared Nonvicious: No dog shall be deemed "vicious" if it bites,
attacks, or menaces a trespasser on the property of its owner or harms or
menaces anyone who has tormented or abused it or is a professionally trained
dog for law enforcement or guard duties. Vicious dogs shall not be classified
in a manner that is specific as to breed.
   (H)   Guide Dogs: Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs
for the physically handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police owned dogs are
exempt from this section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs
while the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under
this section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies. It
shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog to notify the city clerk of
changes of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep
the city clerk advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The
city clerk shall provide police and fire departments with a categorized list of
such exempted dogs, and shall promptly notify such departments of any address
changes reported to him/her.
   (I)   Filing A Complaint: The administrator, the city attorney, or any
citizen of the county in which a dangerous dog or other animal exists may file
a complaint in the name of the city of Spring Valley to enjoin all persons from
maintaining or permitting such, to abate the same, and to enjoin the owner of
such dog or other animal from permitting same to leave his premises when not
under control by leash or other recognized control methods. Upon the filing of
a complaint in the circuit court, the city, if satisfied that the nuisance may
exist, shall grant a preliminary injunction with bond in such amount as the
court may determine enjoining the defendant from maintaining such nuisance. If
the existence of the nuisance is established, the owner of such dog or other
animal shall be in violation of this section, and in addition, the court shall
enter an order restraining the owner from maintaining such nuisance and may
order that such dog or other animal be humanely dispatched.
   (J)   Impoundment; Destroyed:
      1.   Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not
confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the administrator, an animal
control warden, or the law enforcement authority having jurisdiction in such
area and shall be turned over to a licensed veterinarian for destruction by
lethal injection.
      2.   If the owner of the dog has not appealed the impoundment order to
the circuit court in the county in which the animal was impounded within seven
(7) working days, the dog may be humanely dispatched. A dog found to be a
vicious dog shall not be released to the owner until the administrator, an
animal control warden, or the director approves the "enclosure" as defined in
this section. (Ord. 1095, 12-16-2002)
6-5-5: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
No person owning any dog shall suffer or permit such dog to disturb the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood by barking, making other loud or unusual noises,
or by running through or across cultivated gardens or fields. (1972 Code)
6-5-6: NUISANCES:
Any dog found in the city either without a license or running at large under
the conditions set forth above is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be
impounded as hereinafter provided. (1972 Code)
6-5-7: APPOINTMENT OF POUND KEEPER:
A pound keeper shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of the city
council. The pound keeper shall receive a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each
dog taken into custody by him and redeemed by the dog's lawful owner, and also
a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each penalty collected pursuant to section
6-5-1 of this chapter wherein the pound keeper has filed a complaint for
violation of this code pursuant to section
6-5-14 of this chapter resulting in payment of a penalty under provision of
section
6-5-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 273, 4-21-1975)
6-5-8: DUTIES OF POUND KEEPER:
The pound keeper is hereby charged with the duty of impounding all dogs running
at large in violation of the provisions of this chapter. He shall be a special
police officer and shall be and is hereby authorized to make all necessary
arrests in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (1972 Code)
6-5-9: REDEMPTION AND PAYMENT OF FEES FOR IMPOUNDED DOGS:
An owner claiming an impounded dog shall pay a fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for each day that the animal has been impounded, plus the fee charged
by the Bureau County health department for pick up of the animal and their
impoundment fees, plus a redemption of five dollars ($5.00). The owner may also
be proceeded against for violation of this chapter as hereinafter provided.
Such fees shall be paid to the city clerk. (Ord. 1095, 12-16-2002)
6-5-10: DOGS IMPOUNDED; HOW REDEEMED:
The owner or owners of any dog impounded hereunder may redeem the same by
paying all the costs, charges and penalties assessed, including the fees set
forth in section
6-5-9 of this chapter, if any, that have accrued up to the time of making the
redemption, and when the same are paid to the city clerk, the city clerk shall
advise the pound keeper, and it shall be his duty and he shall release the dog
from said pound and deliver him to the owner thereof. (Ord. 1095, 12-16-2002)
6-5-11: PUBLIC NOTICE:
Immediately after impounding any dog hereunder, it shall be the duty of the
pound keeper to enter upon the records of the pound in a book to be kept by him
for such purpose the date of impounding, a description of the dog impounded,
and a record as to whether or not such dog has been licensed and tagged as
required by the provisions of this code. Public notice of the impounding of
such dog shall be given by posting one copy of the description of such dog and
date of impounding at the pound and one copy of such notice on the bulletin
board of the city hall. Any such dog not redeemed by the owner thereof within
five (5) days after the posting of such notice by the pound keeper shall be and
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The pound keeper shall thereafter
dispose of such animal as provided by law. (1972 Code)
6-5-12: LICENSED DOGS IMPOUNDED:
It shall be the duty of the pound keeper to cause notice to be served by
certified mail upon the registered owner of any licensed dog impounded under
the provisions of this chapter, such notice to be mailed at least two (2) days
prior to the posting of the notice of impounding hereinbefore provided. (1972
Code)
6-5-13: DOG BITES:
Whenever any dog bites a person, the owner of the said dog shall immediately
notify the chief of police who shall order the dog held on the owner's premises
or shall have it impounded for a period of ten (10) days. The animal control
officer shall be notified of any dog bite within twenty four (24) hours. The
dog shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again at the
end of the ten (10) day period. If at the end of ten (10) days, a veterinarian
is convinced that the dog is then free from rabies, the dog shall be released
from quarantine or from the pound as the case may be. If the dog dies in the
meanwhile, the head shall be sent to the state department of health for
examination for rabies. (Ord. 1095, 12-16-2002)
6-5-14: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS OR CATS PER RESIDENCE:
No individual, family or group of individuals residing in the same home or
apartment shall be allowed to keep more than six (6) dogs or six (6) cats or a
combination of greater than six (6) dogs and cats in any residence or
apartment. Any individual violating the provisions of this section be subject
to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per day and each day that the violation shall continue shall
deem to be a separate offense. Additionally, any person violating this section
shall be responsible for any veterinary expenses, impoundment expenses, and
expenses incurred by the city of Spring Valley or any other animal rights group
in removing the animals from the residence or apartment. (Ord. 1366, 12-3-2007)
6-5-15: WASTE ACCUMULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit a dog or cat to be on
property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person, unless such
person has in his immediate possession an appropriate device for scooping
excrement and an appropriate depository for the transmission of excrement to a
receptacle located upon property owned or possessed by such person. This
section shall not apply to a person who is visually or physically handicapped.
(Ord. 1366, 12-3-2007)
6-5-16: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, except for section
6-5-14 of this chapter which contains its own separate penalty provisions,
shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense; not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the second offense;
and not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for the third and subsequent offenses. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. In addition to the fines provided herein, any person violating any
provision of this chapter shall be responsible for any medical expenses,
veterinary expenses, or property damages caused by the person's dog. (Ord.
1366, 12-3-2007)
CHAPTER 6
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
SECTION:
6-6-1: Prohibited
6-6-2: Disorderly Crowds Prohibited
6-6-3: Penalty
6-6-1: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to act in such unreasonable manner as to
alarm or disturb another or to act in a disorderly manner or provoke a breach
of the peace. (1972 Code)
6-6-2: DISORDERLY CROWDS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a member of any disorderly crowd,
or any crowd gathered together for any unlawful purpose, or any crowd gathered
to the annoyance of or injury to the public. (1972 Code)
6-6-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 7
INOPERABLE AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-7-1: Definitions
6-7-2: Abandonment Of Vehicles
6-7-3: Nuisance Declared
6-7-4: Wrecked And Non-Operating Vehicles
6-7-5: Authorization To Tow
6-7-6: Termination Of Vehicle Ownership
6-7-7: Redemption By Vehicle Owner
6-7-8: Sale Of Vehicles Seven Years Of Age Or Newer; Disposition
6-7-9: Report Of Vehicle Sale Or Disposition
6-7-10: Use Of Proceeds Of Vehicle Sale Or Disposition
6-7-11:    Liability Disclaimer
6-7-12:    Penalty
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of disrepair
rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any motor
vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved for seven (7) consecutive
days.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is not a street or highway.
VEHICLE: A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel
along the ground by use of wheels, runners or slides and transport persons or
property or pull machinery and includes, without limitation, an automobile,
truck, trailer, motorcycle and tractor.
(Ord. 1760, 8-12-2019)
6-7-2: ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES:
The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on any
highway, street, or alley in this city is unlawful and subject to penalties as
set forth in this chapter. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle
or any part thereof on private or public property, other than a highway,
street, or alley, in view of the general public, anywhere in this city is
unlawful except on property which is zoned and used for the repair and/or
storage of abandoned vehicles. Any vehicle that is inoperable, unlicensed,
without proper registration or license plates, or with registration that has
expired, shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle. A motor vehicle or any part
thereof so abandoned on private property may be authorized for removal by or
upon the order of the chief of police, after a waiting period of seven (7) days
or more has expired, or may be removed immediately if determined to be a
hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle under 65 ILCS 5/11-40-3-1. (Ord. 1760, 8-
12-2019; Ord. 1827, 11-15-2021; Ord. 1921, 8-4-2025)
6-7-3: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind who either owns or is in possession or control of an
abandoned motor vehicle as defined in this chapter shall be deemed to be a
public nuisance and shall be subject to fines as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 1760, 8-12-2019)
6-7-4: WRECKED AND NON-OPERATING VEHICLES:
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked or
junked vehicle on any street or highway within the city. No person in charge of
any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or
otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, non-operating wrecked, junked
or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than seven (7) days,
unless said vehicle is in a completely enclosed garage or said vehicle is on
property zoned and used for the repair and/or storage of partially dismantled,
non-operating, wrecked or junked vehicles.
(Ord. 1760, 8-12-2019)
6-7-5: AUTHORIZATION TO TOW:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away under this
chapter:
   (A)   The authorization, any hold order and any release shall be in writing,
or confirmed in writing, with a copy given to the towing service.
   (B)   The police department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle
towed, listing the color, year of manufacturer, manufacturer's trade name,
manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number and
license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also
include the date and hour of the tow, the location towed from, the location
towed to, the reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the
tow.
(Ord. 1760, 8-12-2019)
6-7-6: TERMINATION OF VEHICLE OWNERSHIP:
   (A)   When the police department does not know the identification of the
registered owner or other legally entitled person, it will cause the motor
vehicle registration records of the state to be searched by a directed
communication to the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.
   (B)   The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the
state police to be searched by a directed communication to the state police for
stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the state police files are
searched with negative results, the information contained in the National Crime
Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the state police. The
information determined from these record searches will be used by the police
department in sending a notification by certified mail to the owner or legally
entitled person advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be
made and setting forth public sale information. Notification shall be sent no
later than ten (10) business days after the date the police department impounds
or authorizes the impounding of a vehicle, provided that if the police
department is unable to determine the identity of the registered owner,
lienholder or other person legally entitled to ownership of the impounded
vehicle within a ten (10) business day period after impoundment, notification
shall be sent no later than two (2) days after the date the identity of the
registered owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to ownership of
the impounded vehicle is determined. Exception to a notification by certified
mail to the registered owner, lienholder and other legally entitled persons are
set forth in 65 ILCS 5/4-209.
   (C)   When the registered owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled
to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from
the registration files of this state or from the registration files of a
foreign state, if applicable, the police department shall notify the state
police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by
the state police will be immediately forwarded to the city police department
for notification purposes as set forth in this section.
(Ord. 1760, 8-12-2019)
6-7-7: REDEMPTION BY VEHICLE OWNER:
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or
disposed of as provided in this chapter, the owner or other person legally
entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police
department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the
vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this
section until all towing and storage charges have been paid.
(Ord. 1760, 8-12-2019)
6-7-8: SALE OF VEHICLES SEVEN YEARS OF AGE OR NEWER; DISPOSITION:
   (A)   When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle seven (7) years
of age or newer remains unclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder or other
legally entitled persons for a period of thirty (30) days after notice has been
given as provided in 625 ILCS 5/4-205 and 5/4-206, the police department or
towing service having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at
public auction to a person licensed as an automotive parts recycler, rebuilder
or scrap processor under 625 ILCS 5/5-101 et seq., or the towing operator which
towed the vehicle. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in
a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the police
department, or the towing service where the vehicle is impounded, shall cause a
notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the
registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled persons. Notice as
provided in 625 ILCS 5/4-205 and 5/4-206, and as provided in this subsection,
shall state the time and place of sale and shall contain a complete description
of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled
person to reclaim the vehicle.
   (B)   If an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle displays dealer
plates, notice under this section and 625 ILCS 5/4-209 shall be sent to both
the dealer and the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled
persons.
   (C)   When the certified notification specified in 625 ILCS 5/4-205 and 5/4-
206 has been returned by the postal authorities to the police department or
towing service, the sending of a second certified notice will not be required.
   (D)   When the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other legally
entitled persons of an abandoned, lost, or unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years
of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in this article,
the vehicle may be sold as provided in this section without notice to any
person whose identity cannot be determined.
   (E)   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is
impounded as specified by this article, or when any such vehicle is towed at
the request of with the consent of the owner or operator and is subsequently
abandoned, it will be kept in custody or storage for a minimum of ten (10) days
for the purpose of determining the identity of the registered owner, lienholder
or other legally entitled persons by the U.S. mail, public service or in person
for a determination of disposition; and an examination of the state police
stolen vehicles files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of
the (10) day period, without the benefit of disposition information being
received from the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled
person, the vehicle may be disposed of in either of the following ways:
      1.   The police department will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as
junk or salvage.
      2.   The towing service may sell the vehicle in the manner provided in
this section, provided that this subsection shall not apply to vehicles towed
by order or authorization of the police department.
   (F)   A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle may, however, be sold to a
person desiring to restore it.
(Ord. 1760, 8-12-2019)
6-7-9: REPORT OF VEHICLE SALE OR DISPOSITION:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the police department
is reclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled
person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as
provided in this chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the
police department for a period of one (1) year from the date of the sale or
disposal.
(Ord. 1760, 8-12-2019)
6-7-10: USE OF PROCEEDS OF VEHICLE SALE OR DISPOSITION:
When a vehicle located within the corporate city limits is authorized to be
towed away by the chief of police and disposed of as set forth in this chapter,
the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of towing,
storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the General Fund of the
City.
(Ord. 1760, 8-12-2019)
6-7-11: LIABILITY DISCLAIMER:
Any police officer, towing service owner, operator, or employee shall not be
held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered
owner, former registered owner, or owner's legal representative, or any other
person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle
when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this
chapter.
(Ord. 1760, 8-12-2019)
6-7-12: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than seven
hundred fifty ($750.00) dollars each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable hereunder as a separate offense.
(Ord. 1760, 8-12-2019)
CHAPTER 8
TRESPASSES
SECTION:
6-8-1: Prohibited
6-8-2: Specifically Enumerated Trespasses; Suppression
6-8-3: Severance Clause
6-8-4: Penalties
6-8-1: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within this
municipality upon either public or private property. (1972 Code)
6-8-2: SPECIFICALLY ENUMERATED TRESPASSES; SUPPRESSION:
Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of section
6-8-1 of this chapter, any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed
included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions
of section
6-8-1 of this chapter, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any
time, or from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or violations
of this chapter, the aforesaid enumerated acts so included, being as follows:
   (A)   Any entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, or another,
including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at
the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry or in
violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing, by any
owner or occupant thereof; or
   (B)   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making
of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or
entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing by any owner or occupant thereof; or
   (C)   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of
being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or occupant
thereof; or
   (D)   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without
the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control
thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft after having been requested to leave by the person having such
right. (1972 Code)
6-8-3: SEVERANCE CLAUSE:
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall be held
invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other provisions of
this chapter. (1972 Code)
6-8-4: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00). (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 9
LOITERING
SECTION:
6-9-1: Loitering Declared Unlawful
6-9-2: Violation
6-9-3: Penalty
6-9-1: LOITERING DECLARED UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain
idle either alone and/or in consorts with others in a public place in such
manner so as to:
   (A)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians.
   (B)   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk
or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction
or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any
business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any
such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place
or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress,
and regress, therein, thereon and thereto. (Ord., 9-20-1976)
6-9-2: VIOLATION:
When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in section
6-9-1 of this chapter, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall
order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on
or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be
guilty of a violation of this section. (Ord., 9-20-1976)
6-9-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject
to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor less than ten
dollars ($10.00). Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on
each successive day continued. (Ord., 9-20-1976)
CHAPTER 10
SNOWMOBILES
SECTION:
6-10-1: Definitions
6-10-2: Regulations
6-10-3: Exceptions
6-10-4: Regulated Use
6-10-5: Registration And Licensing
6-10-6: Penalty
6-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
OPERATE: To control the operation of a snowmobile.
OPERATOR: A person who operates or is in actual control of a snowmobile.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice in a
natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners and supported in part by
skis, belts or cleats. (Ord., 10-19-1981)
6-10-2: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile under the following
circumstances:
   (A)   On public school grounds, public rights of way, park property,
playgrounds, recreational areas, or other publicly owned land.
   (B)   In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as
to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
   (C)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
safety of any person or the property of any other person. (Ord., 10-19-1981)
6-10-3: EXCEPTIONS:
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, a person may operate a
snowmobile on streets which are impassable by other vehicular means due to snow
and ice only if necessary for provisions of food and shelter and to provide
transportation for those persons furnishing essential services, including, but
not limited to, doctors, nurses, policemen, firemen, and employee of public
utilities. (Ord., 10-19-1981)
6-10-4: REGULATED USE:
Snowmobiles may be operated on designated snow routes as follows:
   (A)   Designated Snow Routes:
First ward: Cornelia Street from Dakota Street to Iowa Street; Iowa Street from
Cornelia Street to Power Street; Power Street from Iowa Street to Caroline
Street; Caroline Street from Power Street to Greenwood Street; Greenwood Street
from Caroline Street to the right of way of the Chicago Rock Island Pacific
Railroad thence east to Spring Creek; thence south to the south right-of-way
line of said railroad; thence west to the public road running parallel with and
adjacent to Illinois State Route No. 89; thence north to Caroline Street and
west to Hennessey Street; Elm Street, Oak Street, Prairie Street; Lance Avenue,
Nelson Avenue and Central Street in the area commonly known as Webster Park.
Second ward: Caroline Street from Hennessey Street to Taylor Street; Taylor
Street from Caroline Street to Iowa Street; Iowa Street from Taylor Street to
Strong Avenue; Strong Avenue from Iowa Street to Devlin Street; Devlin Street
from Strong Avenue to John Mitchell Avenue; John Mitchell Avenue to Dakota
Street; Richard Street from Dakota Street to the alley in Block 12 of
Greenwood's Addition; thence west through the alleyway of said Block 12 and
through Blocks 1 and 2 of Luther's Addition to John Mitchell Avenue; Dakota
Street from John Mitchell Avenue to Marquette Road; Marquette Road to Rock
Island; thence southwest on the former Spring Valley and Marquette highway to
the corporate limits of the City.
Third ward: Seventh Street from Hennessey Street to Terry Street; Terry Street
from Seventh Street to Fourth Street; Fourth Street from Terry Street to
Richard Street; Richard Street from Fourth Street to Dakota Street; Dakota
Street from John Mitchell Avenue to Ladd Road; Ladd Road from Dakota Street to
Junction No. 6, No. 29, and No. 89; Northwestern Street from Ladd Road to
Number 3 Coal Mine Road; thence north to Illinois State Route No. 29; Dover
Road, Yardley Drive and Briarcliff Drive in Briarcliff Addition.
Fourth ward: Seventh Street from Hennessey Street to Greenwood Street;
Greenwood Street from Dakota Street to the Peru-Princeton Road; the Peru-
Princeton Road southeast to the corporate limits of the City; the Peru-
Princeton Road running northwesterly from U.S. Rt. No. 6 to the corporate
limits of the City.
   (B)   Alleys: Snowmobiles may be operated by vehicle owners using city
alleys as a means of ingress and egress from their place of residence to the
nearest snow route, but the use of a city alley at any time for the operation
of a snowmobile is expressly prohibited.
   (C)   Speed: No snowmobiles shall be operated at a speed in excess of
fifteen (15) miles per hour.
   (D)   Antenna: Operators of snowmobiles shall place an antenna not less than
five feet (5') in length on said vehicle while in operation with a red flag
attached thereto.
   (E)   Signs: The chief of police shall install signs designating snow routes
as provided by this chapter.
   (F)   Snow Route Map: The chief of police shall prepare and maintain for
public inspection at his office, or by posting the same in a convenient place
in or about the police station a map of the city with the designated snow
routes marked thereon. (Ord., 10-19-1981)
6-10-5: REGISTRATION AND LICENSING:
All operators of snowmobiles within the corporate limits of the city shall be
required to register their snowmobiles at the Spring Valley police department
and to obtain a snowmobile decal from the Spring Valley city clerk's office.
The cost of the snowmobile decal will be two dollars ($2.00) per snowmobile.
Those operators owning more than one snowmobile shall purchase one sticker for
each snowmobile. The sticker shall be displayed in the lower left hand
windshield of the snowmobile. Operators applying for a snowmobile decal must
bring with them a copy of their state of Illinois, department of conservation
registration certificate for each snowmobile intended to be licensed by the
operator. The vehicle sticker purchased by a snowmobile operator in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for the period from December
1, 1991 until December 31, 1992, and from January 1 to December 31 for each
year thereafter. Any individual operating a snowmobile within the corporate
limits of the city without obtaining a snowmobile decal as provided for herein
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall subject the operator to
the penalties set forth herein. (Ord. 755, 11-18-1991)
6-10-6: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 755, 11-18-1991)
CHAPTER 11
CRIMINAL PUBLIC NUISANCES
SECTION:
6-11-1: Prohibition; Abatement
6-11-2: Definitions
6-11-3: Preabatement Procedure
6-11-4: Judicial Abatement Procedure
6-11-5: Abatement Remedy; Penalty
6-11-1: PROHIBITION; ABATEMENT:
No person shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently permit any
property within the corporate limits of the city of Spring Valley to become,
exist as or be used as a criminal public nuisance, and any criminal public
nuisance found to exist within the city of Spring Valley shall be subject to
abatement in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
943, 10-4-1999)
6-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings set
forth below:
CRIMINAL PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any real property within the corporate limits of the
city of Spring Valley, together with the buildings, structures, fixtures or
improvements located thereon, at, in or on which any three (3) or more of the
criminal offenses set forth in subsections (A) through (O) of this definition
have occurred within any given one year period, as determined by authorized
sworn personnel of the city of Spring Valley police department or by any
authorized members of other law enforcement agencies lawfully exercising
jurisdiction within the city of Spring Valley, shall constitute a criminal
public nuisance. The criminal offenses which may be considered in determining
whether or not a criminal public nuisance exists shall be as follows:
   (A)   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 9 (homicide) of the
criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-1 et seq.;
   (B)   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 10 (kidnapping and
related offenses) of the criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/10-1 et seq.;
   (C)   Any offense defined and prohibited by section 11-14 (prostitution),
11-15 (soliciting for a prostitute), 11-16 (pandering), 11-17 (keeping a place
of prostitution), 11-20 (obscenity), 11-20.1 (child pornography), or 11-21
(harmful material to minors) of the criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-14, 5/11-15, 5/11-16, 5/11-17, 5/11-20, 5/11-20.1 and 5/
11-21;
   (D)   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 12 (bodily harm) of the
criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-1 et seq.;
   (E)   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 16 (theft and related
offenses) of the criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-
1 et seq.;
   (F)   Any offense defined and prohibited by section 20-2 (possession of
explosives or incendiary devices) of the criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/20-2 et seq.;
   (G)   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 24 (deadly weapons) of
the criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq.,
together with any violation of section
6-2-8 of this title;
   (H)   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 25 (mob action) of the
criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1 et seq.;
   (I)   Any offense defined and prohibited by section 26-1 (disorderly
conduct) of the criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-1;
   (J)   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 28 (gambling) of the
criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1 et seq.;
   (K)   Any offense defined and prohibited by article 31 (interference with
public officers) of the criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/31-1 et seq.;
   (L)   Any offense defined and prohibited by section 6-16 (prohibited sales
and possession) or 6-20 (purchase or acceptance of gift of liquor by persons
under age 21) of the liquor control act of 1934, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-16 and 5/6-20;
   (M)   Any offense defined and prohibited by the Illinois controlled
substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq.;
   (N)   Any offense defined and prohibited by the cannabis control act, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.;
   (O)   Any inchoate offense defined and prohibited by article 8 (inchoate
offenses) of the criminal code of 1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-1 et
seq., which is relative to the commission of any of the aforesaid principal
offenses.
OCCUPANT: Any person in actual or constructive possession of any real property
within the corporate limits of the city of Spring Valley, or any of the
buildings, structures, fixtures or improvements located thereon.
OWNER: Any person having any legal or equitable interest whatsoever in any real
property within the corporate limits of the city of Spring Valley, together
with the buildings, structures, fixtures or improvements located thereon, or
who, by any means whatsoever, has the ability, authority or right to regulate,
restrain, control, direct or affect the conduct of persons present on any such
property.
PERMIT: To allow, approve, consent to, acquiesce in, agree to, suffer, or
failure to prevent through inaction.
PERSON: Any natural individual, corporation, firm, partnership, limited
liability company, unincorporated association or any other group, enterprise or
entity capable of owning, using or occupying property.
PROPERTY: Any real property, together with any buildings, structures,
improvements or fixtures located thereon or affixed thereto. (Ord. 943, 10-4-
1999)
6-11-3: PREABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
Whenever the chief of the city of Spring Valley police department shall receive
two (2) or more police reports generated in the ordinary course of the business
of the department, or any reports from sworn personnel of any other law
enforcement agency lawfully exercising jurisdiction in the city of Spring
Valley, which reports describe the commission of any acts or conduct within the
same one year period at, in or on the same property which could constitute any
two (2) or more of the offenses set forth in the definition of "criminal public
nuisance" in section
6-11-2 of this chapter, the chief shall review said reports and determine
whether or not the acts or conduct in fact constitute any of said offenses. In
the event that the chief determines that said reports in fact describe the
commission of acts or conduct which constitute any two (2) or more of said
offenses, the chief may take the following action:
   (A)   Notify by registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal
service, the owners and the occupants of the property in question that said
property may be in danger of becoming a criminal public nuisance under the
provisions of this chapter, which notice shall identify the property in
question by either street address, PIN number or legal description, describe
the acts or conduct which have occurred on the property that could serve as
part of the basis for determining that the property constitutes a criminal
public nuisance, and request that the owners and occupants contact the chief
within fourteen (14) days of the date of the letter to discuss potential
courses of action which will prevent and deter the property in question from
becoming a criminal public nuisance.
   (B)   After complying with the notification procedure set forth in
subsection (A) of this section, if the chief of police of the Spring Valley
police department receives an additional police report describing the
commission of acts or conduct within the same one year period as the acts or
conduct with respect to which a notification was issued in accordance with
subsection (A) of this section, which acts or conduct were committed at the
same property described in said notice and which could constitute the
commission of one or more of the offenses set forth in the definition of
"criminal public nuisance" in section
6-11-2 of this chapter, then the chief shall review such report and determine
whether or not such acts or conduct in fact constitute one or more of the said
offenses, and, in the event that the chief determines that such acts or conduct
do constitute one or more of the said offenses, then the chief shall, by
registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, and, in
addition to either of the foregoing, by posting on the property itself, provide
the owners and occupants of the property in question with a second notice,
which notice shall inform the owners and occupants that the property in
question has become and is in fact a criminal public nuisance under this
chapter, describe all of the acts and conduct forming the basis for the
determination that the property in question is a criminal public nuisance, and
request that the owners and occupants of the property contact the chief within
fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice to determine and implement a
course of action which will result in the abatement of the property as a
criminal public nuisance.
   (C)   Proof that the notices required under this section were sent or given
in the manner required hereunder shall be deemed proof that the owners or
occupants of the property to which the notices related received such notices.
(Ord. 943, 10-4-1999)
6-11-4: JUDICIAL ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
In the event that a course of conduct agreed to by the chief of police of the
city of Spring Valley and the owners and occupants of the property to which a
notice has been directed pursuant to subsection
6-11-3(B) of this chapter has not been implemented within thirty (30) days of
the date of said notice to voluntarily abate the criminal public nuisance in
question, then the chief of police shall so notify the city attorney to
initiate judicial proceedings in the circuit court of the 13th judicial
circuit, Bureau County, Illinois, to abate the criminal public nuisance, and to
seek the penalties and remedies provided with respect thereto by the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 943, 10-4-1999)
6-11-5: ABATEMENT REMEDY; PENALTY:
In the event that the city of Spring Valley establishes in any judicial action
instituted in accordance with section
6-11-4 of this chapter that a property within the corporate limits of the city
of Spring Valley constitutes a criminal public nuisance, the court shall, in
addition to any other powers granted by the provisions of this code or
applicable law, have the power to enter an order restraining the owners and
occupants from using the property for any purpose for a period of up to one
year, which order shall further provide that the owners and occupants shall
have the right to use the property during the period of time specified in the
order if any of them shall post a bond or other security payable to the city of
Spring Valley and approved by the court in an amount between one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), which bond or
security shall be forfeited and paid over to the city of Spring Valley by the
obligor thereof in the event that any offense set forth in section
6-11-2 of this chapter in the definition of "criminal public nuisance" is
committed upon such property within the period of time set forth in the court
order. Any person who is an owner or occupant of any property determined in any
such judicial action to constitute a criminal public nuisance who
intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently permitted such property to
become, be used as or exist as a criminal public nuisance shall be liable to a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) per day for each day on which such property was used as
or existed as a criminal public nuisance. (Ord. 943, 10-4-1999)
CHAPTER 12
IMPOUNDMENT AND TOWING OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-12-1: Offenses
6-12-2: Administrative Penalties
6-12-3: Towing; Hearing Procedures
6-12-1: OFFENSES:
   (A)   Class 1 Vehicle: A motor vehicle used in violation of the statutes
hereafter set forth shall be subject to impoundment under this subsection and
shall be defined as a class 1 vehicle:
625 ILCS  
625 ILCS     
5/3-702     Operation of motor vehicle with suspended or revoked registration
5/6-101     No valid driver's license (except cases of a license that is
            expired for less than 1 year)
5/6-303     Driving with a suspended or revoked driver's license
5/11-204    Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer
5/11-204.1  Aggravated fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer
5/11-401(a) Leaving the scene of an accident - death or injury
5/11-401(b) Leaving the scene - failure to report - felony
5/11-402(a) Leaving the scene of an accident - vehicle damage
5/11-501    (DUI) alcohol, drugs or combination
5/11-503    Reckless driving
 
   (B)   Class 2 Vehicle: A motor vehicle used in violation of the statutes
hereafter set forth shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this
subsection and shall be defined as a class 2 vehicle:
      1.   Any felony for which seizure is authorized under the Illinois
criminal code of 1961, 5/36-1 1 ;
      2.   Any violation of article IV of the Illinois controlled substance act
2 ;
      3.   Any violation of the Illinois cannabis control act 3 ;
      4.   Any violation of article 24 of the Illinois vehicle code - deadly
weapons.
   (C)   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply if at the
time of the offense the vehicle was stolen and the theft was reported to the
appropriate police authority within twenty four (24) hours after the theft was
discovered, or the vehicle was otherwise operated without the knowledge and
express or implied consent of the registered owner. (Ord. 1428, 8-17-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 5/36-1.
2 2. 720 ILCS 570 article IV.
3 3. 720 ILCS 550.
6-12-2: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES:
Administrative penalties of unlawful vehicles as defined within this chapter
are hereby established as follows:
   (A)   An administrative penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is
hereby imposed on the owner of record or lawful custodian of a vehicle towed or
impounded under this chapter as a class 1 unlawful vehicle. An administrative
penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is hereby imposed on the owner of
record or lawful custodian of any vehicle towed or impounded under this chapter
as a class 2 unlawful vehicle. In the event the vehicle would qualify as both a
class 1 and a class 2 unlawful vehicle, only a class 2 administrative penalty
shall be imposed. The penalty imposed pursuant to this section shall constitute
a debt due and owing to the city. A vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter
shall remain impounded until:
      1.   The administrative penalty is paid to the city and all applicable
towing fees are paid to the towing agent, in which case the owner or lawful
custodian shall be given possession of the vehicle; or
      2.   A cash bond in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in
the case of a class 1 unlawful vehicle; or in the amount of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) in the case of a class 2 unlawful vehicle, is posted with the
police department of the city and all applicable towing fees are paid to the
towing agent; or
      3.   The towing agent, within the discretion of the towing agent,
otherwise authorizes release, at which time the vehicle will be released to the
owner of record or lawful custodian; or
      4.   The vehicle is deemed abandoned in which case the vehicle shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by law for disposition of an abandoned
vehicle.
   (B)   If a cash bond in the appropriate amount is posted with the police
department, and applicable towing fees are paid to the towing agent or the
towing agent otherwise authorizes release, the impounded vehicle shall be
released to the owner or lawful custodian. All bond money posted pursuant to
this section shall be deposited and held by the clerk of Bureau County until
the circuit court of Bureau County issues a decision on whether the
administrative penalty is due. The citation for the administrative penalty
provided for in this section shall be issued only in the event that the owner
or lawful custodian has posted bond and desires to dispute the administrative
penalty. In the event that the owner or lawful custodian of the vehicle agrees
to pay the appropriate penalty set forth above, and further pays the applicable
towing fees or makes other arrangements satisfactory to the towing agent, then
no filing shall be made with the circuit court in connection with this
administrative penalty and any monies deposited with the city shall be retained
and be the sole property of the city.
   (C)   Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within thirty (30) days after
a final judgment is rendered in favor of the city for imposition of the
administrative penalty by the circuit clerk of Bureau County and against the
owner of record or lawful custodian who is in default, may be disposed of as an
unclaimed and abandoned vehicle as provided by law; provided however, where
proceedings have been instituted under state or federal drug asset forfeiture
laws, the subject vehicle may not be disposed of by the city except if
consistent with those proceedings. (Ord. 1428, 8-17-2009)
6-12-3: TOWING; HEARING PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Unlawful Vehicles: Unlawful vehicles as defined within this chapter
shall be subject to towing without prior notice. If the owner of record or the
legal custodian of the vehicle are present at the scene prior to the towing,
the police officer shall give verbal notice of the fact of the vehicle's
seizure and the owner's rights and remedies including a right to a hearing
before the circuit court of Bureau County.
   (B)   Notice: Alternatively, the police department shall send a written
notification to the owner of record, as identified through state vehicle
registration records, within seven (7) days of the seizure and impoundment. The
written notice shall give the owner notice of the fact of the vehicle's seizure
and rights and remedies including a right to a hearing before the circuit court
of Bureau County. The notice shall be sent certified mail, return receipt, to
the address listed on the state vehicle registration records. Written
notification shall not be necessary in cases where the legal custodian or owner
of record has paid the administrative penalty, all applicable towing and
storage fees and has waived their right to a hearing.
   (C)   Impounded: Towed vehicles authorized to be towed under this chapter
shall be impounded at facilities designated by the city police department until
lawfully claimed or disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and
pursuant to the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq.
   (D)   Release Of Vehicles: Before the owner or person entitled to the
possession of any impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same, the
owner or other person entitled to possession shall furnish evidence of his
identity, ownership of the vehicle, or right to possession, sign a receipt for
the vehicle, and pay the administrative penalty to the city of Spring Valley
(or bond therefor) and pay the amount currently owed for towing and storage
fees to the towing agent or make other arrangements satisfactory to the towing
agent with the towing agent. The chief of police is further authorized to
promulgate regulations as to the documents necessary to carry out and
effectuate the intent and purpose of these provisions.
   (E)   Posttowing And Hearing Procedures With The Circuit Court Of Bureau
County: The hearing at the circuit court of Bureau County for any person
posting bond and desiring a hearing in regard thereto shall be held as promptly
as reasonably possible. (Ord. 1428, 8-17-2009)
CHAPTER 13
TRUANCY
SECTION:
6-13-1: Definitions
6-13-2: Truancy Prohibited
6-13-3: Penalty
6-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
PARENTAL PERMISSION: Shall include permission from a person in loco parentis
and shall be given for reasons only of personal illness, serious family
illness, death in the family, serious home emergencies, necessary and lawful
family support, employment, valid religious justification, providing
appropriate evidence of homeschooling to the school district and/or compelling
family reasons.
TRUANT: A child subject to compulsory school attendance and who is absent
without parental/guardian permission from such attendance for a school day or a
portion thereof. (Ord. 1476, 11-8-2010; amd. Ord. 1577, 8-18-2014)
6-13-2: TRUANCY PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate
limits of the city, or enrolled in a school within the corporate limits of the
city, and enrolled in grades 1 through 12 who is: 1) required by law to attend
school; 2) subject to the compulsory attendance requirements of the Illinois
school code, as it may be amended from time to time, or 3) enrolled in a
public, private or parochial school (hereinafter referred to as "student") to
absent himself or herself from attendance at school without parental or
guardian permission. It shall also be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian
of any such child to allow a child to violate this chapter.
   (B)   Parental/Guardian Permission: It shall further be unlawful for any
student enrolled in public, private or parochial school to absent himself or
herself from attendance at said school without parental/guardian permission.
Any person who shall so absent himself or herself shall be guilty of the
offense of truancy and students and/or those who have custody shall be subject
to a fine as set forth hereafter. Emergency or unforeseen absence due to
illness or other causes beyond the control of the person so absenting himself
or herself from school without parental permission shall not constitute truancy
if permission is submitted in writing to the proper school authorities within
twenty four (24) hours after such absence.
   (C)   Reasonable And Adequate Excuse: It shall be unlawful for any person
who has custody or control of a student to permit such child not to attend some
public, private or parochial school in the district wherein the child resides
during the entire time it is in the session during the regular school term,
without reasonable and adequate excuse, such excuse including, personal
illness, serious family illness, death in the family, serious home emergency,
necessary and lawful family support, employment, valid religious justification
or providing evidence of satisfactory participation in homeschooling, or
compelling family reason. Any person violating this section is guilty of the
offense of truancy and shall be subject to a fine as set forth hereafter.
   (D)   False Excuse Prohibited: It shall be an offense under this section for
a parent or other individual to knowingly submit to the proper school
authorities a written excuse under any of the provisions herein that contains
false information, including falsification of a signature. A person convicted
of an offense under this section shall be subject to a fine set forth
hereafter. (Ord. 1476, 11-8-2010)
6-13-3: PENALTY:
Any student who violates this chapter and/or any persons, including, but not
limited to, a person having custody of a student hereunder who violates this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) and
not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per incident. (Ord. 1476, 11-8-
2010)
CHAPTER 14
NOISE
SECTION:
6-14-1: Excessive Noise Prohibited
6-14-2: Electronic Sound Systems/Musical Instruments/Live Bands
6-14-3: Permit Required
6-14-4: Definitions
6-14-5: Exemptions
6-14-6: Enforcement
6-14-7: Penalties
6-14-1: EXCESSIVE NOISE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city, to
make, continue or cause excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any
noise which disturbs, annoys, injures, or endangers the repose, health, peace
or safety of others. The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing, or
unnecessary noise and in violation of this chapter:
   (A)   Day Hours: No person shall cause or allow the emission of sound during
daytime hours (7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M.) from any noise source to any receiving
residential land which exceeds sixty five (65) dBA when measured at any point
within such residential land provided; however, that point of measurement shall
be on the receiving property line of the complainant.
   (B)   Night Hours: No person shall cause or allow the emission of sound
during nighttime hours (10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.) from any noise source to any
receiving residential land which exceeds fifty five (55) dBA when measured at
any point within such receiving residential land provided; however, that point
of measurement shall be on the receiving property line of the complainant.
   (C)   Unreasonable Disturbance/Commotion/Vibration: The unreasonable making
of, or knowingly and unreasonably permitting to be made, any unreasonable loud,
boisterous, or unusual noise, disturbance or commotion or vibration at any
place of business or other structure, or upon any public street, park, or other
place or building is prohibited. The ordinary and usual sounds, noises,
commotion, or vibration incidental to the operation of these places when
conducted in accordance with the usual standards of practice and in a manner
which will not unreasonably disturb the peace, or which will not detrimentally
affect the operators of other places of business or residents living in
residential units are exempted from this provision. (Ord. 1494, 10-10-2011)
6-14-2: ELECTRONIC SOUND SYSTEMS/MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS/LIVE BANDS:
The use of stationary or portable electronic sound reinforcement and/or sound
reproduction systems or musical instruments including "live bands" that radiate
from a dwelling, business or other structure and are clearly audible from a
distance of fifty feet (50') from such unit shall be prohibited during the
following hours: Ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. each day
of the week.
   (A)   No person shall play or permit the playing of musical instruments
(including live music) outdoors during the following hours: Ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. each day of the week. (Ord. 1494, 10-10-2011)
6-14-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Each person requesting a variance/hours extension/exemption from this chapter
must make application to the Spring Valley city council on a form provided by
the city clerk.
   (A)   The application shall be submitted no less than thirty (30) calendar
days before the date of the event.
   (B)   Upon submission of the permit application, the city clerk will place
the application on the agenda of the next city council meeting for its review.
The city council shall have the discretion to grant or deny any application or
any part thereof on the basis that the permitted variance will create a
nuisance to nearby residents, property owners, or in some way is detrimental to
the repose, peace, health, safety, or welfare of others within the city. (Ord.
1494, 10-10-2011)
6-14-4: DEFINITIONS:
COMMUNITY EVENTS: Shall include, but not be limited to: parades, festivals,
sporting events, drum corp shows, and celebrations when sanctioned or sponsored
in whole or in part by the city or local government.
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent
physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.
EMERGENCY WORKS: Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating physical trauma or property damage, whether actually caused or
threatened by an emergency, or work by private or public utilities when
restoring utility service.
NOISE OR SOUND LEVEL: The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of
a sound level meter using the "A" weighing network. The level so read is
designated dB(A) or dBA.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture or
corporation. (Ord. 1494, 10-10-2011)
6-14-5: EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   Emergency Works: Emergency short term operations which are necessary
to protect the health, welfare, and property of the citizens, such as emergency
utility and street repair, snow removal, emergency generators associated with
power outages, floodwater removal, and storm debris removal. This also includes
the normal testing of generators and pumps to ensure reliability of such items.
   (B)   Noises Required By Law: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to any noise required specifically by law for the protection of safety of
people or property including outdoor warning sirens and sirens on emergency
vehicles.
   (C)   Powered Equipment: Powered equipment such as lawn mowers, small lawn
and garden tools, riding tractors, and snow removal equipment which are
necessary for the maintenance of property when such tools are properly
maintained and operated in a manner that is normal and customary.
   (D)   Construction Noise: The construction, demolition, alteration, or
repair of any building, the excavation of streets and highways, and any
construction or utility work in the City rights-of-way is allowed only between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. In cases
of emergency, however, construction and repair noises are exempt.
   (E)   Government Activities: Local, state, and federal governments are
exempted from this chapter.
   (F)   Outdoor School And Playground Activities: Reasonable activities
conducted on public playgrounds or public or private school grounds, which are
conducted in accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally
used, including, but not limited to, athletic and school entertainment events.
   (G)   Community Events: Events directly sponsored or controlled by the city
or its designee.
   (H)   Outdoor Church Activities: Outdoor church activities provided that
they cannot be heard more than one hundred feet (100') beyond the church
property boundaries or between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M., except that a church may sound chapel bells periodically so long as
each ringing does not continue for an unreasonable amount of time.
   (I)   Utility Repairs: Repairs to utility structures. (Ord. 1494, 10-10-
2011; amd. Ord. 1577, 8-18-2014; Ord. 1920, 8-4-2025)
6-14-6: ENFORCEMENT:
The chief of police or his designee, will have primary responsibility for the
enforcement of the noise regulations herein. Nothing in this chapter shall
prevent the chief of police, or his designee, from obtaining voluntary
compliance by way of warning notice or education. (Ord. 1494, 10-10-2011)
6-14-7: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm, association, joint venture, or corporation who violates this
chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each occurrence of
a violation of this chapter constitutes a separate offense and may be punished
separately.
   (A)   A subsequent violation of this chapter by the same person, firm,
association, partnership, joint venture, or corporation, which occurred within
thirty (30) days of receiving a previous citation, is punishable by a fine of
no less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 1494, 10-10-2011)
CHAPTER 15
CANNABIS POSSESSION AND POSSESSION OF CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
6-15-1: Definitions
6-15-2: Possession And Use Of Cannabis
6-15-3: Unlawful To Exceed Possession Limits Of State Law
6-15-4: Growing Or Cultivating Cannabis
6-15-5: Violations
6-15-6:    Penalty
6-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
   The words, terms and phrases used in this Chapter shall have the meanings
ascribed to them by the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended
from time to time, and as presently provided within 410 ILCS 705/1, et seq.,
which terms and provisions are incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-15-2: POSSESSION AND USE OF CANNABIS:
   It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to possess,
consume, use, purchase, obtain, grow, process, or transport cannabis, except as
authorized by the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1, et
seq.).
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-15-3: UNLAWFUL TO EXCEED POSSESSION LIMITS OF STATE LAW:
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume, use, purchase,
obtain, or transport an amount of cannabis that exceeds the possession limits
established by 410 ILCS 705/1, et seq., or otherwise violates the requirements
of 410 ILCS 705/1, et seq.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-15-4: GROWING OR CULTIVATING CANNABIS:
   It shall be unlawful for any person to grow or cultivate cannabis except as
authorized by 410 ILCS 705/1, et seq.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-15-5: VIOLATIONS:
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to allow any violation of 410
ILCS 705/1, et seq. to occur on property owned by such person or entity.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
6-15-6: PENALTY:
   Any person and/or entity who violates any provision of Sections
6-15-2,
6-15-3,
6-15-4 and/or
6-15-5 of the City of Spring Valley Code shall be fined not less than $250.00,
nor more than $750.00, for each and every violation thereof. Each and every
violation of any such provision shall also be considered a separate independent
violation thereof in reference to the provisions herein relating to fines and
penalties, and every day that a violation of any said provision shall exist
shall constitute a separate offense. Additionally, the penalty provisions
herein are in addition to, and not to the exclusion of, any other lawful
penalty provided and/or allowed by law.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-1-0: Definitions
7-1-1: Combined System
7-1-2: Lien
7-1-3: Foreclosure Of Lien
7-1-4: Obstruction
7-1-5: Fire Hydrant Or Service Cock
7-1-6: Metering
7-1-7: Faulty Meter
7-1-8: No Liability
7-1-9: Access
7-1-10: Rates
7-1-11: Billing
7-1-12: Service Discontinued
7-1-13: Meter Required
7-1-14: Duty Of Collector
7-1-15: Monies Received
7-1-16: Deposit By City Treasurer
7-1-17: Records And Accounts
7-1-18: Application For Services
7-1-19: Regulations
7-1-20: Violations And Nonpayment Of Bills
7-1-21: Separate Stopcocks
7-1-22: Limitation Of Use
7-1-23: Application For Tap
7-1-24: Size Of Tap
7-1-25: Procedure
7-1-26: Connection Fee
7-1-26-1: Cross Connections; Definitions
7-1-26-2: Compliance With Existing Laws
7-1-26-3: Cross Connections Prohibited
7-1-26-4: Local Cross Connection Control Program
7-1-26-5: Corrections And Protective Devices
7-1-26-6: Piping Identification
7-1-26-7: Private Water Storage Tanks
7-1-26-8: Elimination Of Existing Cross Connections
7-1-26-9: Inspection
7-1-26-10: Discontinuance Of Water Service
7-1-27: Sewer System
7-1-28: Wastewater Service Surcharge And Computation Of Basic Charge
7-1-29: Revenues
7-1-30: Accounts
7-1-31: Access To Records
7-1-32: Penalty
7-1-0: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
CLARIFICATION OF WORD USAGE: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
CURB COCK: A shutoff valve attached to a water service pipe from a water main
to a building installed near the curb, which may be operated by a valve key to
start or stop flow in the water supply lines of a building. Also called curb
stop.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
Administrator: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection agency.
Federal Act: The federal 1996 safe drinking water acts amendments.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
Approving Authority: The council of the city of Spring Valley.
City: The city of Spring Valley.
Ordinance: This ordinance.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual,
firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories,
or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the works to
maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and
constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement.
SERVICE BOX: A valve box used with corporation of curb cock.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
Director: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
State Act: The Illinois antipollution bond act of 1970.
State Loan: The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of waterworks as provided for by the Illinois antipollution bond
act and for making such loans as filed with the secretary of state of the state
of Illinois.
TYPES OF CHARGES:
Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public water
system.
Capital Improvement Charge: A charge levied on users to improve, extend or
reconstruct the waterworks.
Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of
interest, principal and coverage of loan, bond, etc., outstanding.
Local Capital Cost Charge: Charges for costs other than the operation,
maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement
costs.
User Charge: A charge levied on users of waterworks for the cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement.
Water Service Charge: The charge per quarter or month levied on all users of
the water facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in
article II and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge and the
local capital cost if applicable.
USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which the waterworks will be operated.
WATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water constituent. It is
0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand milliliters (1,000 ml) of water.
It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it
is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water analysis.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the "IEPA Division Of
Laboratories Manual Of Laboratory Methods".
WATER FUND: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received in
the operation of the water system. (Ord. 1112, 7-7-2003)
7-1-1: COMBINED SYSTEM:
The existing waterworks system in its entirety, together with all additions,
improvements and extensions thereto that may hereafter be made and the existing
sewerage system in its entirety, together with all additions, improvements and
extensions thereto that may hereafter be made of the city, be and the same are
hereby declared to be a combined system, and said combined waterworks and
sewerage system shall be maintained and operated as a single utility, and a
charge or rate shall be established for the use of such combined system, which
shall be reasonable and commensurate with the services performed by said
combined system, and shall be sufficient to maintain, operate, provide an
adequate depreciation fund and pay the principal and interest on any revenue
bonds which may be issued, which by their terms are made payable from the
revenues of such combined system. (1972 Code)
7-1-2: LIEN:
Charges for water or sewer service shall be a lien upon the premises as
provided by statute. Whenever a bill for water service and sewer service
remains unpaid thirty (30) days after it has been rendered, the clerk may file
with the recorder of Bureau County, a statement of lien claim. This statement
shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the
unpaid bill, and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well
as for all charges for water and sewer service served subsequent to the period
covered by the bill.
If the consumer of water or sewer service whose bill is unpaid is not the owner
of the premises, and the clerk has notice of this, then notice shall be mailed
to the owner of the premises, if his address is known to the clerk, whenever
such bills remain unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days after it has been
rendered.
The failure of the clerk to record such lien claims or to mail such notice, or
the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid water bills as mentioned in the following
section. (1972 Code)
7-1-3: FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
Property subject to a lien for unpaid water charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale be applied to pay the
charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory
liens. Such foreclosure shall be bill in equity in the name of the city.
The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings, in the name of the city, in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters, against any property for which any water bill has remained unpaid
thirty (30) days after it has been rendered. (1972 Code)
7-1-4: OBSTRUCTION:
No person shall in any manner obstruct the access to any stopcock, hydrant or
valve, or any public faucet or opening for taking water in any street, alley,
public ground or place connected with or part of said water system, nor pile or
place any lumber, brick or building material or other article, thing or
hindrance whatsoever within twelve feet (12') of the same, or so as to in any
manner hinder, delay or obstruct the members of the fire department in reaching
the same. It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with
or obstruct the flow, retention, storage or authorized use of water in said
water system, reservoir or plant, or any part thereof, or to injure, deface,
remove or displace any water main, hydrant, service pipe, water meter, shutoff
box, public fountain, valve, engine or building connected with said water
system, or plant, or to cause, suffer, or permit any of said things to be done.
Any person who shall perform any act in violation of this section shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, and shall in addition be liable
for the actual damage done or caused. (1972 Code)
7-1-5: FIRE HYDRANT OR SERVICE COCK:
No unauthorized person shall turn the water on at any fire hydrant or service
cock, or use water therefrom when so turned on, under penalty of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for each offense, and the persons so using or wasting water in
such unlawful manner shall be liable to pay for the same. (1972 Code)
7-1-6: METERING:
All water consumers supplied by the city shall be supplied only through meters
purchased from the city. (1972 Code)
7-1-7: FAULTY METER:
Whenever any meter, by reason of its being out of repair, or for any cause
fails promptly to register the water passing through the same, the consumer
shall be charged at the rate shown for the corresponding time of the previous
year under like conditions. If no record of the previous year exists, then it
shall be the duty of the superintendent of the water department to estimate or
determine so far as he can the amount of water consumed during the time such
meter fails to operate, and the consumer shall pay the amount so estimated.
(1972 Code)
7-1-8: NO LIABILITY:
All connections and water applied for hereunder, and all the water used
hereunder, shall be upon the express conditions that the city shall not be
liable, nor shall any claim be made against it for damages or injury caused by
reason of the breaking of any main, branches, service pipes, apparatus or
appurtenances connected with said system or plant, or any part or portion of
said plant, or for any interruption of the supply by reason of the breakage of
machinery, or by reason of stoppage, alterations, extensions or renewals. (1972
Code)
7-1-9: ACCESS:
The city and its employees shall have ready access for the purpose of reading,
examining, testing and repairing all portions of the Spring Valley municipal
water system, and examining and testing the consumption, use and flow of water,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent or obstruct
the city or its duly authorized agent, in his duties hereunder.
If, for any reason, the city employee designated to read said meter is
prevented or is unable to make the reading in the usual course of business,
then, in such event, it shall be the responsibility of the consumer to record
the meter readings on a preprinted card provided by the city, and then mail or
deliver said card to the city clerk, or in the alternative, to call the office
of the city clerk and orally inform the city clerk of said readings. The city
shall be authorized to assess an additional charge of ten dollars ($10.00) to
any consumer's account when said consumer fails to return to the city clerk the
meter card with the meter reading recorded thereon, or fails to otherwise
notify the office of the city clerk within sixty (60) days following the
placement of said card on the premises upon which the meter is located.
Each year during the month of May, the city employee designated to read water
meters shall read the inside water meter of all consumers having both an
outside meter and an inside meter. If, for any reason, the city employee
designated to read said water meter is prevented or unable to make the reading
on the inside meter during the month of May, it shall be the responsibility of
the consumer to record the meter readings on the consumer's inside meter and
place readings on a preprinted card provided by the city, and then mail or
deliver said card to the city clerk, or in the alternative, to call the office
of the city clerk and to orally inform the city clerk of said readings. The
city shall be authorized to assess an additional charge of ten dollars ($10.00)
to any consumer's account when said consumer fails to return to the city clerk
the meter card with the meter reading recorded thereon, or fails to otherwise
notify the office of the city clerk within sixty (60) days following the
placement of said card on the premises upon which the inside meter is located.
Every consumer of said water shall take the same upon the conditions prescribed
in this section. (Ord. 662, 3-7-1988)
7-1-10: RATES:
There shall be and there are hereby established rates and charges for the use
of and for the service supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system
of the city, based upon water consumed as shown by the water meters, as
follows: (Ord. 750, 8-19-1991, eff. retroactive to 6-1-1991)
   (A)   Water Charge Per Monthly Billing Period: Effective retroactive to
August 1, 2004, for each user of the water service of the combined system
within the corporate limits, the monthly charge based upon the amount of water
consumed as shown by the water meters shall be as follows:
      1.   A minimum charge of sixteen dollars fifteen cents ($16.15) per month
which shall apply regardless of whether any water is used during the billing
period.
 
                                       $16.15 (minimum charge) plus $2.45 for
For 0 - 999 gallons of usage           the water used between 0 to 999 gallons
                                       of usage
                                       $16.15 (minimum charge) plus $2.45 for
                                       the water used between 0 to 999 gallons
For all usage in excess of 999 gallons of usage plus $2.45 per 1,000 gallons of
                                       water used in excess of 999 gallons of
                                       usage
 
      2.   In calculating bills for users of the Spring Valley water system,
all meter readings will be rounded to the nearest one thousand (1,000) gallons
of usage as shown on the records maintained by the Spring Valley city clerk's
office. (Ord. 1145, 9-7-2004)
      3.   The sewer charges shall increase three percent (3%) in 2010 and the
sewer and water charges shall increase three percent (3%) in 2012. Thereafter,
there shall be an annual increase of three percent (3%) in sewer and water
charges. (Ord. 1424, 7-20-2009)
      4.   Commencing with the bills sent to each user on October 1, 2015,
there shall be an annual increase of two percent (2%) in sewer and water
charges. Commencing with the bills sent to each user of the system on February
1, 2016, and continuing annually on each February 1 thereafter there shall be
an annual increase of five percent (5%) in sewer and water charges. (Ord. 1618,
8-31-2015)
   (B)   Sewer User Charge Per Monthly Billing Period: For each user of the
sewer service of the combined system within the corporate limits, the monthly
charge shall be as follows:
      1.   A minimum charge of thirteen dollars ($13.00) per month which shall
apply regardless of whether any sewer is used during the billing period.
 
For 0 - 999 gallons of usage           $13.00 (minimum charge)
                                       $13.00 (minimum charge) plus $2.92 per
For all usage in excess of 999 gallons 1,000 gallons of sewer usage used in
                                       excess of 999 gallons of usage
 
A surcharge, in addition to the above charges, will be applied to all users
whose waste discharges exceed the average concentration for BOD, and "suspended
solids" as defined in the sewer use ordinance of this title.
      2.   In calculating the bills for users of the Spring Valley sewer
system, all meter readings will be rounded to the nearest one thousand (1,000)
gallons of usage as shown on the records maintained by the Spring Valley city
clerk's office.
      3.   The sewer charges shall increase three percent (3%) in 2010 and the
sewer and water charges shall increase three percent (3%) in 2012. Thereafter,
there shall be an annual increase of three percent (3%) in sewer and water
charges. (Ord. 1424, 7-20-2009)
   (C)   Users Outside The Corporate Limits: The following subsections shall
set forth the procedures for providing water service and sewer service to
potential users outside the corporate limits of the city of Spring Valley. The
provisions set forth in subsections (C)2 through (C)6 of this section shall
apply to applications for water service and sewer service received by the city
of Spring Valley after September 1, 2000. The provisions set forth in
subsection (C)1 of this section shall apply to all recipients of water and/or
sewer services from the city of Spring Valley after November 1, 2006.
      1.   Beginning November 1, 2006, and continuing until October 31, 2008,
the charge for water service to users located outside the corporate limits of
the city of Spring Valley shall be two and one-half (2.5) times the rate for
water service described herein and the charge for sewer service to users
located outside the corporate limits of the city of Spring Valley shall be two
and one-half (2.5) times the rate for sewer service described herein. Beginning
November 1, 2008, and continuing thereafter the charge for water service to
users located outside the corporate limits of the city of Spring Valley shall
be three (3) times the rate for water service described herein and the charge
for sewer service to users located outside the corporate limits of the city of
Spring Valley shall be three (3) times the rate for sewer service described
herein. (Ord. 1282, 10-2-2006)
      2.   Any applicant for water service or sewer service outside of the
corporate limits of the city of Spring Valley shall, as a condition of said
request for service, agree to enter into an annexation agreement with the city
of Spring Valley which will provide for automatic annexation of the applicant's
property at such time as the property shall become contiguous to the corporate
limits of the city of Spring Valley. If the applicant's property is contiguous
at the time of application, the applicant shall be required to annex said
property into the corporate limits of the city of Spring Valley as a condition
for receiving water and sewer service from the city of Spring Valley.
      3.   It shall be the responsibility of any applicant seeking water and
sewer service to noncontiguous property located outside the corporate limits of
the city of Spring Valley to prove to the satisfaction of the Spring Valley
city council that the applicant has made reasonable efforts to try to convince
any intervening property owners to annex their property into the corporate
limits of the city of Spring Valley so as to provide contiguity between the
applicant's property and the corporate limits of the city of Spring Valley.
      4.   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to bear the cost of
extending water and sanitary sewer service to the applicant's property unless
the applicant and the city of Spring Valley agree by a properly executed
annexation agreement and a properly executed annexation ordinance to make other
arrangements acceptable to the city of Spring Valley and the applicant.
      5.   No applicant requesting water or sanitary sewer service from the
city of Spring Valley shall be allowed to subdivide their property after
receiving water or sewer service from the city of Spring Valley unless annexed
or the applicant and the city of Spring Valley agree in an annexation agreement
and ordinance approving the annexation agreement for other provisions regarding
subdivision of property.
      6.   The Spring Valley city council reserves the right to waive or modify
any of the recommendations and provisions set forth in this subsection (C) by
an affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the aldermen of the city of Spring
Valley. (Ord. 1002, 10-16-2000)
   (D)   Separate User: Each individual apartment, multiple home and/or trailer
shall be considered as a separate user under this chapter. (Ord., 2-3-1986)
   (E)   Minimum Rates For Meter Sizes In Excess Of One Inch: Effective
retroactive to August 1, 2004, the following minimum rates shall be applicable
to meters in excess of one inch (1") size:
Meter Size Amount Allowed    Minimum Charge - Monthly
(Inches)   Gallons - Monthly
Meter Size Amount Allowed    Minimum Charge - Monthly
(Inches)   Gallons - Monthly
11/4       8,000             $ 35.75
11/2       9,000             38.20
2          13,000            48.00
3          26,000            79.85
4          50,000            138.65
6          120,000           310.15
8          220,000           555.15
 
For all usage in excess of the amount of allowed gallons per month, for the
particular meter size, there shall be an additional charge of two dollars forty
five cents ($2.45) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used in excess of
the monthly allowed gallons. (Ord. 1145, 9-7-2004)
   (F)   Water Service Adequacy: The adequacy of the water service charge shall
be reviewed, not less often than annually, by certified public accountants for
the city in their annual audit report. The water service charge shall be
revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or OM&R costs.
   (G)   Rates And Service Charges To Be Made Available: The method for
computation of rates and service charges established for user charges in this
section shall be made available to a user within seven (7) days of receipt of a
written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or in the
computations thereof shall be remedied by the water and sewer committee within
fifteen (15) days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the
discrepancies. (Ord. 1112, 7-7-2003)
7-1-11: BILLING:
For the purpose of the operation of the combined waterworks and sewage system
the calendar year shall be divided into monthly periods, said periods to begin
on the first day of each month of the calendar year. The rates or charges for
service above provided shall be payable monthly on the first day of each month
immediately following the end of the monthly period for which service has been
supplied. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the
service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such
premises and the services are furnished to the premises by the city only upon
the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service
are jointly and severally liable to the city. All bills for service shall be
rendered monthly on the first day of the month succeeding the monthly period
for which the service is billed and shall be payable not later than the close
of business on the tenth day of the same month. If payment of the full amount
of the bill is not made within said period, then a penalty of ten percent (10%)
of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto. Any check issued to the city
of Spring Valley for payment of a water bill which is returned by the bank or
other depository institution upon which the check is drawn for insufficient
funds shall result in the customer having added to their bill a twenty five
dollar ($25.00) charge for processing the insufficient funds check. (Ord. 1395,
10-27-2008)
7-1-12: SERVICE DISCONTINUED:
If the rates or charges for such services are not paid within twenty (20) days
after the rendition of the bill for such services, such services shall be
disconnected without further notice and shall not be reinstated until all past
due bills including the penalties thereon are paid in full, together with
payment made of fifty dollars ($50.00) to reinstate such service during regular
business hours, Monday through Friday between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and
three thirty o'clock (3:30) P.M. or one hundred dollars ($100.00), if service
is reinstated outside of regular business hours, on any weekend or on any
holiday. (Ord. 1395, 10-27-2008)
7-1-13: METER REQUIRED:
All premises using the city water supply must be equipped with an adequate
water meter furnished by the city but paid for by the consumer; provided that
such water service may be supplied by the city at a flat rate of charge until
such meter may be installed.
Before any premises are occupied, a water meter shall be installed therein as
herein required or application made for such water service at the flat rate of
charge until the meter can be installed or no water shall be furnished such
premises.
Each user of water presently using the city water facilities without a proper
meter installed shall be required to cause the installation of a proper meter
within thirty (30) days after written notice to that effect given by the city.
Said city shall terminate water service if compliance is not made within the
thirty (30) day period.
All meters shall be installed in a location that will be of easy access.
   (A)   Meter Mikes: Effective November 15, 1973, there shall be required a
meter reading device commonly known as a "meter mike" to be installed on the
outside of premises where a water meter is installed, said device being
connected to the water meter by cable to allow a reading of said meter from the
exterior of said premises.
Hereafter, effective said date, all applications for water meter installation
shall in addition include the application of a meter mike for which the clerk
shall charge the cost of materials only with installation to be made by the
city without charge.
Owners of premises that have acquired meters prior to November 15, 1973, may at
their option, also acquire meter mikes placed, with a charge for materials only
and without installation fee charge. (1972 Code)
7-1-14: DUTY OF COLLECTOR:
It is the duty of the city collector of the city to render bills for service
and for all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all monies
due thereon. (1972 Code)
7-1-15: MONIES RECEIVED:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the combined waterworks
and sewerage system shall be held by the city collector separate and apart from
his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the city, and
all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the
city treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at
such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the city
council. (1972 Code)
7-1-16: DEPOSIT BY CITY TREASURER:
The city treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the combined waterworks
and sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in a
separate fund designated as the "waterworks and sewerage fund of the city of
Spring Valley", and the treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect
in the manner provided by the provisions of article 62 of the "revised cities
and villages act", effective January 1, 1942, and all laws amendatory thereof
and supplementary thereto. (1972 Code)
7-1-17: RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS:
The city treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall
be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks and sewerage
system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by
an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the combined waterworks and sewerage system. (1972 Code)
7-1-18: APPLICATION FOR SERVICES:
Persons or corporations desiring to use city water for building or construction
purposes shall make application therefor in writing and file the same in the
office of the city clerk on a form provided for that purpose. Upon a permit
being granted (permits shall be issued in writing and signed by the
superintendent of the water department), the service pipe shall be carried at
the expense of the applicant to the inside of the curb line, where a service
cock and meter shall be placed, with pipe leading to the surface, and a faucet
placed at the end thereof above said surface. When the building or construction
work is completed the faucet and meter shall be removed and the water shut off,
unless permanent connection hereunder is made. Charge for the use and
connecting of meters shall be as prescribed hereafter by the mayor and city
council. (1972 Code)
7-1-19: REGULATIONS:
The following rules and regulations for the customer of water are hereby
established:
   (A)   No water shall be furnished or supplied to any consumer for any
purpose whatever, until such consumer shall make application therefor. Said
application shall state the location of the premises to be served and the use
to which the water will be put, and effective December 1, 2008, every applicant
not a property owner shall file with such application, a deposit of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 1395, 10-27-2008)
   (B)   No water consumer may supply water to other families or allow them to
take it, except for use on the premises and for purposes specified in the
application, nor after water is introduced into any building or upon any
premises shall any person make or employ any other person to make any tap, or
connection with the work upon the premises for alterations, repairs, extensions
or attachments without a written permit therefor to be issued by the
superintendent of the waterworks system.
   (C)   The city reserves the right to shut off water at any time in the mains
for the purpose of repairing, cleaning, making connections with or extensions
to same, or for the concentrating of water in any part of the city in case of
fire; and for restricting the use of the water in case of deficiency in supply.
No claim shall be made against the city by reason of the breaking of any
service pipe or service cock, or damage arising from shutting off of water for
repairing, laying or relaying mains, hydrants or other connections or repairing
any part of the water system, or from failure of the water supply or by
increasing the water pressure at any time, or from concentration or restricted
use of water as above. (Ord. 296)
   (D)   The water deposit referred to in subsection (A) of this section shall
be refunded to the applicant when the applicant is no longer subject to the
provisions of subsection (A) of this section; provided, however, that said
applicant shall not have any outstanding charges for water and sewer service
owing to the city, and the applicant shall notify the city clerk of the
applicant's new address. If the applicant has an outstanding water and sewer
bill owing to the city, the deposit shall first be applied to the outstanding
water and sewer bill and the balance, if any, shall be refunded to the
applicant in accordance with the provisions contained herein. If the applicant
fails to provide the city clerk with the applicant's new address or a proper
forwarding address and, if after diligent inquiry the city clerk is unable to
locate a new address for the applicant within a period of three (3) years after
the refund in question becomes due to the applicant, the city clerk is then
directed to forfeit the deposit and pay the deposit to the general operating
fund of the Spring Valley water and sewer system to help defray the expenses of
the water and sewer system. (Ord. 682, 12-5-1988)
   (E)   When the city of Spring Valley determines that there is a water leak
between the water shutoff box on public property and the water meter on private
property, the city shall give the owner of the private property on which the
leak is located, thirty (30) days' notice of the existence of the leak. This
notice shall state that the property owner must repair the leak within said
thirty (30) day period. If the repair is not done promptly, the city may shut
off the water supply to the property after the expiration of the thirty (30)
day notice. (Ord. 1472, 8-30-2010)
7-1-20: VIOLATIONS AND NONPAYMENT OF BILLS:
For violation of any of the foregoing rules or for the nonpayment of water
bills, the city reserves the right to turn off the water without notice and to
forfeit any payments made, and after the water has been turned off from any
service pipe on account of nonpayment of water bills, or violation of rules,
the same will not be turned on until all delinquent bills and penalties are
paid, together with expense of turning off and on such water, which will be
fifty dollars ($50.00) if service is reinstated during regular working hours on
Monday through Friday between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and three thirty
o'clock (3:30) P.M. or one hundred dollars ($100.00) if service is reinstated
outside of regular billing hours, on a weekend or on a holiday, and no water
will be furnished to any person who is indebted to the city on account of water
consumed, material or repairs. (Ord. 1395, 10-27-2008)
7-1-21: SEPARATE STOPCOCKS:
No owner or plumber shall be permitted to conduct water pipes into any two (2)
distinct premises or tenements unless separate and distinct stopcocks shall be
placed on the outside of such premises along the sidewalk opposite the same,
nor shall any pipe be allowed to cross lots or buildings to adjoining premises.
(1972 Code)
7-1-22: LIMITATION OF USE:
The right is reserved to suspend the use of lawn fountains and hose for
sprinkling lawns and gardens, whenever in the opinion of the mayor or city
council public exigencies require it. (1972 Code)
7-1-23: APPLICATION FOR TAP:
Any person adjacent to and along the existing municipal water main and sewer
main who desires a service connection to said water main and sewer main or to
replace an existing water main or sewer main shall file a written application
therefor with the city clerk giving the location of the premises to be served
and the size of the tap to be made and the use to which the water is to be put;
said application shall be accompanied with the proper amount of money in
payment for said service connection as herein provided, provided that no water
tap and/or sewer tap shall be made until said application has been approved by
the Spring Valley city council. (1972 Code)
7-1-24: SIZE OF TAP:
Applicants who desire water taps shall pay the following amounts according to
the size of the tap desired, said amounts to be paid to the city clerk:
Size Of Water Service Connection Water Service Connection Fee
Size Of Water Service Connection Water Service Connection Fee
Up to 1 inch                     $ 400.00
11/4 inch                        475.00
11/2 inch                        600.00
2 inch                           800.00
3 inch                           1,600.00
4 inch                           2,850.00
6 inch                           6,840.00
8 inch                           12,540.00
 
In addition to the tap-on fees set forth herein, applicants who desire water
taps shall also reimburse the city of Spring Valley for the cost of the meter
supplied by the city of Spring Valley and all other materials necessary for the
connection of the tap.
Applicants/developer will be charged a flat rate of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) if the applicant/developer provides all material and labor for the
water tap. Said fee is to be paid prior to the start of the water tap
construction. (Ord. 1202, 5-15-2006; amd. Ord. 1439, 11-23-2009; Ord. 1883, 11-
6-2023)
7-1-25: PROCEDURE:
It is further provided that where a lead-in line, a shutoff box, and service
cock have previously been installed the applicant shall only be required to
install at his own expense the lead-in line to the residence or building to be
served; that in the event that it is necessary to replace an existing line, the
lead-in line from the city water main to the shutoff box should be made by the
city while the lead-in line from the shutoff box to the residence or structure
being served should be made by the property owners at the property owner's
cost; that in the event that a sewer line need be replaced, said line should be
replaced at the property owner's expense from city interceptor sewer to the
residence or structure being served. (1972 Code)
7-1-26: CONNECTION FEE:
In addition to all other charges provided herein, owners of individual lots
heretofore assessed connection fees for payment of water mains or sewers
installed by the city pursuant to ordinance shall tender the connection fee for
said water main and/or sewer in addition to the application for tap provided
above. (1972 Code)
7-1-26-1: CROSS CONNECTIONS; DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
BACKFLOW: Water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants entering
a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow.
CROSS CONNECTION: A connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenance which a
backflow could occur.
SAFE AIR GAP: The minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above the
maximum high water level or overflow rim in a fixture, device or container to
which public water is furnished which shall be at least two (2) times the
inside diameter of the water inlet pipe, but shall not be less than one inch
(1") and need not be more than twelve inches (12").
SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY: A water supply system maintained in addition to a
public water supply, including, but not limited to, water systems from ground
or surface sources not meeting the requirements of act 98 to the public acts of
1913, as amended, being sections 325.201 to 325.214 of the compiled laws of
1948, or water from a public water supply which in any way has been treated,
processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or stored in other than an
approved storage facility.
SUBMERGED INLET: A water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply
terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of
questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is unprotected
against backflow.
WATER UTILITY: The city of Spring Valley water department. (Ord. 555, 12-20-
1982)
7-1-26-2: COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING LAWS:
A connection with a public water supply system shall comply with the existing
laws and rules and the provisions of the plumbing code of the city and shall
also comply with the provisions of the Illinois state plumbing code. (Ord. 660,
1-18-1988)
7-1-26-3: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
Cross connection of the public water supply system and any other water supply
system or source including, but not limited to, the following are prohibited:
   (A)   Between a public water supply system and a secondary water supply.
   (B)   By submerged inlet.
   (C)   Between a lawn sprinkling system and the public water supply system.
   (D)   Between a public water supply and piping which may contain sanitary
waste or chemical contaminant.
   (E)   Between a public water supply system and piping immersed in a tank or
vessel which may contain a contaminant. (Ord. 555, 12-20-1982)
7-1-26-4: LOCAL CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM:
The city shall develop a comprehensive control program for the elimination and
prevention of all cross connections, and removal of all existing cross
connections and prevention of all future cross connections. (Ord. 555, 12-20-
1982)
7-1-26-5: CORRECTIONS AND PROTECTIVE DEVICES:
Any user of Spring Valley water shall obtain written approval from the water
department of any proposed corrective action or protective device before using
or installing it. The total time allowed for completion of the necessary
corrections shall be contingent upon the degree of hazard involved and include
the time required to obtain and install equipment. If the cross connection has
not been removed within the time as hereinafter specified, the city shall
physically separate the Spring Valley water supply from the on site piping
system in such manner that the two (2) systems cannot be connected by any
unauthorized person. (Ord. 555, 12-20-1982)
7-1-26-6: PIPING IDENTIFICATION:
When a secondary water source is used in addition to the Spring Valley water
supply, exposed Spring Valley water and secondary water piping shall be
identified by distinguishing colors or tags and so maintained that each pipe
may be traced readily in its entirety, it will be necessary to protect Spring
Valley water supply at the service connection in a manner acceptable to the
water department. (Ord. 555, 12-20-1982)
7-1-26-7: PRIVATE WATER STORAGE TANKS:
A private water storage tank supplied from the Spring Valley water supply
system shall be deemed a secondary water supply unless it is designed and
approved for potable water usage. (Ord. 555, 12-20-1982)
7-1-26-8: ELIMINATION OF EXISTING CROSS CONNECTIONS:
Within one year from the effective date of this section all existing cross
connections to the Spring Valley water supply systems shall be eliminated. The
expenses of such elimination shall be that of the owner of the property on
which such cross connection exists. (Ord. 555, 12-20-1982)
7-1-26-9: INSPECTION:
The water department of the city or any representative thereof shall have the
authority to inspect any premises to determine the presence of an existing
cross connection and to order the elimination of such cross connection. (Ord.
555, 12-20-1982)
7-1-26-10: DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE:
The water department is hereby authorized to discontinue water service after a
reasonable notice to any person owning any property where a cross connection in
violation of this code exists. The water department may take such other
precautionary measures as necessary to eliminate any danger of the
contamination of the Spring Valley water supply system. Water service to such
property shall not be restored until such cross connection has been eliminated.
(Ord. 555, 12-20-1982)
7-1-27: SEWER SYSTEM:
The existing sewerage system of its entirety, together with all additions,
improvements and extensions thereto that may hereafter be made shall be
maintained and operated as a single utility and a charge or rate shall be
established for the use of the said sewerage system, which shall be reasonable
and commensurate with the services performed by the sewerage system, and shall
be sufficient to maintain, operate, provide an adequate depreciation fund and
pay the principal and interest on any revenue bond which may be issued which by
their terms are made payable from the revenues of the said sewer system. (Ord.
688, 2-20-1989)
7-1-28: WASTEWATER SERVICE SURCHARGE AND COMPUTATION OF BASIC CHARGE:
The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the
wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of a basic user charge for
operation and maintenance plus replacement, applicable surcharges, and local
capital cost charge composed of a debt service charge and a capital improvement
charge.
   (A)   Basis For Wastewater Service Charges: The debt service charge is
computed by apportioning the annual debt service on a cost per one thousand
(1,000) gallon basis.
The capital improvement charge is levied on all users to provide for capital
improvements, extensions or reconstruction of the sewage treatment works. The
capital improvement is computed by apportioning the annual amount to be accrued
as a cost per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters
for wastes having the following normal domestic concentrations:
      1.   A five (5) day twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD of 200 mg/l).
      2.   A suspended solids (SS) content of two hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (250 mg/l).
It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement and shall
be computed as follows:
      1.   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be
treated.
      2.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities including a replacement fund for the year,
for all works categories.
      3.   Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance and replacement
costs to each user class by volume, suspended solids and BOD.
      4.   Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance and replacement
(OM&R) costs to wastewater facility categories by volume, suspended solids and
BOD.
      5.   Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal sewage
strength.
      6.   Compute surcharge costs per pound per one thousand (1,000) gallons
in excess of normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.
A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal domestic
concentrations of BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l). The surcharge will be based
on water usage as recorded by water meters for all wastes which exceed the two
hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) and two hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (250 mg/l) concentration for BOD and SS respectively. Subsection (C) of
this section specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.
The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed, not less often
than annually, by certified public accountants for the city in their annual
audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to
reflect a change in local capital costs or a change in operation and
maintenance costs including replacement costs.
The users of wastewater treatment services will be notified annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to the wastewater treatment operation,
maintenance and replacement.
   (B)   Surcharge Rate: The rates of surcharges for BOD5 and SS shall be as
follows:
 
Per pound of BOD $0.14
Per pound of SS  0.12
 
   (C)   Computation Of Surcharge: The concentration of wastes used for
computing surcharges shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling
shall be performed as often as may be deemed necessary by the city and shall be
binding as a basis for surcharges.
   (D)   Computation Of Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service
charge shall be computed by the following formula:
   CW = CC + CD + CM + (Vu - X) CU + CS
Where:   
 CW   = Amount of waste service charge ($) per billing period.
 CD   = Debt service charge.
 CC   = Capital improvement charge.
 CM   = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement.
 Vu   = Wastewater volume for the billing period.
 X    = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge.
 CU   = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement.
 CS   = Amount of surcharge.
 
(Ord. 688, 2-20-1989)
7-1-29: REVENUES:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the combined water and
sewage system shall be deposited in the combined water and sewage account of
the combined water and sewage fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held
by the city treasurer separate and apart from his private funds and separate
and apart from all other funds of the city, and all of said sum, without any
deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the city treasurer not more than ten
(10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may
from time to time be directed by the mayor and city council.
The city treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the combined water and
sewage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such
combined system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the
account of the fund designated as the combined water and sewage fund of the
city. Said treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner
provided by the Illinois statute entitled "revised cities and villages act",
effective January, 1942, and all laws amendatory thereof and supplementary
thereto; provided, however, that if there shall be any conflict between the
provisions of the "revised cities and villages act" or the provisions contained
in this section and the provisions and requirements contained in the bond
indenture ordinance passed by the city council to finance improvements to the
water and sewer system, the provisions of the bond indenture ordinance shall,
in all respects, control. (Ord., 6-19-1989)
7-1-30: ACCOUNTS:
The city treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall
be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular
annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing
concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewerage
system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system, and capital amounts required to
be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
   (A)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for
the current fiscal year.
   (B)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
   (C)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
   (D)   Number of users connected to the system.
   (E)   Number of nonmetered users.
   (F)   A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial wastes and
volume of waste discharged. (Ord. 688, 2-20-1989)
7-1-31: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The IEPA, USEPA, or its authorized representative shall have access to any
books, documents, papers and records of the city which are applicable to the
city system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of
making audit, examination excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the grant. (Ord. 688, 2-20-1989)
7-1-32: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, in addition to the enforcement of the forfeiture and liabilities
herein contained, pay a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 688, 2-20-1989)
CHAPTER 2
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS AND DISCHARGE OF WASTES
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definitions
7-2-2: Use Of Public Sewers Required
7-2-3: Building Sewers And Connections
7-2-4: Use Of The Public Sewers
7-2-5: Protection From Damage
7-2-6: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
7-2-7: Penalties
7-2-8: Permit System
7-2-9: Incorporation Of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
7-2-10: Excessive Discharge
7-2-11: Spill Containment
7-2-12: Compliance Procedures
7-2-13: Immediate Disconnection Of Service
7-2-14: Elimination Of Discharge/Reinstatement
7-2-15: Injunctive Relief
7-2-16: Additional Remedies
7-2-17: Confidential Information
7-2-18: Falsification
7-2-19: Connection Of Sanitary Or Waste Sewers To Storm Drainage Systems
Prohibited
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
Administrator: The administrator of the United States environmental protection
agency.
Federal Act: The federal clean water act (33 USC 466 et seq.) as amended (pub.
L. 95-217).
Federal Grant: The United States government participation in the financing of
the construction of treatment works as provided for by title II grants for
construction of treatment works of the act and implementing regulations.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
Approving Authority: The superintendent of the department of public works.
City: The city of Spring Valley.
Ordinance: The ordinance codified herein.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
administrator or where appropriated by the director, after enactment of the
federal clean water act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
section 402 of the federal act.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
wall of the building, and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater,
storm, surface and ground water drainage.
Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the city.
It shall also include sewers within or outside the city boundaries that serve
one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary (or
combined) sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed
with city funds.
Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and ground waters or
polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage but
excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
Stormwater Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into the
sewers.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
Director: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
State Act: The Illinois anti-pollution bond act of 1970.
State Grant: The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois anti-pollution
bond act and for making such grants as filed with the secretary of state of the
state of Illinois.
TREATMENT:
Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution
control plant".
TYPES OF DISCHARGES:
Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer
system.
Capital Improvement Charge: Charges for costs other than the operation,
maintenance and replacement costs (i.e., debt service and capital improvement
costs).
Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of
interest, principal and coverage of loan, bond, etc., outstanding.
Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories
or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were
designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
Sewerage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received
in the operation of the sewerage system.
Surcharge: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt service
charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength
than the concentration values established in section
7-1-28 of this title.
Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated.
User Charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
Wastewater Service Charge: The charge per month levied on all users of the
wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in
section
7-1-28 of this title and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge,
the local capital cost and a surcharge, if applicable.
USER TYPES:
Commercial User: Transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places
engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are
discharged. Where feasible the manhole shall have an interior drop. The purpose
of a control manhole is to provide access for the city representative to sample
and/or measure discharges.
Industrial Users: Establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving
the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of substance into
products.
Institutional/Governmental User: Schools, churches, penal institutions, and
users associated with federal, state and local governments.
Residential User: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments,
permanent multi-family dwellings.
User Class: The type of user: residential, institutional/governmental,
commercial, or industrial as defined herein.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
BOD (Denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C) expressed in milligrams per
liter.
Effluent Criteria: Defined in any applicable "NPDES permit".
Floatable Oil: Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted
to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any
natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Major Contributing Industry: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment
works that: a) has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per
average workday; or b) has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow
carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; or c) has in its waste, a
toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section
307(a) of the federal act; or d) is found by the permit issuant authority, in
connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned
treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly
or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works
or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 gram of constituent in one thousand milliliters (1,000
ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per
million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of
water and wastewater analysis.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA "Division Of
Laboratories Manual Of Laboratory Methods".
Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.167 pound of BOD and 0.2
pound of suspended solids.
Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in any
dimension.
Sewage: Used interchangeably with "wastewater".
Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average
twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
Suspended Solids (SS): Solids that either float on the surface or, are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
may be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA "Division Of
Laboratories Manual Of Laboratory Methods".
Unpolluted Water: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria
in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality
standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and
wastewater treatment facilities provided.
Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it
may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present.
Water Quality Standards: Defined in the water pollution regulations of
Illinois.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
WATERCOURSE AND NATURAL OUTLET:
Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body
of surface or ground water.
Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
WORD USAGE: Clarification of word usage: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is
permissible. (Ord. 685, 2-6-1989)
7-2-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of sewage.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting
on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located or may in
the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is
hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after
date of official notice to do so, provided, that said public sewer is within
one hundred feet (100') of the property line. (Ord. 685, 2-6-1989)
7-2-3: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the city.
All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those
discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
federal act and more stringent state and local standards.
There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: a) residential
wastewater service, and b) commercial, institutional/governmental or industrial
wastewater service. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city.
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or
other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A
permit and inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a residential or
commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the
application is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization,
must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics, and type of activity.
A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only
be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities,
including sewers, pump station and wastewater treatment facilities, have
sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional
anticipated waste load.
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building;
except, where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and
no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
through the adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from
the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they
are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and
the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city. (In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society Of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual Of Practice No. 9" and "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois" shall apply.)
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains,
areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building
sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a
public sanitary sewer. Except as hereinafter provided, all persons having
existing connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains or building drains, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to
a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer as defined by this chapter, shall
disconnect same prior to January 1, 1983. (Ord. 685, 2-6-1989)
Any new building domestic waste connection shall be distinct from the building
inflow connection to facilitate disconnection if a storm sewer becomes
available.
Inflow sources on the combined sewer system shall be connected to a storm sewer
within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so if storm sewer
becomes available, provided that said storm sewer is within one hundred feet
(100') of the property line.
New construction tributary to the combined sewer system shall be designed to
minimize and/or delay inflow contribution to the combined sewer system. (Ord.
1075, 8-5-2002)
Where the owner or his agent can show that compliance with the foregoing
provisions would cause undue and unnecessary hardship of strictly adhering to,
and where because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site or
surrounding conditions, the city council may approve a variance upon petition
therefor, and upon the recommendations of the water and sewer committee of the
council after inspection of the site by said committee.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society Of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9", and "Standard Specifications For
Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent
or his representative.
All excavations for the building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (Ord. 685, 2-6-
1989)
7-2-4: USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a
natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent,
to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited
to, cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter (2 mg/l) as CN in the wastes
as discharged to the public sewer.
   (C)   Any wastes or waters having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream,
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
superintendent, in consultation with the city engineer, superintendent of
sewage treatment plant, and the county and state regulating agency, will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant,
degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other
pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F).
      2.   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
superintendent.
      4.   No discharge of mercury shall be permitted which, alone or in
combination with other sources, causes a violation of the water quality
standard of 0.0005 milligram per liter of Hg.
   (E)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
   (F)   No waste discharged to the municipal sewer system shall contain
detectable levels of cyanide at any time except as permitted below:
Any person desiring to discharge cyanide or cyanogen compounds to the municipal
sewer system shall apply for and procure approval from the municipality and
environmental protection agency.
Total cyanide shall not exceed ten milligrams per liter (10 mg/l), provided any
sample tested shall not release more than two milligrams per liter (2 mg/l) of
cyanide when tested at a pH of 4.5 and at a temperature of one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) for a period of thirty (30) minutes. Such discharges
shall be permitted only when the agency has determined that no violation of the
effluent criteria of 0.025 milligram per liter concentration (alone or in
combination with other sources) will result from such discharge.
   (G)   Any concentration of certain substances in the waste discharged to the
city sewers in excess of limits and standards as may be promulgated by the
United States environmental protection agency from time to time.
   (H)   Any substance listed in subsection (F) of this section or any other
substance not listed whose concentration can result in any of the following
conditions:
      1.   Decreased sewage plant treatment process efficiencies and degraded
effluent qualities exceeding the current requirements of the regulatory
agencies.
      2.   Concentrations of any toxic or objectable substances in the sewage
treatment plant effluent exceeding the current maximum limits established by
the regulatory agencies for such plant effluent flows.
      3.   Any concentrations of toxic or objectionable substances in plant
effluent flows which will result in concentrations of such substances in the
receiving waters which will exceed the regulatory agency's maximum allowable
limits for these substances in the receiving waters.
   (I)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
   (J)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life concentration as
may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
   (K)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
   (L)   Materials which exert or cause:
      1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
      2.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
      3.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
      4.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined in section
7-2-1 of this chapter.
   (M)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
All such persons not now in compliance with the aforesaid provisions of this
section shall be required to comply with same prior to January 1, 1972.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in this section, and/or which are in violation of
the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June 26, 1978, and any
amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the superintendent may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under provisions of this
chapter.
If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the superintendent, and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws of the city.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner, at his expense,
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analysis of water and
wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special conditions
for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge.
The number, type and frequency of laboratory analysis to be performed by the
owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but no less than once per year the
industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater
discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and local
standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and
laboratory analysis to the city at such times and in such a manner as
prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements,
analyses and reporting required by the city. At such times as deemed necessary
the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an
outside laboratory service.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24 hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from grab
samples.)
No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern.
(Ord. 685, 2-6-1989)
7-2-5: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct. (Ord. 685, 2-6-1989)
7-2-6: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. When required by
the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall, within ten (10) days of said request, provide
and deliver to the superintendent in written form, a narrative report
describing the processes undertaken upon said property, including, but not
limited to, metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries which may have a direct bearing on the kind, type, make up, and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this
section, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company
and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city
employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to
its property by city employees, and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
section
7-2-4 of this chapter.
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 685, 2-6-1989)
7-2-7: PENALTIES:
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except section
7-2-5 of this chapter, shall be served by the city with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The city may revoke
any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of
this chapter.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for
in this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof
shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable
to the city by reasons of such violation. (Ord. 685, 2-6-1989)
7-2-8: PERMIT SYSTEM:
It is accepted practice for those political entities using the permit system to
call for two (2) classes of permits:
   (A)   For residential and commercial building sewers, and
   (B)   For industrial sewer connections. (1972 Code)
7-2-9: INCORPORATION OF NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standard for a
particular industrial user, the said standard, if more stringent than the
limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that category, shall,
when effective, immediately supersede the limitations and conditions imposed
under this chapter and said standards shall be complied with by all industrial
users subject to each of said national categorical pretreatment standards.
(Ord., 6-17-1985)
7-2-10: EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE:
No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
national categorical pretreatment standards (NCPS) when effective, or in any
other pollutant specific limitations developed by the POTW. (Ord., 6-17-1985)
7-2-11: SPILL CONTAINMENT:
   (A)   Each industrial user having the ability to cause interference with the
POTW treatment plant or to violate the regulatory provisions of this chapter
shall provide protection from accidental discharge to the POTW or prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained
at the owner's or user's own cost and expense.
   (B)   All industrial users whose wastewater includes or could include
compatible or incompatible pollutants in amounts great enough to cause
interference with the POTW must have detailed plans on file at the POTW showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide protection from accidental
discharge. All industrial users shall complete construction of said facilities
by June 30, 1985. No industrial user who begins contributing to or could
contribute such pollutants to the POTW after the effective date of this chapter
shall be permitted to introduce such pollutants into the POTW until accidental
discharge facilities and procedures, as appropriate, have been approved by the
POTW and installed by the industrial user. Review and approval of such plans
and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of
this chapter.
   (C)   In the case of an accidental or deliberate discharge of compatible or
incompatible pollutants which may cause interference at the POTW or will pass
through the POTW or violate requirements of this chapter, it shall be the
responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the
POTW of the incident. The notification shall include name of caller, location
and time of discharge, type of wastewater, concentration and volume.
   (D)   Within fifteen (15) days following such an accidental or deliberate
discharge the industrial user shall submit to the POTW a detailed written
report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by
the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Follow up reports may be
required by the POTW as needed. Such report, or reports, shall not relieve the
industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to
person or property; nor shall such report relieve the user of any fines, civil
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or
otherwise.
Failure to report accidental or deliberate discharges will be considered a
violation of this chapter and the discharger will be subject to any fines,
civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or
otherwise.
   (E)   The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
includes the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
   (F)   A notice in English and the language of common use shall be
permanently posted in the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent
place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental or illegal
discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who are in a position to
cause, discover, or observe such discharge are advised of the emergency
notification procedures. (Ord., 6-17-1985)
7-2-12: COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Compliance Meeting: Should a violation of this chapter by an
industrial user occur, whether or not a significant user, the POTW shall notify
the offending user, in writing, as to the particulars of such violation or
violations and set a time and place for a meeting to be attended by
representatives of the POTW and the industrial user. The purpose of such a
meeting shall be to establish such procedures, investigations, studies and
compliance measures as the POTW deems necessary and desirable to control and
prevent violations of this chapter. The industrial user shall cooperate fully
with the POTW in making such investigations and studies.
   (B)   Compliance Requirements:
      1.   Following the completion of any procedures, investigations or
studies as described in subsection (A) of this section, the POTW may:
         (a)   Require compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements;
         (b)   Control the contribution to the POTW to ensure compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements;
         (c)   Require: 1) the development of a compliance schedule for the
installation of technology required to meet applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements and 2) the submission of all notices and self-monitoring
reports as are necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users
with pretreatment standards and requirements, including, but not limited to,
the reports required by 40 CFR section 403.12.
      2.   If the POTW has sufficient information at the time of the compliance
meeting to determine necessary and desirable compliance measures, it may, at
the time of the compliance meeting, issue a directive requiring the industrial
user to take such action, including pretreatment, without further investigation
or study.
      3.   Failure to comply with said directive shall be deemed a violation of
the chapter and may be grounds for such actions as may be authorized for
violation of this chapter. (Ord., 6-17-1985)
7-2-13: IMMEDIATE DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE:
   (A)   Conditions For Immediate Disconnection Of Service: Any industrial user
is subject to immediate disconnection of service under either of the following
conditions:
      1.   Whenever immediate disconnection is required to halt or prevent any
discharge of pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appears to the
superintendent to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons; or
      2.   Whenever the industrial user's IEPA wastewater discharge permit is
revoked.
   (B)   Procedures For Immediate Disconnection:
      1.   Notwithstanding section
7-2-12 of this chapter, the superintendent shall have the authority, after
informal notice to the industrial user, to immediately and effectively halt or
prevent any discharge of pollutants to the POTW that reasonably appears to
present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. When the
superintendent determines that such an emergency situation exists, he shall
issue a verbal order (followed immediately by a written order) to the
industrial user stating the problem and requiring immediate cessation of the
discharge. The superintendent's actions may include disconnection of wastewater
collection service. The superintendent shall obtain the concurrence of the POTW
attorney before initiating action. Methods of informal notice shall include,
but not be limited to, any of the following: personal conversation between the
industrial user and POTW employees, telephone calls, letters, hand delivered
messages or notices posted at the industrial user's premises or point of
discharge. (Ord., 6-17-1985)
7-2-14: ELIMINATION OF DISCHARGE/REINSTATEMENT:
Any industrial user notified of a disconnection of wastewater treatment service
under section
7-2-13 of this chapter and/or revocation of its IEPA wastewater discharge
permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a
failure of the industrial user to comply voluntarily with the disconnection or
revocation order, the POTW shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate blockage or severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW system or danger to any person. If the superintendent
exercises his authority under section
7-2-13 of this chapter, the superintendent shall reinstate the wastewater
treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge.
(Ord., 6-17-1985)
7-2-15: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
   (A)   The POTW may institute a civil action for an injunction to restrain
violations of this chapter.
   (B)   The POTW may, upon discovering an ongoing or potential discharge or
pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appears to present an imminent danger
to the health or welfare of persons, seek and obtain from the circuit court of
Bureau County a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction to halt
or prohibit such discharge. Prior to the filing of such petition, the
discharger shall be given informal notice of the POTW intention to file such
action. Methods of informal notice shall include, but not be limited to, any of
the following: personal conversation between discharger and the POTW employees,
telephone calls, letters, hand delivered message or notices posted at the
discharger's premises or point of discharge. Personal contact between the POTW
personnel and the discharger shall be attempted, but shall not be condition
precedent to POTW petitioning for and obtaining a temporary restraining order.
(Ord., 6-17-1985)
7-2-16: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
   (A)   In addition to remedies available to the POTW set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, if the POTW is fined by the state of Illinois or USEPA for
violation of the POTW NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as
the result of discharge of pollutants, then the fine, including all the POTW
legal, sampling, analytical testing costs and any other related costs shall be
charged to the responsible industrial user. Such charge shall be in addition
to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies the POTW may have under this
chapter, statutes, regulations, at law or in equity.
   (B)   If the discharge from any industrial user causes a deposit,
obstruction or damage to any of the POTW wastewater facility, the POTW shall
cause the deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to
be promptly repaired. The cost for such work, including materials, labor, and
supervision, shall be borne by the person or industrial user causing such
deposit, obstruction or damage.
   (C)   The remedies provided in this chapter shall not be exclusive and the
POTW may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by statute, at law or in
equity against any person or industrial user violating the provisions of this
chapter.
   (D)   In addition to any fine levied under section
7-2-7 of this chapter, the POTW may, where the circumstances of the particular
case so dictate, seek injunctive relief to prohibit the user from discharging
into the sanitary sewer system, or to provide such other affirmative relief as
may be appropriate. (Ord., 6-17-1985)
7-2-17: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
   (A)   Information and data relating to an industrial user obtained from
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs
and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agencies without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests,
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW, that the release of
such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user.
   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, and until such time
as the POTW determines that the requested information is not entitled to
confidential treatment, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental
agencies for uses related to this chapter, the national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) permit, and for use by the state or state agency in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person or industrial
user furnishing the report.
   (C)   Information and data provided to the POTW which is effluent data shall
be available to the public without restriction.
   (D)   Information claimed by an industrial user to be confidential shall not
be transmitted to the general public by the POTW until and unless a thirty (30)
day notification is given to the industrial user.
   (E)   The POTW shall implement measures to prevent the negligent release of
confidential information; however, neither the POTW nor its employees shall be
held legally responsible for release of information if they have acted in good
faith. (Ord., 6-17-1985)
7-2-18: FALSIFICATION:
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or wastewater discharge
permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall be subject to
the penalties and costs provided in section
7-2-7 of this chapter and shall in addition be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ord., 6-17-1985)
7-2-19: CONNECTION OF SANITARY OR WASTE SEWERS TO STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or
institution, public or private, to connect or cause to be connected, any drain
carrying, or to carry, any toilet, sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool,
industrial waste, or any fixture or device discharging polluting substances to
any open ditch, drain, or drainage structure installed solely for street or
highway drainage purposes in the city of Spring Valley.
   (B)   This section is intended to and shall be in addition to all other
ordinances, state statutes, rules, and regulations concerning pollution and
shall not be construed as repealing or rescinding any other ordinance or part
of any ordinance unless in direct conflict herewith. (Ord. 1192, 12-19-2005)
   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating this section shall be fined
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
for each and every day during which a violation continues to exist. (Ord. 1400,
11-10-2008)
CHAPTER 3
SEPTIC TANKS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Sewage Disposal Facilities Required
7-3-2: Permit Required
7-3-3: Type, Capacities, Location
7-3-4: Use Of Private Facilities
7-3-5: Septic Tanks; Capacity
7-3-6: Location; Construction Of Tank
7-3-7: Feeder Sewer Laterals; Construction Of
7-3-8: Backfill
7-3-9: Inspection
7-3-1: SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES REQUIRED:
Where a public sanitary (or combined) sewer is not available under the
provisions of section
7-2-2 of this title, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 686, 2-6-
1989)
7-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other
information as deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and inspection
fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid to the city at the time the
application is filed.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until
the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He
shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any
event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the
work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within seventy two (72) hours of the
receipt of written notice by the superintendent. (Ord. 686, 2-6-1989)
7-3-3: TYPE, CAPACITIES, LOCATION:
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the state of Illinois private sewage
disposal licensing act and code and with the state of Illinois environmental
protection agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet (1,394 square meters).
No septic tank shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. (Ord.
686, 2-6-1989)
7-3-4: USE OF PRIVATE FACILITIES:
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in section
7-2-2 of this title, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in
a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the city.
No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the local health officer.
When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to
said sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage disposal system shall
be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank run gravel or dirt. (Ord. 686,
2-6-1989)
7-3-5: SEPTIC TANKS; CAPACITY:
Any such premises not connected with a sanitary sewer system shall be equipped
with an adequate septic tank having a capacity of not less than five hundred
(500) gallons for each seven (7) persons living or working in excess of seven
(7); provided that the tank in any premises used for meeting purposes shall
have a capacity of not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons.
(1972 Code)
7-3-6: LOCATION; CONSTRUCTION OF TANK:
Each such tank shall be located at least twenty feet (20') from any building;
and shall be constructed of 12-gauge steel, monolithic concrete, or of brick or
concrete blocks adequately coated inside so as to be impervious to water.
Baffle shall be located from six inches to nine inches (6" - 9") away from the
inlet and outlet and must extend twelve inches (12") beneath the sewer level in
the tank. Each tank must be equipped with a manhole or similar suitably covered
opening to permit inspection or cleaning. (1972 Code)
7-3-7: FEEDER SEWER LATERALS; CONSTRUCTION OF:
The feeder sewer from the tank to the laterals of the disposal field shall be
constructed of vitrified bell and spigot tile with cemented joints and shall be
laid with a grade of one foot (1') per one hundred feet (100'); disposal field
tile shall be located at least seventy five feet (75') from any building used
for human habitation. No lateral shall be closer than five feet (5') from the
lot line. There shall be at least two hundred feet (200') of disposal field
tile, consisting of four inch (4") drain tile laid with open joints. Disposal
tiles shall be laid to a depth of not more than two feet (2') on a slope not to
exceed six inches (6") per one hundred feet (100'). (1972 Code)
7-3-8: BACKFILL:
Backfill in the trench under the tile shall be at least six inches (6") of
coarse gravel or crushed stone. Earth backfill shall be well tamped. (1972
Code)
7-3-9: INSPECTION:
No septic tank or any pipes leading to or from the same shall be covered unless
and until such tank and pipes have been inspected and found to be in compliance
with the provisions of this code and with the state laws pertaining thereto.
(1972 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GARBAGE
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Receptacles
7-4-3: Disturbing Receptacles
7-4-4: Dangerous Items
7-4-5: Garbage And Recycle Collection
7-4-6: Execution
7-4-7: Garbage System
7-4-8: Collection By City
7-4-9: Deposit Of Refuse Within Corporate Limits
7-4-10: Service Charge
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words “garbage”, “recyclable materials”, “recycling”, and “refuse” shall
have the following meanings:
 
                      Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
GARBAGE:              and consumption of food; wastes from the handling,
                      storage and sale of produce.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Newsprint, glass, household metals, plastics and other
                      materials as determined by the city and the contractor.
                      The use (collection, remanufacture, etc.) of secondary
RECYCLING:            materials as feedstock for the production of new
                      materials or products.
                      All wastes which normally result from the operation of a
REFUSE:               household, including all garbage, rubbish and bulky
                      wastes.
 
(Ord. 1893, 6-17-2024)
7-4-2: RECEPTACLES:
   The owner, occupant, or lessee of any premises in the city, upon which shall
accumulate any garbage or miscellaneous waste, shall be provided with two
receptacles furnished by Republic Services, one for garbage and one for
recyclable materials, and shall maintain such receptacles in good, clean
condition. Only household garbage, refuse, and recyclable materials shall be
collected in the containers furnished by Republic Services.
   The occupant, tenant, owner or his agent of any three-family residence or
larger as well as commercial buildings with attached apartments, and any
commercial or business refuse generators shall use dumpsters and the following
conditions shall be maintained by every occupant, tenant, owner or his agent of
said premises:
   (A)   Dumpsters must be of sufficient capacity to contain all garbage
between pickups.
   (B)   Dumpsters must be covered with close fitting covers, unless such
dumpsters contain no animal, vegetable or food wastes.
   (C)   Dumpsters used for disposal of large amounts of food wastes causing
foul, offensive or disagreeable odors shall be emptied at least two (2) times
per week.
   (D)   Dumpsters shall be: a) stable while empty or loaded; b) equipped for
mechanical dumping; c) durable; d) leakproof and vermin proof; and e)
maintained in good repair.
   Any person subject to the provisions of this section may file a written
request for exemption with the city clerk which shall be considered and acted
upon by the city council. Such request shall be based upon factual
circumstances which would make the application of the requirements an undue
hardship or burden upon the applicant, or otherwise demonstrate the
requirements to be inappropriate.
(Ord. 1893, 6-17-2024)
7-4-3: DISTURBING RECEPTACLES:
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the city garbage collector,
or the owner, occupant, lessee or person in possession of the premises, to
remove, displace, injure, deface, destroy, uncover or in any way or manner
disturb any receptacle of garbage or recyclable materials or any portion of its
contents.
(amd. Ord. 1893, 6-17-2024)
7-4-4: DANGEROUS ITEMS:
   No tin cans, bottles, broken glass, crockery, metalware or sharp edged
articles shall be wrapped in paper before depositing same into receptacles.
(1972 Code)
7-4-5: GARBAGE AND RECYCLE COLLECTION:
   The city shall provide for collection of garbage every Monday, provided that
when a holiday falls on a Monday, garbage will be collected on Tuesday.
   The city shall provide for collection of recyclables every other week.
Recyclables will be collected in one-half of the town one week and in the other
half of the town the following week in rotation.
(Ord. 1893, 6-17-2024)
7-4-6: EXECUTION:
When said contract is awarded by the council the same shall be executed by the
mayor on behalf of the city and attested by the city clerk. This chapter is
considered by the council to be a health measure. (1972 Code)
7-4-7: GARBAGE SYSTEM:
There is hereby established by this chapter a garbage system for the collection
and disposal of garbage for and in the city; and there shall be hereafter
maintained a garbage system for the collection and disposal of garbage within
the corporate limits of the city. (1972 Code)
7-4-8: COLLECTION BY CITY:
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from collecting, hauling and
disposing of garbage, refuse and ashes and miscellaneous waste during cleanup
periods designated by the city council, provided further that during said
cleanup periods the city council may suspend landfill charges for residents of
the city. (1972 Code)
7-4-9: DEPOSIT OF REFUSE WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS:
It shall be unlawful to deposit garbage or refuse excepting dirt, sand, and
gravel anywhere within the corporate limits of the city. Any person violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than one dollar
($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (1972
Code)
7-4-10: SERVICE CHARGE:
A service charge is hereby established pursuant to statute to be collected from
all single-family units, multiple-family dwellings, trailer courts and
commercial businesses within the corporate boundaries of the city for the
collection and disposal of garbage, whether said entities either use the
municipal scavenger service or use a private scavenger service as hereinafter
set forth.
   (A)   Single-Family Unit: A single-family unit shall include any single-
family residence, duplex residence, any trailer or mobile home, any multiple-
family apartment dwelling or similar structure having separately metered water
service for each dwelling unit regardless of whether the owner of said property
or trailer court has a contract with a private scavenger service to pick up
refuse.
   (B)   Multiple-Family Units: A multiple-family unit shall include duplexes
or apartment buildings having fewer separately metered water service
connections than dwelling units.
   (C)   Other Units: Other units include all commercial establishments having
individually metered water service regardless of whether said establishment has
a private contract with a scavenger service to pick up refuse which exceeds the
amounts required to be picked up under the terms of this section. (Ord. 1093,
11-18-2002)
   (D)   Rates:
      1.   Effective April 1, 2007, the following rates or service charges are
hereby established as reasonable charges to yield revenues for the city not in
excess of the cost of collecting and disposing of solid waste and an adequate
depreciation fund for the collection and disposal of garbage, refuse, ashes and
other solid wastes either within the corporate limits of the city or outside
thereof:
 
Single-family unit    $14.00 per month
Multiple-family units $14.00 per month for each dwelling unit not having
                      separately metered water service connection
Other units           $14.00 per month
 
(Ord. 1328, 3-26-2007; amd. Ord. 1436, 10-26-2009)
      2.   Except when a dumpster is provided by an apartment building, church,
school or multiple housing unit, the individual occupants or the owner of the
apartment building, church, school or multiple home unit may apply for an
exemption from the separate user fees for garbage for themselves and their
tenants, provided that the applicant has provided a dumpster approved by the
city and sufficient to store the garbage provided by the applicant. The
application for exemption shall be made to the city clerk for submission to the
city council prior to January 31 of each year.
(Ord. 1436, 10-26-2009)
   This service charge shall be payable monthly and charged to each single-
family unit on the monthly water bill. The owner of the premises, the occupant
thereof and the recipient of the service shall be jointly and severally liable
to pay for the service to such premises and the services furnished to the
premises by the city only upon this condition of joint and several liability.
All bills rendered hereunder shall be payable not later than the close of
business on the tenth day of the month next following the end of the monthly
period. If payment of the full amount of the bill is not made on or before the
tenth day of said month, then a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of
the charge shall be added thereto. Failure to pay the full amount of the
garbage charge for two (2) consecutive months shall also subject an individual
to a fine in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per month for each month that
the individual shall refuse to make the payment called for hereunder. Garbage
service may also be discontinued if the charges are not paid.
(Ord. 1328, 3-26-2007)
CHAPTER 5
NUISANCES
SECTION:
7-5-1: Nuisance Defined
7-5-2: Nuisance Prohibited
7-5-3: Nuisances Enumerated
7-5-4: Abatement Of Nuisances
7-5-5: Penalty
7-5-6: Unsolicited Advertising Materials
7-5-1: NUISANCE DEFINED:
It shall constitute a nuisance to commit any offense which is in fact a
nuisance or which is a nuisance according to the common law, or which is made
such by an ordinance of the city or the statutes of this state, and shall
include any act, occupation, or use of property or premises or equipment, or
structure of any kind which:
   (A)   Shall annoy, injure or endanger the safety or health of the public; or
   (B)   Shall offend public decency; or
   (C)   Shall unlawfully interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or
render, dangerous for passage, a public park, sidewalk, street, alley or
highway.
(Ord. 1757, 7-15-2019)
7-5-2: NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a nuisance, or to permit a
nuisance to continue under his control, or to fail to abate any nuisance after
notification or recognition of its existence.
(Ord. 1757, 7-15-2019)
7-5-3: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
Any one or more of the following acts or omissions shall be deemed to be and
are hereby declared nuisances:
   (A)   An act which shall unlawfully interfere with, obstruct or tend to
object or render dangerous for passage, a public park, square, street, alley or
highway.
   (B)   All diseased animals running at large.
   (C)   Obstructing any gutter or watercourse so as to cause water to stagnate
therein, or to permit foul or stagnant water to stand upon any premises.
   (D)   Carcasses of animals, or any part thereof not buried or destroyed
within twenty-four (24) hours after death.
   (E)   To cause, permit or suffer any garbage or offensive substance of any
kind to be collected, deposited or remain in any place in the city other than
as prescribed in the garbage, refuse and debris regulations of the City of
Spring Valley.
   (F)   All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by
fire, decay or otherwise to an extent exceeding one-half their current market
value which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public, and which
are not actively being repaired.
   (G)   All dangerous or unsanitary, unguarded, unprotected machinery or
equipment in any public place, or situated or operated on private property.
   (H)   All infestations of flies, fleas, roaches, lice, ticks, rats, mice,
fly maggots, mosquito larvae, rodents, insects, vermin and pest birds.
   (I)   To pollute or render unwholesome or impure the public water supply.
   (J)   To permit the growth upon any premises of any noxious plants (as
defined by the State of Illinois).
   (K)   To construct or maintain any building or structure which is an
unsanitary, unsafe or dangerous condition, or to maintain or permit any
building or part thereof to be or remain in an unsanitary condition by reason
of the basement or cellar being damp or wet or the floor of such basement or
cellar being covered with stagnant water, or by reason of any presence of sewer
gas, or which by reason of any other unsanitary, unsafe or dangerous condition
endangers the health or safety of any person.
   (L)   To cause, permit or allow, the deposit of any bird/animal manure,
excrement, dead animal or other filthy, offensive substance or any lot, street,
alley or other place.
   (M)   To cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney,
engine, oil burner or any other source so as to cause annoyance or discomfort
to the residents thereof.
   (N)   The use of "barbed wire" for fencing or screening of any type in a
residentially zoned district.
   (O)   To establish, maintain or carry on any offensive or unwholesome
business including the sale or illicit distribution of pornographic or illegal
drug related materials.
   (P)   To place graffiti in public view (graffiti defined as any sign,
symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram, sketch, picture or
letter).
   (Q)   To allow graffiti to remain on any building, wall or structure on real
property.
   (R)   Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such
sources as storage areas, yards, roads, and the like shall be kept to a minimum
by landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing, cutting of weeds or other appropriate
means.
   (S)   It shall be unlawful to cause or to knowingly permit the emission of
objectionable or hazardous odors in such quantities as to be readily detectable
to any average observer at any point on the boundary line of any premises or
beyond.
   (T)   It shall be unlawful for any person to lease or permit to remain
outside of dwelling, building or other structure, or within any occupied or
abandoned dwelling, or other structure under his control, in a place accessible
to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or
other container which has an airtight door or lid, snaplock, or other locking
device which has not been removed from said icebox, refrigerator or container.
   (U)   It shall constitute a nuisance to allow any building foundation or
excavation to remain open and unclosed for a period in excess of thirty (30)
days. Such an excavation or foundation may be filled in by order of the Spring
Valley City Council after said thirty (30) day period.
   (V)   It shall constitute a public nuisance if any building used for
residential purposes does not have a clean, potable and adequate supply of
running water.
   (W)   To keep, use or maintain any stable, chicken yard, lot, building or
premises in which any horse, cattle, hogs, sheep, or other animals or fowl may
be confined in such a manner as to omit a nauseous, foul or offensive odor,
except on land zoned agricultural under the Spring Valley Illinois Land
Development Code.
   (X)   To place or deposit or permit to be accumulated on any premises any
heap of filth or manure in such a manner as to omit a nauseous, disagreeable or
offensive smell to the annoyance or detriment of family, nor place or deposit
any manure or the contents of any privy vault in or upon any public street,
alley or other public place or upon or along the bank of any ravine within the
City.
   (Y)   To place, erect or maintain any obstruction in or across any water
course, stream, brook or ravine so as to cause water to stand and to stagnate
therein, nor to place or deposit therein any nauseous or offensive matter or
any stone, earth, straw, hay, manure or other article or substance, or to by
any means dam up or obstruct any sewer, drain or gutter.
   (Z)   To keep any nauseous, foul, offensive or putrid liquid, or to permit
any such liquid to be discharged, placed, thrown or to flow from or out of any
premises onto or upon any adjacent premises or any public street or alley.
   (AA)   To permit any person to sleep or remain in any cellar or place
dangerous or prejudicial to health by reason of one of ventilation, drainage or
because of dampness, or by reason of the presence of any poisonous, nauseous or
offensive substance or otherwise.
   (BB)   To feed stray animals, if the act of feeding stray animals causes
animals to congregate on any property, whether public or private, and if the
number of stray animals annoys, injures or endangers the safety or health of
the public or offends public decency, or interferes with any property owners
quiet enjoyment and use of their property.
The foregoing acts or omissions are intended to illustrate specific actions
deems to constitute nuisances, but any act or omission which meets the
definition of "nuisance" as defined in section
7-5-1 shall be deemed a nuisance even if not specifically enumerated herein.
(Ord. 1757, 7-15-2019)
7-5-4: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
The following procedures shall apply to the abatement of nuisances:
   (A)   Notice: It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, Building
Inspector or other designated authority, commissioned by the Mayor and City
Council, to serve notice, in writing, upon the owner, occupant, agent or person
in possession or control of any lot, building or premises in or upon which any
nuisance may be found or who may be the owner or cause of any such nuisance
requiring him/her to abate the same in such manner as prescribed, within a
reasonable amount of time. It shall not be necessary in any case for the Chief
of Police, Building Inspector or other designated authority to specify in his/
her notice the manner in which any nuisance shall be abated, unless he/she
deems it advisable to do so. Such notice may be given or served by any officer
who is so directed.
   (B)   Failure To Comply With Notice: If the person referred to in the
preceding subsection notified accordingly shall refuse or neglect to comply
with such notice within the time and in the manner specified, the Chief of
Police, Building Inspector or other designated authority shall cause the
summary abatement of such nuisance at the expense of the party responsible for,
or permitting the same, and they shall be subject to the penalties as provided
for in Chapter 5, Nuisances, of Title 7, Health and Sanitation of the Spring
Valley City Code.
   (C)   Procedure When Responsible Person Is Unknown: Whenever the owner or
person in possession, charge or control of premises, in or upon which any
nuisance may be found is unknown and cannot be found, the Chief of Police,
Building Inspector, or other designated authority shall proceed to abate such
nuisance without notice.
   (D)   Collection of Expenses: In either case provided by the two (2)
preceding subsections, the expense of such abatement shall be collected from
the person who may have created, continued or suffered such nuisance to exist.
(Ord. 1757, 7-15-2019)
7-5-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the nuisance provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than five hundred
($500.00) dollars for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 1664, 2-13-2017; amd. Ord. 1757, 7-15-2019)
7-5-6: UNSOLICITED ADVERTISING MATERIALS:
   (A)   Classification Of Printed Materials: There are hereby designated
classes of printed material as follows:
      1.   First Class Printed Matter: Printed matter of the first class
includes religious, political and literary handbills, cards, circulars, sheets,
pamphlets and other printed matter of like character and nature.
      2.   Second Class Printed Matter: Printed matter of the second class
includes mercantile, advertising handbills, card circulars, sheets, pamphlets,
shopping news and other printed matter of a like character and nature.
      3.   Third Class Printed Matter: Printed matter of the third class
includes all other circulars and literature such as obscene, lewd, immoral and
destructive circulars and literature of like nature.
   (B)   Exceptions:
      1.   Transmitted Or Delivered Materials: Nothing herein contained shall
be construed as interfering with or legislating against newspapers, magazines,
pamphlets, periodicals, and other printed matter transmitted and delivered in
the following manner:
         (a)   Through the United States mail.
         (b)   By the parcel post system.
         (c)   Delivered by carriers to the premises of persons who have
lawfully subscribed for the same or by other legal means not contrary to the
provisions of this section.
      2.   Posting Notices: The posting of legal notices of the Police
Department, election notices and all notices authorized by law shall be
excluded from the operation of this section.
      3.   Certain Signs And Billboards: Nothing herein shall be construed as
interfering with or legislating against billboards and advertising signs where
the parties have lawfully entered into a contract or have obtained consent of
the owner of the premises to carry on such business and engage in such
activity.
   (C)   First Class Printed Matter:
      1.   Distribution Regulations: First class printed matter intended to
disseminate knowledge, intelligence and education may be distributed, passed
out and circulated freely within the City, subject to the following rules and
regulations:
         (a)   Such handbills, cards, circulars, sheets, pamphlets and other
printed matter mentioned aforesaid may be distributed by hand and delivered to
persons (who shall respectively be called receivers and acceptors if they
accept the same), but in no case shall such handbills, cards, circulars,
sheets, pamphlets and other printed matter referred to be dropped loosely or
scattered by the distributor, receiver or acceptor in and upon any squares,
streets, alleys, parks, public grounds or in public buildings, so as to litter
the squares, streets, alleys, parks, public grounds and public buildings.
         (b)   Provided that at meetings, assemblages, gatherings, educational,
religious, political and literary, and at business or mercantile demonstrations
and exhibitions, circuses, shows, theaters and business places, such materials
may be passed around freely in and around the premises to persons attending
such affairs.
      2.   Breach Of Peace; Littering: The distributors and circulators of
first class printed matter, by their conduct and actions in the distribution
and circulation of same, shall not disturb the peace or cause a riot and shall
not blockade, obstruct or congest any streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public
places which are crowded with vehicles and pedestrians, so as to interfere with
the flow of traffic on such streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public places and so
as to interfere with the free passage of pedestrians on such streets, alleys,
sidewalks, and public places; nor shall such distributors and circulators,
receivers and acceptors of same, throw, drop or scatter about such handbills,
circulars, pamphlets and other printed matter so as to litter such streets,
alleys, sidewalks and public places.
      3.   License Or Fee Not Required: No license fee of any kind shall be
paid or permission of any kind shall be necessary for the distribution of
printed matter of the first class in the City.
   (D)   Second Class Printed Matter:
      1.   Distribution Regulations: No printed matter of the second class
shall be dropped or scattered in or about the streets, alleys, sidewalks,
parks, public grounds or other places, public or private, in the City, at any
place or at any time, and no such printed matter shall be deposited in and upon
a gangway, parkway, yard, sidewalk, basement, garage, porch (rear or front),
stairway, doorstep, alcove, enclosure, or other room of any private building,
nor shall such printed matter be placed or deposited or stuck behind any door,
under any door or any doorbell, on a door knob or transom, or on a door handle
or window, or under window ledges, or in crevices, cracks or apertures between
doors or otherwise, unless:
         (a)   With the permission and consent obtained from the owner,
landlord, tenant or occupant of the premises that such printed matter herein
referred may be placed, deposited or stuck behind any door, under a door or
doorbell, on a door knob or transom, or on a door handle or window, or under
window ledges, or in crevices, cracks or apertures between doors or otherwise.
If the distributor of second class printed matter observes that previously
distributed second class printed matter remains on the property from previous
distributions of second class printed matter, this fact shall be deemed to be
notice to the distributor of second class printed matter that permission and
consent to receive second class printed matter has been revoked by either the
owner, landlord, tenant, or occupant of the premises.
         (b)   The distributor or circulator of the same can show by proper
written authority that the owner, landlord, tenant or occupant of the premises
has legally subscribed for or permitted the delivery of the same to the
premises.
         (c)   The owner, landlord, tenant or occupant of the premises shall
have on the premises an appropriate container, receptacle or box (other than a
mailbox) for the deposit and delivery of the same, where same may be delivered
and deposited. The presence of such receptacle, container or box being on the
premises shall be construed as consent and invitation on the part of the owner,
landlord, tenant or occupant to allow the deposit and delivery in the
container, receptacle or box of such printed matter. Such printed matter shall
not be pasted, affixed, attached, nailed to, or tied by string, rubber bands,
wire or otherwise to any window, door, telegraph, telephone, or trolley pole,
electric wire pole, police or fire alarm box, fence, garage, bridge, viaduct or
to any refuse box or container, on any part of any sidewalk, street or alley,
park, or public grounds in the City.
      2.   Certificate Granting Permission: In addition to the requirements of
subsection (D)1 of this section, no person shall distribute any printed matter
of the second class without first having obtained from the Clerk a certificate
in writing granting said person permission to distribute printed matter of the
second class in conformity with the provisions of this section. No certificate
shall be issued or renewed to any person who has been convicted of violating
any of the provisions of this section or of a felony, or to any person of ill
repute, or to any person whose hands are infected with a skin disease of any
kind that is contagious.
      3.   Distributor's Badge: Upon issuance of this certificate, the person
shall receive a distributor's badge which will be displayed on the person of
such distributor at all times while he is distributing printed matter of the
second class. The certificate issued shall identify the distributor and his
employer, if any, and shall designate the territory to be traversed and the
dates and hours of the distribution.
   (E)   Unlawful Matter: It shall be unlawful, and the same is hereby
prohibited, for any person to distribute, circulate, possess, pass out, deliver
and deposit any obscene, lewd or immoral literature whatsoever or any
literature or writing which advocates the destruction of the democratic form of
government, the overthrow of the Federal or State Constitution, the destruction
of freedom of religion and which advocates any unlawful conduct or the
commission thereof, or any printed matter known as printed matter of the third
class, at any time or at any place within the limits of the City.
   (F)   Distributing Into Vehicles: Dropping circulars, handbills and other
printed matter of any class into passenger automobiles, trucks, taxis,
commercial or mercantile vehicles, whether parked or in motion, and attaching,
affixing, placing and sticking same on any part of passenger automobiles,
trucks, taxis, commercial or mercantile vehicles is hereby strictly forbidden
and prohibited by persons other than the owner, at any time and place within
the limits of the City; provided, the owner and possessor of any kind of motor
vehicle is not prohibited from furnishing, displaying or decorating in his own
private motor vehicle with any cards, signs, placards and the like that may
suit him, for the promotion of his safety, pleasure and business as long as the
same shall not violate any provisions of this Code and State laws.
   (G)   Penalty: Any individual or business found to be violating the
provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for the first offense, a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the second offense and
a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the third and subsequent offense.
(Ord. 1664, 2-13-2017; amd. Ord. 1757, 7-15-2019)
CHAPTER 6
CONTAGIOUS DISEASES
SECTION:
7-6-1: Report Required
7-6-2: Quarantine
7-6-3: Spreading Contagion
7-6-4: Deliveries To Quarantined Premises
7-6-5: Penalty
7-6-1: REPORT REQUIRED:
Every physician called in to care for or treat a person afflicted with a
contagious disease or any epidemic disease shall make a report of the same
within twenty four (24) hours after being called in to the health officer. In
case no physician is in attendance, it shall be the duty of the person in
charge or having the care of such person to make a report within twenty four
(24) hours from the time the disease is recognized. (1972 Code)
7-6-2: QUARANTINE:
The health officer shall have charge of the enforcement of the quarantine
rules. He shall have the power and authority to place any premises within which
a contagious or epidemic disease occurs under quarantine, and the health
officer shall determine the time when the quarantine ends. (1972 Code)
7-6-3: SPREADING CONTAGION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to spread, wilfully or carelessly, any
contagious disease or to so cause the spread of the same. (1972 Code)
7-6-4: DELIVERIES TO QUARANTINED PREMISES:
No person engaged in the delivery of food or drink intended for human
consumption shall enter any premises which are quarantined because of the
existence of a contagious or epidemic disease. No containers or bottles shall
be removed from any such premises until the termination of the quarantine; and
no such container which has been left at such premises during the quarantine
shall be placed in use for carrying food or drink until it has been thoroughly
sterilized. (1972 Code)
7-6-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or violating any of the
reasonable rules of the health officer with regard to quarantined premises, or
disturbing or disregarding any notice of quarantine placed by or under the
direction of the health officer shall be fined not less than five dollars
($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 7
WEEDS
SECTION:
7-7-1: Weeds Prohibited; Certain Height
7-7-2: Notice Of Violation
7-7-3: Fine For Violation
7-7-4: Abatement
7-7-5: Filing Of Lien
7-7-6: Foreclosure Of Lien
7-7-1: WEEDS PROHIBITED; CERTAIN HEIGHT:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants or
underbrush other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants to grow
to a height exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in the city; and such plants
or underbrush or weeds exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a
nuisance. (1972 Code)
7-7-2: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to serve or cause to be served a notice
upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants are
permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this chapter and to demand
the abatement of the nuisance within seven (7) days. The notice which the city
clerk sends out shall be an ongoing notice and shall indicate that any further
excessive growth of weeds or plants in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a continuing nuisance and the notice shall be a demand
for the abatement of the nuisance within seven (7) days from the date on which
the weed growth constitutes a further nuisance. (Ord., 8-5-1985)
7-7-3: FINE FOR VIOLATION:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within seven (7) days, the
person shall be fined a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first
offense; for all subsequent offenses, the fine shall be increased in increments
of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per offense up to a maximum fine of five
hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 747, 7-15-1991)
7-7-4: ABATEMENT:
If the person so served fails to abate the nuisance within seven (7) days, the
superintendent of public works may proceed to abate such nuisance keeping an
account of expenses of such abatement including labor and equipment charges
based upon the prevailing wage rate paid to any city employee assigned to work
in abating the aforesaid nuisance and the prevailing rental rate of any
equipment used by the city in conjunction with such abatement. (Ord., 6-16-
1980)
7-7-5: FILING OF LIEN:
In event of failure to pay the fee as provided herein within thirty (30) days,
the city clerk may file with the county clerk and the recorder of Bureau
County, Illinois, a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the
legal description of the premises upon which the nuisance was abated and the
amount of unpaid charges as provided under section
7-7-6 of this chapter. (Ord., 6-16-1980)
7-7-6: FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay
the charges after deducting costs, as in the case of foreclosure of statutory
liens. Such foreclosure shall be an equity proceeding filed in the circuit
court of Bureau County in the name of the city. (Ord., 6-16-1980)
CHAPTER 8
OTHER HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-8-1: Unwholesome Food
7-8-2: Sanitary Regulations
7-8-3: Watercourses
7-8-4: Fowl
7-8-5: Premises
7-8-6: Acts
7-8-7: Serving Food
7-8-8: Nuisance; Abatement
7-8-9: Spitting
7-8-10: Dense Smoke
7-8-11: Penalty
7-8-12: Notice Of Violation
7-8-13: Abatement
7-8-14: Enforcement Of Lien
7-8-1: UNWHOLESOME FOOD:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any unwholesome or polluted food
or drink of any kind in the city. (1972 Code)
7-8-2: SANITARY REGULATIONS:
All premises used in the sale or storage of food or drink intended for human
consumption shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be
unlawful to permit any person who is afflicted with a contagious disease to
handle any food or drink intended for sale. Premises shall be kept free from
flies and vermin of all kinds. (1972 Code)
7-8-3: WATERCOURSES:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or pollute any
watercourse or source of water supply in the city. (1972 Code)
7-8-4: FOWL:
Any person permitting the running at large of chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks
or other like fowl shall be deemed and taken as a public nuisance, and any
person who shall allow any chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks or like fowl to run
at large, or who shall not keep the same yarded, or otherwise confined, or who
shall permit any such fowl to stray upon the premises of another, to the
annoyance of the owner or occupant of such premises shall be deemed guilty of
maintaining or creating a public nuisance. (1972 Code)
7-8-5: PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful to permit any building, structure or place to remain in
such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health in any way. Any such
structure, building or place is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1972 Code)
7-8-6: ACTS:
It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the public health
or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public. (1972 Code)
7-8-7: SERVING FOOD:
Utensils for personal use in all places serving food or drink to the public
shall be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized after each such usage. (1972 Code)
7-8-8: NUISANCE; ABATEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any
nuisance on any property under his control. The chief of police and the health
officer are each hereby authorized to abate any such nuisances existing in the
city whether such nuisances are specifically recognized by ordinance or not.
(1972 Code)
7-8-9: SPITTING:
It shall be unlawful to spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk or street or
other public place, or on the floor or walls of any store, theater, hall,
public vehicle or other place frequented by the public or to which the public
is invited. (1972 Code)
7-8-10: DENSE SMOKE:
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any
fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or any other agency in the city so as to
cause annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof.
For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann
smoke chart as published and used by the United States geological survey shall
be and is hereby adopted as a standard for such grading, and smoke shall be and
is hereby defined as and declared to be "dense" when it is of a degree of
density of number three (3) of the said chart, or greater, for more than six
(6) minutes in any one hour; whether such period of time is consecutive or not.
(1972 Code)
7-8-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each and
every day during or on which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue.
(1972 Code)
7-8-12: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to serve or cause to be served,
by mail, upon the owner or lienholders of record of the real estate in question
a written notice demanding that the building be repaired to a safe condition or
demolished. If, after fifteen (15) days, neither the owner nor any of the
lienholders of record have repaired or demolished the building, the city
council may authorize the municipal attorney to apply to the circuit court of
Bureau County for an order authorizing the city to demolish, repair, cause
demolition or repair of any dangerous, unsafe, uncompleted or abandoned
buildings. Where, upon diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of the
owner or owners of any such building or the lienholders of record are not
ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or persons in whose name such real
estate was last assessed is sufficient notice under this section. (Ord., 7-1-
1985)
7-8-13: ABATEMENT:
After obtaining authority from the circuit court of Bureau County the city may
proceed to demolish or repair any such building and the cost of such demolition
or repair incurred by the city shall be recoverable from the owner or owners of
such real estate, said cost being a lien upon the real estate. This lien is
superior to all prior existing liens and encumbrances, except taxes. The city
clerk shall be directed to file a lien within sixty (60) days after such repair
or demolition for the cost and expense incurred by the city in the office of
the recorder of deeds of Bureau County. (Ord., 7-1-1985)
7-8-14: ENFORCEMENT OF LIEN:
The lien provided for in this chapter may be enforced by proceedings to
foreclose the lien as in the case of a mortgage or mechanics' lien. This
foreclosure action shall be commenced in accordance with the provisions of
Illinois law. Any action to foreclose a lien under this chapter must be
commenced within three (3) years after the date of filing the notice of lien in
the Bureau County recorder of deeds office. (Ord., 7-1-1985)
CHAPTER 9
TREES
SECTION:
7-9-1: Tree Disease; Public Safety
7-9-2: Preservation And Removal Authority
7-9-3: Notice Of Violation
7-9-4: Fine
7-9-5: Abatement
7-9-1: TREE DISEASE; PUBLIC SAFETY:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit the growth of trees that have become
a threat to public safety through weather, age or disease; and further such
trees are declared to be a nuisance. (Ord., 6-16-1980)
7-9-2: PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL AUTHORITY:
The superintendent of public works shall have the authority and it shall be his
duty to order the trimming, preservation or removal of trees or plants upon
private property when he shall find such action necessary to public safety or
to prevent the spread of disease or insects to public trees and places. (Ord.,
6-16-1980)
7-9-3: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to serve or cause to be served a notice
upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which such trees be found in
violation of the provisions of this chapter and to demand the abatement of the
nuisance. (Ord., 6-16-1980)
7-9-4: FINE:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within seven (7) days, such
owner shall also be fined a minimum of ten dollars ($10.00) and a maximum of
fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each offense; and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which such nuisance continues
unabated after seven (7) days from receipt of notice. (Ord., 6-16-1980)
7-9-5: ABATEMENT:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within seven (7) days, the
city or someone directed by the city may remove such nuisance and assess the
cost thereof against the owner of the premises and the amount of such cost
shall be paid by the owner to the city. (Ord., 6-16-1980)
CHAPTER 10
OPERATION OF AND APPLICATION FOR GROUNDWATER WELLS
SECTION:
7-10-1:    Use Of Groundwater
7-10-2:    Dewatering
7-10-3:    Other Permit Obligations
7-10-1: USE OF GROUNDWATER:
   (A)   Prohibited Without A Permit: No person owning, leasing, occupying, or
having charge or possession of any property in the city shall extract
groundwater from the basin for beneficial use, as that term is defined pursuant
to Illinois law, unless:
      1.   On the effective date of this section, there is a groundwater
extraction well on the property that has been in operation within the previous
three (3) years and for which filings have been made pursuant to Illinois Water
Code within that three-year period; or
      2.   The person has obtained prior approval from the city by applying for
an obtaining a groundwater use permit, in accordance with this article.
   (B)   Permit Procedures: The director of public works may issue groundwater
use permits in accordance with section
14-11-19.
   (C)   Permit Application: In addition to any other information required by
section
14-11-19 and any other information the city building inspector may deem
necessary in order to determine whether a groundwater use permit should be
issued, an application for a groundwater use permit shall include all of the
following information:
      1.   The applicant's name and address;
      2.   The location of the property for which a groundwater use permit is
sought, including the street address and assessor's parcel number(s);
      3.   A description of the legal interest the applicant has in the
property (e.g., owner, lessee, renter) and the name and address of the owner of
the property if the applicant is not the owner;
      4.   A description of the groundwater extraction well(s) to be used as
the source of the groundwater supply, including:
         (a)   Whether the well(s) are already in existence or will be drilled
or constructed in the future; and
         (b)   Whether a well permit was issued for drilling or construction of
the well(s), according to Section
14-11-19, and a copy of any permit thus issued.
      5.   A detailed description of the proposed beneficial use of groundwater
by the applicant, including the place of use, purpose of use (i.e., domestic,
irrigation, power, frost protection, municipal mining, industrial, fish and
wildlife preservation and enhancement, recreational, water quality, stock
watering, heat control, or other type of use according to state law), manner of
use, season of use, and maximum and average quantities of use on annual and
gallons-per-minute bases.
   (D)   Standards For Permit Issuance: The city building inspector may issue a
groundwater use permit if he or she finds that the application is for a
reasonable and beneficial use of water, the applicant has applied for water
service from the City, and the city has declined to offer water service to the
applicant in lieu of the applicant's use of groundwater, use of the groundwater
would not be injurious to public health based on the quality of the water, and
the applicant has satisfied the general criteria of Section
14-11-19.
   (E)   Reporting Requirement: Any groundwater use permit shall be conditioned
upon the permittee's reporting the amount of groundwater extracted and used as
required by the director of public works.
   (F)   Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit: The city building inspector may
revoke or suspend a groundwater use permit in accordance with Section
8-11-11, or if the permittee does not use any groundwater or report any
groundwater usage for a period exceeding two (2) years. (Ord. 1846, 7-5-2022)
7-10-2: DEWATERING:
   (A)   Prohibited Without A Permit: No person owning, leasing, occupying, or
having charge or possession of any premises in the city shall cause the
dewatering of the basin or the basin drainage area, by the extraction,
diversion, transportation, or movement of water from, through or across the
premises, unless the person has obtained prior approval from the city by
applying for and obtaining a dewatering permit, in accordance with this
article. This requirement applies to all dewatering, including any dewatering
commenced prior to the effective date of this section, for which all
responsible parties shall apply for a permit within six (6) months of enactment
of this chapter.
   (B)   Use In Lieu Of Dewatering: Unless impracticable, all persons shall
place all extracted groundwater to reasonable and beneficial use rather than
causing the dewatering of the basin. For purposes of this section,
"impracticable" shall mean technically infeasible or requiring the expenditure
of a greater amount than the replenishment fee described in subsection (G)
below. The beneficial purposes to which extracted groundwater may be placed
include:
      1.   Recharging the groundwater to the basin;
      2.   Placing the groundwater to reasonable and beneficial use on the
property, including irrigation or other nonpotable use, subject to the
permitting requirements of Section
14-11-19; or
      3.   Delivering the groundwater to the city for treatment and use by the
City, including the design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair, and
replacement of all facilities necessary for conveyance of the water to the
city's water treatment plant, at no cost to the City.
   (C)   Permit Procedures: The city building inspector may issue dewatering
permits in accordance with Section
14-11-19.
   (D)   Permit Application: In addition to any other information required by
Section
14-11-19 and any other information the city building inspector may deem
necessary in order to determine whether a dewatering permit should be issued,
an application for a dewatering permit shall include all of the following
information:
      1.   The applicant's name and address;
      2.   The location of the property on which dewatering will occur;
      3.   A description of the legal interest the applicant has in the
property (e.g., owner, lessee, renter) and the name and address of the owner of
the property if the applicant is not the owner;
      4.   A detailed description of the purpose or purposes for which the
dewatering is proposed. Such description shall include:
         (a)   The activity or activities that will necessitate the dewatering
of the basin;
         (b)   The method by which the dewatering will be affected;
         (c)   The estimated duration of the dewatering, including beginning
and ending dates;
         (d)   The estimated amount of water that will be dewatered from the
basin, including the amount estimated to be dewatered daily;
         (e)   A statement that the dewatering site is in compliance with all
federal, state, and local laws and regulations;
      5.   A declaration that the applicant shall pay to the City the
replenishment fee described in subsection (G) below.
   (E)   Standards For Permit Issuance: The city building inspector may issue a
dewatering permit if it finds that the alternatives described in subsection (B)
above in lieu of dewatering are impracticable, and the applicant has satisfied
the general criteria of Section
14-11-19.
   (F)   Permit Conditions: Any dewatering permit shall be conditioned upon the
permittee's reporting the amount of groundwater dewatered as required by the
city building inspector and paying the replenishment fee described in
subsection (G) below.
   (G)   Replenishment Fee: In the event that the recharge of dewatered
groundwater to the basin is impracticable, the permittee shall pay to the City
an annual fee based upon the cost of replacing the dewatered groundwater, as
recommended by the city building inspector and determined by the City Council.
The fee may be set based upon either direct or in-lieu replenishment of the
basin by the City and may account for the treatment of water or stranded
capital facilities of the City, at the discretion of the City Council. The
amount of dewatered groundwater subject to the fee shall be measured or
estimated by the permittee according to a method approved by the city building
inspector.
   (H)   Persons owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of
any R-1 property in the City that have, as of the effective date of this
section, a valid National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit
are exempt from the requirements of Section
14-11-19.
   (I)   Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit: The city building inspector may
revoke or suspend a dewatering permit in accordance with Section
14-11-19. (Ord. 1846, 7-5-2022)
7-10-3: OTHER PERMIT OBLIGATIONS:
Compliance with this chapter does not relieve an applicant of the
responsibility to maintain all required federal, state and county permits for
the discharge of water and drilling of wells. (Ord. 1846, 7-5-2022)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS, UTILITIES AND SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Supervision
8-1-2: Construction
8-1-3: Bond
8-1-4: Specifications
8-1-5: Injury To Pavements
8-1-6: Repairs
8-1-7: Defects
8-1-8: Obstruction
8-1-9: Barricades
8-1-10: Disturbing Barricades
8-1-11: Private Use
8-1-12: Encroachments
8-1-13: Drains
8-1-14: Poles Or Wires
8-1-15: Gas Pumps
8-1-16: Openings
8-1-17: Barbed Wire Fences; Electric Current Fences
8-1-18: Deposits On Streets
8-1-19: Deposits On Sidewalks
8-1-20: View At Corners
8-1-21: Sidewalk And Outdoor Dining Permits
8-1-22: Penalty
8-1-1: SUPERVISION:
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways shall be under the
supervision of the superintendent of public works. He shall have supervision
over all work thereon, and the cleaning thereof, and shall be charged with the
enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to such public places (except
traffic ordinances) and is hereby authorized to enforce such ordinances. (1972
Code)
8-1-2: CONSTRUCTION:
It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public street,
sidewalk, alley or other public way or to repair the same without having first
secured a permit therefor. Application for such permit shall be made to the
clerk and shall state the location of the intended pavement or repair, the
extent thereof, and the person or firm who is to do the actual construction
work. No such permit shall be issued except on order of the mayor and city
council. (1972 Code)
8-1-3: BOND:
Each applicant shall file a bond in the amount of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) with sureties to be approved by the mayor and city council
conditioned to indemnify the city from any loss or liability or damage
resulting from the work undertaken or the manner of doing the same. (1972 Code)
8-1-4: SPECIFICATIONS:
All street and sidewalk pavement shall be made in conformity with the
specifications laid down from time to time by the mayor and council. (1972
Code)
8-1-5: INJURY TO PAVEMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon or injure
any newly laid street or alley pavement while the same is guarded by a warning
sign or barricade or to knowingly injure any street, sidewalk or alley
pavement. (1972 Code)
8-1-6: REPAIRS:
All public streets, alley and sidewalk pavement shall be in good repair. Such
repair work, whether done by the city or the abutting owner, shall be under the
supervision of the superintendent of public works. (1972 Code)
8-1-7: DEFECTS:
It shall be the duty of every city officer or employee becoming cognizant of
any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk or any obstruction thereof to
report the same to the superintendent of public works as soon as possible.
(1972 Code)
8-1-8: OBSTRUCTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any
obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way except as may be
specifically authorized by ordinance or by the superintendent of public works.
(1972 Code)
8-1-9: BARRICADES:
Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other
public place or making any excavation in any such place shall maintain suitable
barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work.
Such barricades shall be protected by suitable and sufficient electric battery
operated flashing lights. Such lights shall be kept burning from twilight in
the evening through the night. Flares, lanterns, "bombs" or other devices using
a flame shall not be permitted.
Defects in pavement shall be barricaded to prevent injury, and any person
properly maintaining an opening or excavation in such place shall guard such
opening or excavation while the same remains open, by proper barricades and
lights described in the preceding paragraph of this section. (1972 Code)
8-1-10: DISTURBING BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights
lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or opening in
any public street, alley or sidewalk. (1972 Code)
8-1-11: PRIVATE USE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other public
place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to write or
mark any signs or advertisements on any such pavement. (1972 Code)
8-1-12: ENCROACHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches upon any public street or property. (1972 Code)
8-1-13: DRAINS:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or alley. (1972
Code)
8-1-14: POLES OR WIRES:
It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires
over any public place, street, alley or other public way without having first
secured permission from the mayor and council. (1972 Code)
8-1-15: GAS PUMPS:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or erect any gasoline pump or tank in any
public street, alley or sidewalk. (1972 Code)
8-1-16: OPENINGS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any
public street or alley or sidewalk or other public place without a permit from
the mayor and city council.
All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong
cover or railing to the approval of the superintendent of public works. (1972
Code)
8-1-17: BARBED WIRE FENCES; ELECTRIC CURRENT FENCES:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or
part of barbed wire or with any similar materials designed to cause injury to
persons or any wire charged with electrical current, anywhere within the city
except to protect industrial property in which case, barbed wire must be at
least six feet (6') above sidewalk and extend inward of property. (1972 Code)
8-1-18: DEPOSITS ON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any material which may be harmful
to the pavement thereof or any waste material or any glass or other articles
which may cause injury to any person, animal or property.
Coal or other materials may be deposited in streets preparatory to delivery for
use, provided, that such deposit does not reduce the usable width of the street
or roadway at that point to less than eighteen feet (18'), and provided that
such material or coal other than material used in actual building construction
shall not be permitted to remain in such street for more than three (3) hours.
Any such material or coal shall be guarded by lights if the same remains upon
any street after nighttime. (1972 Code)
8-1-19: DEPOSITS ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk any material which may
be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or
other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals or property.
Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks preparatory to
delivery, providing that the usable width of the sidewalk is not thereby
reduced to less than four feet (4'); and provided that no such article shall
remain on such walk for more than one-half (1/2) hour. (1972 Code)
8-1-20: VIEW AT CORNERS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain or permit to remain any fence or
other structure, or any bushes or other plants, on a corner lot within fifty
feet (50') of the street line, which obstructs the view, at a height of more
than five feet (5') above the level of the adjacent street pavement.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than
five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which such obstruction to view is permitted to remain after notice from the
police department or any official of the city to remove the same. (1972 Code)
8-1-21: SIDEWALK AND OUTDOOR DINING PERMITS:
   Subject to the provisions of this section, businesses desiring to provide
outdoor dining facilities for their customers in the 100 and 200 blocks of East
and West St. Paul Street can obtain a permit from the Spring Valley city
council upon compliance with the following conditions:
   (A)   Sidewalk dining permits shall only be issued for business
establishments serving food in the 100 and 200 blocks of East and West St. Paul
Street in the city of Spring Valley.
   (B)   Outdoor dining shall only be allowed in front of the business
establishment requesting a permit and shall only be allowed subject to the
conditions contained in this section.
   (C)   Before a permit for outdoor dining is approved by the Spring Valley
city council, the business requesting the outdoor dining permit must submit an
application to the city of Spring Valley and the application must contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
      1.   The applicant’s name and address. If the applicant is a corporation,
the applicant shall identify a manager and state the name and address of its
manager;
      2.   The address where the outdoor dining will be located;
      3.   A photograph and description of the outdoor dining furniture (tables
and chairs) to ensure sufficient design and quality so as to harmonize and
improve the aesthetic appearance of the 100 and 200 blocks of East and West St.
Paul Street. Plastic outdoor furniture or furniture not designed for outdoor
uses will not be permitted;
      4.   A site plan depicting the location of the outdoor dining tables must
be submitted which establishes that the location of the outdoor dining tables
will be in compliance with the special design elements adopted by the Illinois
Department of Transportation for sidewalk construction and compliance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act; and
      5.   Proof of insurance including a certificate of insurance evidencing
the existence of a general liability insurance policy issued to the applicant
with minimum per person liability limits of not less than five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) and minimum aggregate liability limits of not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
      6.   Outdoor benches are allowed; they must be of sufficient design and
quality so as to harmonize the aesthetic and appearance of the 100 and 200
blocks of East St. Paul Street and West St. Paul Street. A photograph and
description of the outdoor bench(es) should be submitted to the City Clerk for
counsel consideration.
   (D)   Any permits issued to an applicant pursuant to this section will be
limited to outdoor dining during the time period from ten o’clock (10:00) A.M.
to ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. from April 1 to November 1 of each year.
   (E)   Alcoholic beverages may be served or consumed in the outdoor dining
area, but at all times must remain within the permitee’s outdoor dining area or
establishment.
   (F)   The applicant must provide sufficient trash receptacles for refuse and
smoking materials or in the alternative the applicant will be required to
remove any trash in the outdoor dining area and dispose of the trash as part of
the applicant’s business.
   (G)   Any applicant requesting a permit for outdoor dining must remove all
furniture and receptacles used for outdoor dining after any measurable
snowfall.
   (H)   Any applicant requesting a permit for outdoor dining shall pay a fifty
dollar ($50.00) annual fee for the outdoor dining permit and the outdoor dining
permit must be renewed on March 1 of each year and each applicant must pay an
additional fifty dollar ($50.00) yearly fee upon the issuance of a renewal
permit.
   (I)   The city of Spring Valley reserves the right to rescind any outdoor
dining permits issued pursuant to this section, if the applicant violates any
of the provisions of this section or if the applicant fails to promptly dispose
of trash or any other unconsumed food left by patrons using the outdoor dining
facilities.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
8-1-22: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(1972 Code; amd. Ord. 1622, 10-12-2015)
CHAPTER 2
DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Permit Required
8-2-2: Fee
8-2-3: Grade Surface
8-2-4: Specifications
8-2-5: Repair
8-2-6: Penalty
8-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles across any sidewalk in the
city without first having obtained a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the city clerk and shall be
accompanied by the fee required. (1972 Code)
8-2-2: FEE:
The fee for all such construction permits shall be one dollar ($1.00), and an
annual fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be paid by every person maintaining such
driveways for the habitual or continuous use of persons other than the owners
or occupants of the premises to which it leads. (1972 Code)
8-2-3: GRADE SURFACE:
No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a steep, sharp
depression or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade shall be nearly as
possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. It shall be unlawful to
have the surface finish of any driveway where the same crosses the sidewalk
constructed of such materials as to render it slippery and hazardous to
pedestrians, or to have the grade of such portion vary from the grade of the
sidewalk or be other than level. (1972 Code)
8-2-4: SPECIFICATIONS:
Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications adopted by the city council. (1972 Code)
8-2-5: REPAIR:
It shall be the duty of the person maintaining a driveway to keep the same in
good repair where it crosses the sidewalk, and free from obstruction and
openings. (1972 Code)
8-2-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 3
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Permit Required
8-3-2: Applications
8-3-3: Issuance
8-3-4: Fees
8-3-5: Barricades And Lights
8-3-6: Manner Of Excavating
8-3-7: Sidewalks
8-3-8: Time Limits
8-3-9: Restoring Surface
8-3-10: Supervision
8-3-11: Exemptions
8-3-12: Penalty
8-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to tunnel under or to make any excavation
in any street, alley or other public place in the city without having obtained
a permit as is herein required or without complying with the provisions of this
chapter or in violation of or in variance from the terms of any such permit.
(1972 Code)
8-3-2: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for such permits shall be made to the clerk and shall describe the
location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose
therefor, and the person doing the actual excavating work, and the name of the
person for whom or which the work is being done, and shall contain an agreement
that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the
work to be done. (1972 Code)
8-3-3: ISSUANCE:
No such permit shall be issued except on order of the mayor and city council.
(1972 Code)
8-3-4: FEES:
The fee for such permits shall be ten dollars ($10.00). A cash deposit of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be made with each such application to ensure
replacement of the surface in its original condition, to be returned when the
work has been completed in accordance with the terms of the permit. (1972 Code)
8-3-5: BARRICADES AND LIGHTS:
Any person making or maintaining any excavation in any street or alley shall
keep the same adequately guarded by barricades and lights as provided for in
section
8-1-9, "Barricades", of this title. (1972 Code)
8-3-6: MANNER OF EXCAVATING:
It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way contrary
to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper bracing shall
be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground; and in excavations
the excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface any portion which
extends beyond the opening at the surface.
No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making of such
excavations or tunnels; and notice shall be given to the persons maintaining
any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the city department or officer charged
with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or affected by the making
of any such excavation or tunnel before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be
disturbed.
No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or the roots
thereof. (1972 Code)
8-3-7: SIDEWALKS:
If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for
users. (1972 Code)
8-3-8: TIME LIMITS:
Each applicant for a permit shall state the length of time it is estimated will
elapse from the commencement of the work until the restoration of the surface
of the ground, or until the refill is made ready for the pavement to be put by
the city if the city restores such surface pavement. It shall be unlawful to
fail to comply with this time limitation unless permission for an extension of
time is granted by the mayor and city council. (1972 Code)
8-3-9: RESTORING SURFACE:
Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public street, alley
or public place in the city shall restore the surface thereof to its original
condition if there is no pavement there. Refills shall be properly tamped down
and any bracing in such tunnel or excavation shall be left in the ground.
Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be repaired and
the surface relaid by the applicant, in compliance with the provisions of this
code and subject to the supervision of the superintendent of public works and
if such work is not done within ten (10) days after restoration is possible,
the city may restore the surface and charge the cost thereof to the permittee.
(1972 Code)
8-3-10: SUPERVISION:
The superintendent of public works shall from time to time inspect all
excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley or
other public place in the city to see to the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter. Notice shall be given to him at least ten (10) hours before the
work of refilling any such excavation or tunnel commences. (1972 Code)
8-3-11: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter relative to securing permits shall not apply to
officers or employees of the city engaged in doing work for the city, nor to
persons or corporations which are operating under a franchise or grant from the
city if such franchise provides for the making of excavations and tunnels
without securing a permit therefor. (1972 Code)
8-3-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SIGNS AND AWNINGS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Permits
8-4-2: Insurance
8-4-3: Temporary Permits
8-4-4: Construction
8-4-5: Permit Period
8-4-6: Height Above Walk
8-4-7: Inspection
8-4-8: Penalty
8-4-1: PERMITS:
No person shall erect or maintain any sign, signboard or rigid canopy over or
upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way or public property in the
city without having first obtained a permit therefor as herein provided, and
subject to provisions of the city land development code 1 . Permits for signs,
canopies or signboards shall be issued by the city clerk after approval of the
petition therefor by the city council and shall designate the location of the
proposed structure.
No permit shall be issued for the placement or erection of any such sign which
shall be deemed to interfere with the public safety or as may be in violation
of the ordinances of the city or the statutes of the state of Illinois. (Ord.,
1-20-1986; amd. Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 14 of this code.
8-4-2: INSURANCE:
Each person maintaining such a sign shall file with the city clerk a copy of
the person's or entity's present liability insurance policy establishing that
said person or entity has liability insurance in an amount not less than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00). (Ord., 1-20-1986)
8-4-3: TEMPORARY PERMITS:
Temporary permits may be issued for the maintenance of a temporary sign for a
short period of time not to exceed three (3) weeks. (Ord., 1-20-1986)
8-4-4: CONSTRUCTION:
All signs and canopies extending over any public sidewalk, street, alley or
other public place must be securely fastened or constructed so that there will
be no danger of the same being dislodged by ordinary winds or falling from
other cause. (1972 Code)
8-4-5: PERMIT PERIOD:
The period for which permits required by this chapter shall run shall be the
same as the general license year. (1972 Code)
8-4-6: HEIGHT ABOVE WALK:
The lowest part of any such canopy, sign or of any nonrigid awning or any
support thereof which extends over any public way shall be at least ten feet
(10') above the level of the walk or public way over which it extends; but no
sign shall be maintained over any public way used by vehicles if any part of
its support or of the sign is less than fifteen feet (15') above the level of
such public way. (1972 Code)
8-4-7: INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of the property owner to request the building inspector
annually during the month of May to inspect every sign, canopy or awning under
the owner's control located on public property or which extends over any
sidewalk, street, alley or other public way. If any such sign or canopy is
found to be insecurely fastened or placed, the building inspector shall report
this fact to the owner of the sign or to the owner or occupant of the premises
on which it is fastened. If the sign or canopy is not made secure within ten
(10) days after such notice, it may be torn down on the order of the mayor and
city council.
If at any time the building inspector determines, with the concurrence of the
chief of police, that any such sign interferes with the public safety or is in
violation of the ordinances of the city, the building inspector shall give
notice of his said findings to the person who has installed or placed said
sign, directing the immediate removal thereof and failure to remove said sign
shall constitute a violation of this title. (Ord. 585, 6-18-1984)
8-4-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with
any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 5
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Planting
8-5-2: Removals
8-5-3: Injury
8-5-4: Advertisements And Notices
8-5-5: Dangerous Trees
8-5-6: Wires
8-5-7: Gas Pipes
8-5-8: Excavations
8-5-9: Penalty
8-5-1: PLANTING:
It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or shrub in any public street or parkway
or other public place without first having secured a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the city clerk and shall be
referred by him to the mayor and city council of the city. All trees and shrubs
so planted shall be placed subject to the directions of the superintendent of
public works. (1972 Code)
8-5-2: REMOVALS:
It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub in any street,
parkway or other public place without having first secured a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the city clerk and shall be
referred by him to the mayor and city council for approval before permission
shall be granted. (1972 Code)
8-5-3: INJURY:
It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in any such public
place. (1972 Code)
8-5-4: ADVERTISEMENTS AND NOTICES:
It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or
shrub in any street, parkway or other public place. (1972 Code)
8-5-5: DANGEROUS TREES:
Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in
the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel on such
public place shall be trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises on which
such tree or shrub is located so that the obstruction shall cease.
Any limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any public way
or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree or
shrub grows or stands. (1972 Code)
8-5-6: WIRES:
It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or other rope to any tree without
permission of the mayor and city council.
Any person or company given the right to maintain poles and wires in the
streets, alleys or other public ways in the city shall in the absence of
provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles
free from and away from any trees or shrubs in such place so far as may be
possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed and subject
to the supervision of the superintendent of public works, so that no injury
shall be done to the poles or wires or shrubs and trees by contact. (1972 Code)
8-5-7: GAS PIPES:
Any person maintaining any gas pipe in the city shall, in the absence of a
provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such pipes free from
leaks. (1972 Code)
8-5-8: EXCAVATIONS:
In making excavations in streets or other public places proper care shall be
taken to avoid injury to the roots of any trees or shrub wherever possible.
(1972 Code)
8-5-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC PARKS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Public Parks Designated
8-6-1: PUBLIC PARKS DESIGNATED:
There shall be authorized and established and hereafter maintained the
following public parks located within the City: City Park, Kirby Park, Savitch
Park, Baltikowski Park, Knol Park, Pederzani Park, Casford Park, Coal Miners
Park, Spring Valley Mini Park, City Hall Park, Foley Field, Barto Landing, and
Coveny Veteran's Memorial Pool, as well as the bump outs on the 100 and 200
blocks of East and West St. Paul Street, and any other lands which the City
shall hereafter acquire or lease for park purposes. (1972 Code; amd. Ord. 1921,
7-2-2025)
CHAPTER 7
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND GRADES
SECTION:
8-7-1: Cost Of Construction
8-7-2: Sidewalks To Conform
8-7-3: Datum Plane Established
8-7-4: Grades Established
8-7-1: COST OF CONSTRUCTION:
All sidewalks constructed within the city along or upon any street or alley,
unless otherwise especially ordained, shall be constructed subject to special
assessment as provided by law; provided, however, that any property owner may
construct or replace an existing sidewalk at his own expense subject to
approval of the city council. (1972 Code)
8-7-2: SIDEWALKS TO CONFORM:
No person shall construct any sidewalk where no grade has been established by
the council, without having first obtained a grade therefor from the engineer,
or contrary to any grade given by the engineer; nor shall he construct any
sidewalk contrary to any grade which may have been or may hereafter be
established. (1972 Code)
8-7-3: DATUM PLANE ESTABLISHED:
The datum plane of all grade elevations in the city is hereby declared to be a
concrete footing at the northeast leg of the water tower situated east of the
Spring Valley City Hall, elevation six hundred ten and forty five hundredths
feet (610.45'). (1972 Code)
8-7-4: GRADES ESTABLISHED:
The grade elevations shall be fixed with reference to the datum plane
hereinbefore established and are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this chapter as if set out at length herein, copies to be kept on file in the
office of the city engineer. (1972 Code)
ARTICLE A. SIDEWALK REPAIR PROGRAM
SECTION:
8-7A-1: Program Adopted
8-7A-2: Eligible Sidewalks
8-7A-3: Prioritizing Sidewalks
8-7A-4: Reimbursement
8-7A-5: Sidewalk Construction Application
8-7A-6: Time Frame For Completion Of Repair Work
8-7A-7: Allocation Of Funds
8-7A-8: Approved Work Not Done Due To Insufficient Funds
8-7A-9: Property Owner Responsibilities
8-7A-1: PROGRAM ADOPTED:
The city of Spring Valley hereby adopts a sidewalk repair and replacement
program which shall be administered in accordance with the procedures set forth
in this article. (Ord. 1569, 6-23-2014)
8-7A-2: ELIGIBLE SIDEWALKS:
The aldermen of the Spring Valley city council shall survey the sidewalks in
their ward and shall designate sidewalks within each ward which are deemed to
be either unsafe or eligible for repair reimbursement. Those sidewalks, or any
portion of a sidewalk, deemed by the public health and safety committee of the
city of Spring Valley to be unsafe shall be replaced and the entire cost to
replace an unsafe portion of sidewalk will be paid by the city of Spring
Valley. Those sidewalks deemed to be eligible for repair reimbursement will be
subject to repair reimbursement pursuant to the repair reimbursement provisions
of this article. (Ord. 1569, 6-23-2014)
8-7A-3: PRIORITIZING SIDEWALKS:
In determining which sidewalks are deemed to be unsafe, the Spring Valley
public health and safety committee shall meet and prioritize those sidewalks
deemed by the city of Spring Valley to be unsafe. In reaching this
determination, the Spring Valley city council shall consider the following
factors: a) the extent to which the sidewalk in question is in need of repair;
b) the amount of pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk; and c) any other factors
which the Spring Valley public health and safety committee deems to be
appropriate in prioritizing sidewalks for repair under the Spring Valley
sidewalk program. (Ord. 1569, 6-23-2014)
8-7A-4: REIMBURSEMENT:
The Spring Valley city council, through the Spring Valley public health and
safety committee, shall also determine and classify those sidewalks which are
deemed by the city of Spring Valley to be eligible for repair reimbursement. If
the city of Spring Valley determines that either an entire sidewalk or a
portion of a sidewalk is eligible for repair reimbursement, the city of Spring
Valley will reimburse the adjacent property owner for the cost incurred by the
adjacent property owner for the concrete used to repair all or that portion of
the sidewalk deemed eligible for repair reimbursement. The city of Spring
Valley will reimburse the adjacent property owner for the cost of the concrete
used to repair all or that portion of the sidewalk deemed eligible for repair
within thirty (30) days after the city of Spring Valley receives a paid receipt
from the business supplying the concrete or the contractor performing the
repair work which specifically itemizes the cost of the concrete. The adjacent
property owner must also submit to the city of Spring Valley proof that all
costs associated with the sidewalk repair have been paid by adjacent property
owner to qualify for reimbursement from the city of Spring Valley. (Ord. 1569,
6-23-2014)
8-7A-5: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION APPLICATION:
In order for a sidewalk to be deemed eligible for repair reimbursement by the
city of Spring Valley, the adjacent property owner must complete the sidewalk
construction application and return the sidewalk construction application to
the Spring Valley city clerk's office. The Spring Valley building inspector
will review the sidewalk construction application and make an on site
inspection to determine whether all or a portion of the sidewalk is eligible
for repair reimbursement from the city of Spring Valley. The building inspector
will forward his recommendations to the Spring Valley public health and safety
committee. The building inspector's recommendations will be reviewed by the
public health and safety committee and the recommendations of the public health
and safety committee will be forwarded to the Spring Valley city council for
final approval. After final approval by the Spring Valley city council the
adjacent property owner will be notified, in writing, by the city of Spring
Valley as to what portion of the sidewalk is eligible for repair reimbursement
under the terms of this article. (Ord. 1569, 6-23-2014)
8-7A-6: TIME FRAME FOR COMPLETION OF REPAIR WORK:
Any adjacent property owner submitting a sidewalk construction application to
the city of Spring Valley must complete the repair work and provide
documentation to the city of Spring Valley that all costs associated with the
sidewalk repair have been paid within forty five (45) days of approval of the
sidewalk construction application. Any adjacent property owner submitting a
sidewalk construction application who does not complete the work and provide
the city of Spring Valley with documentation that all costs associated with the
sidewalk repair have been paid within forty five (45) days shall forfeit their
entitlement to receive reimbursement from the city of Spring Valley. For good
cause shown, the Spring Valley city council may extend the forty five (45) day
period, if the adjacent property owner provides the city of Spring Valley with
a written request to extend the forty five (45) day repair period set forth in
this article. (Ord. 1569, 6-23-2014)
8-7A-7: ALLOCATION OF FUNDS:
The city of Spring Valley will allocate funds to the sidewalk repair program on
an annual basis by no later than May 15 of each year. After the city of Spring
Valley makes its allocation, the city of Spring Valley will notify the public
that it is accepting sidewalk construction applications from adjacent property
owners who wish to take advantage of the concrete reimbursement for those
sidewalks deemed to be eligible for repair reimbursement by the city of Spring
Valley.
If the city of Spring Valley receives more sidewalk construction applications
requesting funds for concrete reimbursement than the amount of money allocated
by the city of Spring Valley for sidewalk repair, the Spring Valley public
health and safety committee shall prioritize the sidewalk construction
applications which the public health and safety committee recommends to the
Spring Valley city council for approval based upon a decision by the public
health and safety committee as to which sidewalks are most in need of repair.
(Ord. 1569, 6-23-2014)
8-7A-8: APPROVED WORK NOT DONE DUE TO INSUFFICIENT FUNDS:
If an adjacent property owner submits a sidewalk construction application to
the city of Spring Valley which is approved by the Spring Valley city council,
but the construction work is not performed prior to November 1 of the year in
which the sidewalk construction application was submitted to the city of Spring
Valley and approved by the city of Spring Valley due to insufficient funds in
the sidewalk repair program, the adjacent owner must submit a new sidewalk
construction application to the city of Spring Valley after the city of Spring
Valley allocates additional funds to the sidewalk repair program in May of the
following fiscal year. (Ord. 1569, 6-23-2014)
8-7A-9: PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES:
Any repair or replacement of sidewalks pursuant to this article must comply
with all of the requirements of the Americans with disabilities act and any
other applicable Spring Valley city ordinances dealing with sidewalk
construction. The adjacent property owner is responsible for replacement of any
sod or grass disturbed or removed in the construction process. The adjacent
property owner must contact the building inspector after the sidewalk has been
repaired to inspect the construction work. An adjacent property owner will not
be eligible for repair reimbursement under the terms of this article until the
Spring Valley building inspector inspects the sidewalk repair and advises the
city of Spring Valley that the sidewalk has been repaired in accordance with
the provisions of this article and all other applicable Spring Valley municipal
ordinances. (Ord. 1569, 6-23-2014)
CHAPTER 8
HOUSE NUMBERING
SECTION:
8-8-1: Numbering Required
8-8-2: Designation Of Numbers
8-8-1: NUMBERING REQUIRED:
All lots and parts of lots lying within the corporate limits of the city are
hereby ordered numbered by the owners or occupants thereof in the manner
hereinafter set forth. (1972 Code)
8-8-2: DESIGNATION OF NUMBERS:
   (A)   All buildings fronting on streets running north and south, north of
St. Paul Street, shall be numbered from south to north, commencing at St. Paul
Street as the baseline; and all buildings fronting on streets running north and
south, south of St. Paul Street shall be numbered from north to south
commencing at St. Paul Street as the baseline, except as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   All buildings fronting on streets running east and west, east of
Spalding Street, shall be numbered from west to east, commencing at Spalding
Street as the baseline; and all buildings fronting on streets running east and
west, west of Spalding Street, shall be numbered from east to west commencing
at Spalding Street as the baseline, except as hereinafter provided.
   (C)   Each platted lot shall be allotted a street number with one hundred
(100) numbers assigned to each platted block. Even numbers shall be allotted
lots on the north side of a street and on the west side of the street, while
odd numbers shall be allotted lots on the south side of the street and on the
west side of the street.
   (D)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Glenn's Addition,
Nelsons' First Addition, and Nelson's Second Addition, additions comprising
what is commonly known as Webster Park, with the baseline being designated as
Oak Street and Nelson Avenue.
   (E)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in H.J. Miller's Addition
and Smith Miller's Addition, with Ladd Road and Northwestern Street designated
as the baseline.
   (F)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to Dalzell's Fourth Addition with
Marquette Road and Dakota Street designated as the baseline.
   (G)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Sobieski Park with
Marquette Lane and Ravine Lane designated as the baseline.
   (H)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Briarcliff Subdivision,
same to be identical to the lot numbers of said lots.
   (I)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Cambridge Subdivision,
same to be identical to the lot numbers of said lots.
   (J)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Cambridge Second
Subdivision, same to be identical to the lot numbers of said lots.
   (K)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Century Oaks
Subdivision, same to be identical to the lot numbers of said lots.
   (L)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Deerpath Subdivision,
same to be identical to the lot numbers of said lots.
   (M)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Glenn's Grove, same to
be identical to the lot numbers of said lots.
   (N)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Reinke's Addition, same
to be identical to the lot numbers of said lots.
   (O)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Bernal's Subdivision,
same to be identical to the lot numbers of said lots.
   (P)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Sunset Farms
Subdivision, same to be identical to the lot numbers of said lots.
   (Q)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Wolfer's Grove
Subdivision, same to be identical to the lot numbers of said lots.
   (R)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Willow Trail
Subdivision, same to be identical to the lot numbers of said lots.
   (S)   Separate numbers shall be assigned to lots in Oak Grove Subdivision,
same to be identical to the lot numbers of said lots. (1972 Code; amd. Ord.
1921, 8-4-2025)
CHAPTER 9
PUBLIC UTILITIES
SECTION:
8-9-1: Franchises
8-9-2: Transmission Lines
8-9-1: FRANCHISES:
The city council may grant or renew public utility franchises provided that the
granting or renewal of said franchise shall not exceed a period of ten (10)
years. (1972 Code)
8-9-2: TRANSMISSION LINES:
All electrical, telephone and television transmission lines and cables
hereafter erected, constructed and extended over or upon any property in the
city as provided by franchise including any street, alley or public way to
serve any subdivision within the city not heretofore receiving electrical,
telephone or television transmission services, shall be placed underground.
(1972 Code)
CHAPTER 10
ELECTRIC AGGREGATION
SECTION:
8-10-1: Aggregation Program
8-10-2: Plan Of Operation
8-10-1: AGGREGATION PROGRAM:
   (A)   The corporate authorities of the city hereby are authorized to
aggregate in accordance with the terms of the act 1  residential and small
commercial retail electrical loads located within the corporate limits of the
city, and for that purpose may solicit bids and enter into service agreements
to facilitate for those loads the sale and purchase of electricity and related
services and equipment.
   (B)   The corporate authorities of the city are granted the authority to
exercise such authority jointly with any other municipality or county and, in
combination with two (2) or more municipalities or counties, may initiate a
process jointly to authorize aggregation by a majority vote of each particular
municipality or county as required by the act.
   (C)   The aggregation program for the city shall operate as an opt out
program for residential and small commercial retail customers.
   (D)   The aggregation program shall be approved by a majority of the members
of the corporate authority of the city.
   (E)   The corporate authorities of the city with the assistance from the
Illinois power agency shall develop a plan of operation and governance for the
aggregation program and shall conduct such public hearings and provide such
public notice as required under the act. The load aggregation plan shall
provide for universal access to all applicable residential customers and
equitable treatment of applicable residential customers, shall describe demand
management and energy efficiency services to be provided to each class of
customers and shall meet any requirements established by law concerning
aggregated service offered pursuant to the act.
   (F)   As an opt out program, the corporate authorities of the city shall
fully inform residential and small commercial retail customers in advance that
they have the right to opt out of the aggregation program. The disclosure and
information provided to the customers shall comply with the requirements of the
act.
   (G)   The electric aggregation shall occur automatically for each person
owning, occupying, controlling, or using an electrical load center proposed to
be aggregated in the corporate limits of the city, subject to a right to opt
out of the program as described under this chapter and the act.
   (H)   The corporate authorities hereby grant the mayor or his designee in
writing the specific authority to execute a contract without further action by
the corporate authorities and with the authority to bind the city. (Ord. 1506,
6-4-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 3855/1-92.
8-10-2: PLAN OF OPERATION:
The corporate authorities hereby adopt the electrical power aggregation plan of
operation and governance as set forth in exhibit A attached to the ordinance
codified herein and made a part hereof as if fully set forth by this reference.
(Ord. 1506, 6-4-2012)
CHAPTER 11
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
8-11-1: Purpose; Scope
8-11-2: Definitions
8-11-3: Annual Registration Required
8-11-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
8-11-5: Action On Permit Applications
8-11-6: Effect Of Permit
8-11-7: Revised Permit Drawings And GPS Locations
8-11-8: Insurance
8-11-9: Indemnification
8-11-10: Security
8-11-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
8-11-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
8-11-13: General Construction Standards
8-11-14: Traffic Control
8-11-15: Location Of Facilities
8-11-16: Construction Methods And Materials
8-11-17: Vegetation Control
8-11-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
8-11-19: Clean-Up And Restoration
8-11-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
8-11-21: Variances
8-11-22: Enforcement
8-11-23: Penalty
8-11-24: Severability
Appendix A: Tree Trimming Permit Application Form
Appendix B: Right-Of-Way Permit Application Form
8-11-1: PURPOSE; SCOPE:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the city's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city
rights-of-way and the city as a whole.
   (B)   Intent: In enacting this chapter, the city intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the city and, in particular, the use of the
public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
city's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the city's residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
      10.   Ensure efficient and safe use of public spaces by preventing
simultaneous work by two (2) or more applicants that could lead to operational
conflicts and jeopardize public safety.
   (C)   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The city, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require certain utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the city
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the city enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this
chapter, to the extent authorized by applicable law.
   (E)   Effect of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. To the extent
authorized by applicable law and in the event that a utility other than a
telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with
the city, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control
during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers. To the extent authorized by applicable
law and in the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or
similar agreement between the city and any telecommunications provider, the
provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and
control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension
thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (H)   Sound Engineering Judgment: The city shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the city so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city
to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term not
defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
ASHTO:                                 American association of state highway
                                       and transportation officials.
ANSI:                                  American national standards institute.
APPLICANT:                             A person applying for a permit under
                                       this chapter.
ASTM:                                  American society for testing and
                                       materials.
BACKFILL:                              The methods or materials for replacing
                                       excavated material in a trench or pit.
                                       To excavate an underground cylindrical
BORE or BORING:                        cavity for the insertion of a pipe or
                                       electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR:                        That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522
                                       (5).
CABLE SERVICE:                         That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522
                                       (6).
CABLE SYSTEM:                          That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522
                                       (7).
CARRIER PIPE:                          The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or
                                       slurry to be transported.
                                       A structural protective enclosure for
CASING:                                transmittal devices such as: carrier
                                       pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber
                                       optic devices.
CITY:                                  The City of Spring Valley.
                                       The total roadside border area, starting
                                       at the edge of the pavement, available
                                       for safe use by errant vehicles. This
                                       area may consist of a shoulder, a
                                       recoverable slope, a non-recoverable
CLEAR ZONE:                            slope, and a clear run-out area. The
                                       desired width is dependent upon the
                                       traffic volumes and speeds, and on the
                                       roadside geometry. Distances are
                                       specified in the AASHTO roadside design
                                       guide.
                                       Protective wrapping or mastic cover
COATING:                               applied to buried pipe for protection
                                       against external corrosion.
CODE:                                  The municipal code of the City of Spring
                                       Valley.
CONDUCTOR:                             Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT:                               A casing or encasement for wires or
                                       cables.
                                       The installation, repair, maintenance,
CONSTRUCTION Or CONSTRUCT:             placement, alteration, enlargement,
                                       demolition, modification or abandonment
                                       in place of facilities.
COVER:                                 The depth of earth or backfill over
                                       buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY:                     A facility that crosses one (1) or more
                                       right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.
                                       For the purposes of this chapter, any
                                       work that obstructs the right-of-way or
                                       causes a material adverse effect on the
                                       use of the right-of-way for its intended
                                       use. Such work may include, without
                                       limitation, the following: excavating or
                                       other cutting; placement (whether
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY:              temporary or permanent) of materials,
                                       equipment, devices, or structures;
                                       damage to vegetation; and compaction or
                                       loosening of the soil, and shall not
                                       include the parking of vehicles or
                                       equipment in a manner that does not
                                       materially obstruct the flow of traffic
                                       on a highway.
                                       Any immediate maintenance to the
                                       facility required for the safety of the
                                       public using or in the vicinity of the
EMERGENCY:                             right-of-way or immediate maintenance
                                       required for the health and safety of
                                       the general public served by the
                                       utility.
ENCASEMENT:                            Provision of a protective casing.
                                       Materials, tools, implements, supplies,
EQUIPMENT:                             and/or other items used to facilitate
                                       construction of facilities.
                                       The making of a hole or cavity by
EXCAVATION:                            removing material, or laying bare by
                                       digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE:                      Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this
                                       pipe designation.
                                       All structures, devices, objects, and
                                       materials (including, but not limited
                                       to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber
                                       optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes,
                                       equipment enclosures, cabinets,
                                       pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
FACILITY:                              covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances
                                       thereto) located on, over, above, along,
                                       upon, under, across, or within rights-
                                       of-way under this chapter. For purposes
                                       of this chapter, the term facility shall
                                       not include any facility owned or
                                       operated by the city.
                                       A facility that is not a crossing
FREESTANDING FACILITY:                 facility or a parallel facility, such as
                                       an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter
                                       station.
                                       Roadway, usually parallel, providing
FRONTAGE ROAD:                         access to land adjacent to the highway
                                       where it is precluded by control of
                                       access to a highway.
                                       Any substance or material which, due to
                                       its quantity, form, concentration,
                                       location, or other characteristics, is
                                       determined by the city superintendent of
                                       public works to pose an unreasonable and
                                       imminent risk to the life, health or
                                       safety of persons or property or to the
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:                   ecological balance of the environment,
                                       including, but not limited to
                                       explosives, radioactive materials,
                                       petroleum or petroleum products or
                                       gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
                                       agents, flammables, corrosives or any
                                       substance determined to be hazardous or
                                       toxic under any federal or state law,
                                       statute or regulation.
                                       A specific type of right-of-way used for
                                       vehicular traffic including rural or
                                       urban roads or streets. Highway includes
                                       all highway land and improvements,
HIGHWAY:                               including roadways, ditches and
                                       embankments, bridges, drainage
                                       structures, signs, guardrails,
                                       protective structures and appurtenances
                                       necessary or convenient for vehicle
                                       traffic.
                                       The Illinois highway code, 605 ILCS 5/1-
HIGHWAY CODE:                          101 et seq., as amended from time to
                                       time.
                                       A person or entity that has received
                                       authorization to offer or provide cable
HOLDER:                                or video service from the ICC pursuant
                                       to the Illinois cable and video
                                       competition law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
ICC:                                   Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT:                                  Illinois department of transportation.
                                       Pushing a pipe horizontally under a
JACKING:                               roadway by mechanical means with or
                                       without boring.
                                       Pushing a pipe through the earth using
JETTING:                               water under pressure to create a cavity
                                       ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE:                             The use of pole lines, trenches or other
                                       facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
                                       The joint utility locating Information
J.U.L.I.E:                             for excavators utility notification
                                       program.
MAJOR INTERSECTION:                    The intersection of two (2) or more
                                       major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY:                             The presence of facilities on, over or
                                       under right-of-way.
                                       A facility that is generally parallel or
PARALLEL FACILITY:                     longitudinal to the centerline of a
                                       right-of-way.
PARKWAY:                               Any portion of the right-of-way not
                                       improved by street or sidewalk.
                                       The removal of an area of pavement for
PAVEMENT CUT:                          access to facility or for the
                                       construction of a facility.
                                       That entity to which a permit has been
PERMITTEE:                             issued pursuant to sections 8-11-4 and
                                       8-11-5 of this chapter.
                                       That which is performable, feasible or
PRACTICABLE:                           possible, rather than that which is
                                       simply convenient.
                                       The internal force acting radially
PRESSURE:                              against the walls of a carrier pipe
                                       expressed in pounds per square inch
                                       gauge (psig).
                                       Pipelines carrying crude or refined
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES:          liquid petroleum products including, but
                                       not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
                                       propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
                                       That which is done within a period of
PROMPT:                                time specified by the city. If no time
                                       period is specified, the period shall be
                                       thirty (30) days.
                                       A legal entity that constitutes or is
PUBLIC ENTITY:                         part of the government, whether at
                                       local, state or federal level.
                                       The repair of a right-of-way, highway,
RESTORATION:                           roadway, or other area disrupted by the
                                       construction of a facility.
                                       Any street, alley, other land or
                                       waterway, dedicated or commonly used for
                                       pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other
                                       similar purposes, including utility
                                       easements, in which the city has the
                                       right and authority to authorize,
                                       regulate or permit the location of
RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY:         facilities other than those of the city.
                                       Rights-of-way or rights-of-way shall not
                                       include any real or personal city
                                       property that is not specifically
                                       described in the previous two (2)
                                       sentences and shall not include city
                                       buildings, fixtures and other structures
                                       or improvements, regardless of whether
                                       they are situated in the right-of-way.
ROADWAY:                               That part of the highway that includes
                                       the pavement and shoulders.
                                       The transmitting, supplying, or
                                       furnishing of telecommunications and all
                                       services rendered in connection
                                       therewith for a consideration, other
                                       than between a parent corporation and
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATION S AT RETAIL: its wholly owned subsidiaries or between
                                       wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
                                       gross charge made by one such
                                       corporation to another such corporation
                                       is not greater than the gross charge
                                       paid to the retailer for their use or
                                       consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND:                         That amount of security required
                                       pursuant to section 8-11-10.
                                       A width of roadway, adjacent to the
                                       pavement, providing lateral support to
SHOULDER:                              the pavement edge and providing an area
                                       for emergency vehicular stops and
                                       storage of snow removed from the
                                       pavement.
                                       A decision(s) consistent with generally
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT:            accepted engineering principles,
                                       practices and experience.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:        The city superintendent of public works
                                       or his or her designee.
                                       This term includes, but is not limited
                                       to, messages or information transmitted
                                       through use of local, toll, and wide
                                       area telephone service, private line
                                       services, channel services, telegraph
                                       services, teletypewriter, computer
                                       exchange services, cellular mobile
                                       telecommunications service, specialized
                                       mobile radio, stationary two-way radio,
                                       paging service, or any other form of
                                       mobile and portable one-way or two-way
                                       communications, or any other
                                       transmission of messages or information
                                       by electronic or similar means, between
                                       or among points by wire, cable, fiber
                                       optics, laser, microwave, radio,
                                       satellite, or similar facilities. As
                                       used herein, private line means a
                                       dedicated non-traffic sensitive service
                                       for a single customer, that entitles the
                                       customer to exclusive or priority use of
                                       a communications channel or group of
                                       channels, from one (1) or more specified
                                       locations to one (1) or more other
                                       specified locations. The definition of
TELECOMMUNICATION S:                   telecommunications shall not include
                                       value added services in which computer
                                       processing applications are used to act
                                       on the form, content, code, and protocol
                                       of the information for purposes other
                                       than transmission. Telecommunications
                                       shall not include purchases of
                                       telecommunications by a
                                       telecommunications service provider for
                                       use as a component part of the service
                                       provided by such provider to the
                                       ultimate retail consumer who originates
                                       or terminates the taxable end-to-end
                                       communications. Telecommunications shall
                                       not include the provision of cable
                                       services through a cable system as
                                       defined in the cable communications act
                                       of 1984 (47 U.S.C. 521 et seq.), as now
                                       or hereafter amended, or cable or other
                                       programming services subject to an open
                                       video system fee payable to the city
                                       through an open video system as defined
                                       in the rules of the federal
                                       communications commission (47 C.F.R.
                                       76.1500 et seq.), as now or hereafter
                                       amended.
                                       Any person that installs, owns, operates
TELECOMMUNICATION S PROVIDER:          or controls facilities in the right-of-
                                       way used or designed to be used to
                                       transmit telecommunications in any form.
                                       Every person engaged in making sales of
TELECOMMUNICATION S RETAILER:          telecommunications at retail as defined
                                       herein.
                                       A relatively narrow open excavation for
TRENCH:                                the installation of an underground
                                       facility.
                                       The individual or entity owning or
UTILITY:                               operating any facility as defined in
                                       this chapter.
                                       A pipe to allow the dissipation into the
VENT:                                  atmosphere of gases or vapors from an
                                       underground casing.
                                       That term as defined in 21-201(v) of the
VIDEO SERVICE:                         Illinois cable and video competition law
                                       of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).
WATER LINES:                           Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
                                       Boring using water under pressure at the
WET BORING:                            cutting auger to soften the earth and to
                                       provide a sluice for the excavated
                                       material. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
 
8-11-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the city shall register on
January 1 of each year with the superintendent of public works, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one (1) or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the
utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in
the right-of-way and a twenty-four (24) hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in section 
8-11-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 1911,
3-3-2025)
8-11-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this
chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any city right-of-way which (1) changes the location of the facility, (2) adds
a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this chapter), or
(4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility
on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first
filing an application with the city superintendent of public works and
obtaining a permit from the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of
the right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois manual
on uniform traffic control devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
section unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section 8-11-8 of this chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 8-
11-10 of this chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one (1) or more provisions of this
chapter (see section 8-11-21); and
      10.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
city.
   (D)   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection (C) above, the permit application
shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that
is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control and the metropolitan water reclamation
district, and any other local or state entities with jurisdiction, have been
satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the city within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). No
application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is
paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the city
superintendent of public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city superintendent of
public works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor. If the city superintendent of public works is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city superintendent of
public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the city superintendent of public works, that the construction
proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that it intends to commence
work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the city not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of
work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation for new construction. The city
superintendent of public works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way
upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the city superintendent of public works fails to
provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either (i) ten (10) days after service of notice to the city by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction or (ii) twenty-five (25) days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a permit
is required for work pursuant to section
8-11-4 of this chapter, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the
city an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (A) above.
   (C)   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the cable
and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty-five (45) days
after submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided
the holder has complied with applicable city codes, ordinances, and
regulations. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on city rights-of-way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Pre-Construction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the city with
such city representatives in attendance as the city deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners.
   (D)   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS AND GPS LOCATIONS:
   (A)   Revised Permit Drawings: In the event that the actual locations of any
facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the
plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the
permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within
ninety (90) days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised
drawings or plans shall specifically identify the locations of the actual
facilities constructed within the right-of-way and where the locations of the
actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any
deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter,
it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with section 8-11-
21 of this chapter. If the city denies the request for a variance, then the
permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the
facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor.
   (B)   GPS Locations: The permittee shall provide, upon request by the
superintendent of public works, GPS locations illustrating the actual locations
of all of the facilities constructed by the permittee. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-8: INSURANCE:
   (A)   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or
constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents,
and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsection (A)
(1)(a) and (b) below:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         (a)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to
each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting
from any one (1) accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) or all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
         (a)   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and
         (b)   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
      3.   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the city within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the city.
   (D)   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages:
      1.   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
      "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled
nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt
by the city, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of
a written notice addressed to the mayor of such intent to cancel or not to
renew."
      2.   Within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and
in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility
shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (A) above. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-
insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds
under subsection (A) above, or the requirements of subsections (B), (C) and (D)
above. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance
coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (A) above, such as
evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers
compensation act.
   (F)   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-10: SECURITY:
   (A)   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The security fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by
the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the city must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city in the
form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection
(B) shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
city and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the city of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the State
of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the city superintendent of public works, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are likely
to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one (1) location or a related group of locations,
and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to
substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the city
superintendent of public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow
the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to
each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security
fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would
have been required under the provisions of this subsection (C) for any single
phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals: The city, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection (D), may withdraw an amount from the security fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within
the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the city
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   (E)   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund,
the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection (C) above.
   (F)   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the city,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection (C) above.
   (G)   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the city with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect
any other right the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its
rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   (A)   City Right To Revoke Permit: The city may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter for one (1) or more of the following reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Non-compliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The city shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension:
      1.   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the city, the permittee shall have the following options:
         (a)   Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the city within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal
to the city within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
      2.   The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this subsection (C).
   (D)   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (A) above.
   (E)   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection (C) above, the city or its designee
may, at the option of the city: (1) correct the deficiencies; (2) upon not less
than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities
or equipment; or (3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the
permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city
for all costs of removal. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   (A)   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the city no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right-of-
way.
   (C)   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-
2025)
8-11-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (A)   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      1.   Standard specifications for road and bridge construction;
      2.   Supplemental specifications and recurring special provisions;
      3.   Highway design manual;
      4.   Highway standards manual;
      5.   Standard specifications for traffic control items;
      6.   Illinois manual on uniform traffic control devices;
      7.   Flagger's handbook; and
      8.   Work site protection manual for daylight maintenance operations.
   (B)   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the city superintendent of public works shall determine, in the
exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such
decision shall be final. If requested, the city superintendent of public works
shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction,
maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   (A)   Minimum Requirements: The city's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois manual on uniform traffic control
devices" and this code.
   (B)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty-eight (48) hours prior
to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such
work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
8-11-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the city. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   (A)   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference With City facilities: No utility facilities shall be
placed in any location if the city superintendent of public works determines
that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any
of the city's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation
or maintenance of any of the city's utility facilities.
      2.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      5.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two (2) feet behind the face of the
curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four (4) feet the outer shoulder
line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one (1) foot
of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than five (5) feet from and parallel to the right-of-
way line, nor closer than two (2) feet from and parallel to the right-of-way
line;
         (b)   A new facility must be placed with at least five (5) feet of
horizontal separation from any water main, sanitary sewer, or storm sewer while
running parallel to the existing utility and at least eighteen (18) inches of
horizontal separation from any water main, sanitary sewer, or storm sewer while
crossing perpendicular to the existing utility;
         (c)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (d)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five (5) feet from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one (1) foot of the right-of-way line or
as near as practicable.
   (E)   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety (90) Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall
cross at or as near to a ninety (90) degree angle to the centerline as
practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83
Ill. Adm. Code § 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one (1) foot of the right-of-way line
of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design, materials, and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The city may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations.
   (D)   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way: The city may
require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      2.   The city may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities Installed Above Ground: Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 1911,
3-3-2025)
8-11-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   (A)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the city
superintendent of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring
or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty-eight (48) hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty-eight (48) hours after
boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six (6) inches. Borings over
six (6) inches in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one (1) inch.
         (d)   Borings with diameters six (6) inches or less. Borings of six
(6) inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided
whip auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of IDOT's "standard specifications for road and bridge construction."
         (a)   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half (½) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the city superintendent of public works.
         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by the "Illinois manual on
uniform traffic control devices." Where practicable, the excavated material
shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection.
Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the
roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated
material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be
hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   Drip line of trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "standard specifications for
road and bridge construction." When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three (3) years from the date of construction of
a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the superintendent of public works, the utility, at its expense,
shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed
facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by
the superintendent of public works.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection (A)(4)
is permitted under section 8-11-21, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the superintendent of public works.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one (1) piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by
the city.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
(1) foot of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located
in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the
highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city-approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated
only if: (1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair and (2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      6.   Minimum cover of underground facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
TYPE OF FACILITY                           MINIMUM COVER
Power or Communication Line (In General)   30 Inches (0.8 m)
Communication Line Installed by the Plowed 24 Inches (0.6 m)
Method
Gas or Petroleum Products                  30 Inches (0.8 m)
Water Line                                 Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze
                                           Protection
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage   Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze
Line                                       Protection
 
   (B)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric power or communication lines:
         (a)   Code compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within city rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 entitled
"construction of electric power and communications lines," and the national
electrical safety code.
         (b)   Overhead facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground facilities:
         (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
         (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: (a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip augers," or
other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or (b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
         (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national
electrical safety code.
         (d)   Burial of drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a city approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline
safety operations, U.S. department of transportation, Part 192 "transportation
of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards" (49
C.F.R § 192), IDOT's "standard specifications for road and bridge
construction," and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping.
      5.   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "standard specifications for water and sewer main construction in
Illinois."
      6.   Ground mounted appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one (1) foot width beyond the
appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an
extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material
approved by the superintendent of public works. With the approval of the
superintendent of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be
used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "standards
specifications for road and bridge construction," the requirements of the ICC,
or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the
appropriate industry.
      2.   Material storage on right-of-way: No material shall be stored on the
right-of-way without the prior written approval of the city superintendent of
public works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public
or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval
must be obtained from the city.
      3.   Hazardous materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the city
shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the superintendent of public
works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise approved by the superintendent of public works or
his or her designee, the hours of construction are from eight o’clock (8:00)
a.m. to seven o’clock (7:00) p.m. Monday through Friday.
   (E)   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the city shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and
location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the rights-
of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by
J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground
facilities within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in
accordance with the Illinois underground utility facilities damage prevention
act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.). (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   (A)   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the city as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the international society of
arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The city may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection (D)(2) below, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the city for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the superintendent of public works that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   (A)   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
city, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon,
the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The city retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior
to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within ninety (90)
days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the city superintendent of public
works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public
health, safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the
utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of
abandonment to the city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to
the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another
utility or person. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-19: CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights-of-way
are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the
utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the city superintendent of public works. Such
cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be
extended by the city superintendent of public works for good cause shown. (Ord.
1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the city and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
city superintendent of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection
of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary
repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free
movement of traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the city a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within forty-eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-21: VARIANCES:
   (A)   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one (1) or
more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the city
superintendent of public works as a part of the permit application. The request
shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is
requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority To Grant Variances: The city superintendent of public works
shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this
chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The city superintendent of public
works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      1.   One (1) or more conditions not under the control of the utility
(such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision impractical or
unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the city superintendent of public works may require the
utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
   (E)   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the city
superintendent of public works under the provisions of this chapter shall have
the right to appeal to the city council, or such other board or commission as
it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to
the city clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order,
requirement, decision or determination. The city council shall commence its
consideration of the appeal at the council's next regularly scheduled meeting
occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The city
council shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-22: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-23: PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fines in accordance
with chapter 1-4 of this code. There may be times when the city will incur
delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will
not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the
utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested
action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the city's costs of damages and
its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the
facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or
commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the
city. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs
apportioned to it. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
8-11-24: SEVERABILITY:
If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
APPENDIX A: TREE TRIMMING PERMIT APPLICATION FORM
 
Permit #:         
Date Approved:    
Approved By:      
Expiration Date:  
TREE TRIMMING PERMIT APPLICATION FORM
All Tree Trimming Work Shall Be Performed to the Standards and Regulations Set
Forth in Ordinance No.                        of the City of Spring Valley Code
of Ordinances
(If more space is needed, please attach additional sheets)
UTILITY INFORMATION
Name of Utility:                   
Utility's Address:                   
Utility Telephone Number:             
Utility Telecopy Number:             
APPLICANT INFORMATION (IF DIFFERENT THAN UTILITY)
Name of Applicant:                   
Applicant's Address:                         
Applicant Telephone Number:                      
Applicant Telecopy Number:                      
Applicant E-mail Address:                         
Applicant's Interest in the Work Requested:                            
SITE INFORMATION
Site Address:                         
Start Date:                   
Anticipated Completion Date:
UNDER PENALTY OF INTENTIONAL MISREPRESENTATION AND/OR PERJURY, I declare that I
have examined and/or made this application, and it is true and correct to the
best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that this application is for tree
trimming that is done by any utility with facilities in the right-of-way and
that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations
specifically governing same. Any work performed upon grant of a permit
requested hereunder, will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision
who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Furthermore, any work
performed upon grant of a permit requested hereunder shall be expeditiously
accomplished. I understand that poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
any tree trimming permit granted and for assessment of damages. The City will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The City may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition. I realize that the information that I have
affirmed hereon forms a basis for the issuance of the permit herein applied
for. For consideration of such permission, to the fullest extent authorized by
applicable law, I agree to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the City of
Spring Valley, its Officers, Agents and Employees, from any and all claims
resulting from injuries, including death, damages of losses, including but not
limited to the general public, which may arise or which may be alleged to have
risen out of, or in conjunction with such tree trimming within the public
right-of-way.
Utility/Applicant Name:
By:                   
   Name [Printed]
Date:                
Signature:                         
Title:                         
Contractor Name:                         
By:                   
   Name [Printed]
Date:                   
Signature:                       
Title:                         
(Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
APPENDIX B: RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT APPLICATION FORM
 
Permit #:         
Date Approved:    
Approved By:      
Expiration Date:  
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT APPLICATION FORM
All Right-of-Way Work Shall Be Performed to the Standards and Regulations Set
Forth in Ordinance No.                                          of the City of
Spring Valley Code of Ordinances
(If more space is needed, please attach additional sheets)
UTILITY INFORMATION
Name of Utility:                   
Utility's Address:                   
Utility Telephone Number:             
Utility Telecopy Number:             
APPLICANT INFORMATION (IF DIFFERENT THAN UTILITY)
Name of Applicant:                   
Applicant's Address:                         
Applicant Telephone Number:                      
Applicant Telecopy Number:                      
Applicant E-mail Address:                         
Applicant's Interest in the Work Requested:                            
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS (ADVISING THE APPLICANT OR UTILITY WITH RESPECT TO
THIS APPLICATION)
Name of Consultant:                   
Consultant's Address:                         
Consultant Telephone Number:                      
Consultant Telecopy Number:                      
Consultant E-mail Address:                         
Consultant's Discipline and/or Interest in the Work Requested:
                           
SITE INFORMATION
Site Address:                         
Start Date:                   
Anticipated Completion Date:                   
General Description of Proposed Work and the Purposes and Intent of the
Facility and the Uses to Which the Facility Will be Put. The Scope and Detail
of this Description Shall be Appropriate to the Nature and Character of the
Work to be Performed, with Special Emphasis on those Matters Likely to be
Affected or Impacted by the Work Proposed:
DRAWINGS
Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the
certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications
comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations shall be provided before
approval. Please email these materials to                              along
with this completed form.
TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN AND EMERGENCY CONTINGENCY PLAN
 
Have you placed on file with the City a
written traffic control plan as         Yes No (If no, you must provide to the
required by Section                         City)
8-11-4(C)(5)(i) of the City Code?
Have you placed on file with the City
an emergency contingency plan as        Yes No (If no, you must provide to the
required by Section                         City)
8-11-4(C)(5)(ii) of the City Code?
 
INSURANCE/SECURITY FUND REQUIREMENTS
 
Is evidence of insurance on file with Yes No
the City?
If no, you must provide to the City.
If yes: Policy #:                     Expires:
Have you placed on file with the City
evidence of posting of the security   Yes No (If no, you must provide to the
fund as required by Section               City)
8-11-10 of the City Code?
 
VARIANCE REQUEST
If a request for a variance is being made pursuant to Section
8-11-21 of the City Code, identify each provision of Chapter 11 from which a
variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted:
                  
SUPPLEMENTAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC TYPES OF UTILITIES, AS
APPLICABLE
In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications,
telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system, provide evidence of any "Certificate of Public Convenience
and Necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required
by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, which has been
issued by the Illinois Commerce Commission or other jurisdictional authority.
In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design,
construction class, and operating pressures:
                                 
 
In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water     Yes No
Supplies, have been satisfied.
(If no, explain why on a separate sheet)
In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Yes No
Reclamation District, and any other local or state entities with
jurisdiction, have been satisfied.
(If no, explain why on a separate sheet)
 
In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of
petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed:
                                 
UNDER PENALTY OF INTENTIONAL MISREPRESENTATION AND/OR PERJURY, I declare that I
have examined and/or made this application, and it is true and correct to the
best of my knowledge and belief. I agree to construct said improvement(s)
within the public Right-of-Way in the City of Spring Valley in compliance with
Title 8, Chapter 11 of the City Code and all provisions of the applicable
ordinances. I realize that the information that I have affirmed hereon forms a
basis for the issuance of the ROW permit(s) herein applied for and approval of
plans in connection therewith shall not be constructed to permit any
construction upon said premises or use thereof in violation of any provision of
any applicable ordinance or to excuse compliance therewith. For consideration
of such permission, to the fullest extent authorized by applicable law, I agree
to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the City of Spring Valley, its Officers,
Agents and Employees, from any and all claims resulting from injuries,
including death, damages of losses, including but not limited to the general
public, which may arise or which may be alleged to have risen out of, or in
conjunction with such construction of improvement(s) within the public Right-
of-Way.
Utility/Applicant Name:                   
By:                   
   Name [Printed]
Date:                
Signature:                         
Title:                         
Contractor Name:                   
By:                   
   Name [Printed]
Date:                
Signature:                         
Title:                         
(Ord. 1911, 3-3-2025)
CHAPTER 12
SMALL CELL ANTENNA/TOWER RIGHT-OF-WAY SITING
SECTION:
8-12-1: Definitions
8-12-2: Standards And Regulations
8-12-3: Permits And Application Fees And Procedures
8-12-4: Conflict Of Laws
8-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms will have the following
meanings:
ALTERNATIVE ANTENNA STRUCTURE: An existing pole or other structure within the
public right-of-way that can be used to support an antenna and is not a utility
pole or a City-owned infrastructure.
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio signals used in the provision of any type of wireless communications
services.
APPLICANT: Any person or entity submitting an application to install personal
wireless telecommunication facilities or structures to support the facilities
within a public right-of- way.
CITY-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE: Infrastructure in public right-of-way within the
boundaries of the City, including, but not limited to, streetlights, traffic
signals, towers, structures, or buildings owned, operated or maintained by the
City.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS): A type of personal wireless
telecommunication facility consisting of a network of spatially separate
antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides
wireless service within a geographic area. Generally serves multiple carriers.
LANDSCAPE SCREENING: The installation at grade of plantings, shrubbery, bushes
or other foliage intended to screen the base of a personal wireless
telecommunication facility from public view.
MONOPOLE: A structure compose of a single spire, pole or tower designed and
used to support antennas or related equipment and that is not a utility pole,
an alternative antenna structure, or a City-owned infrastructure.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA: An antenna that is part of a
personal wireless telecommunications facility.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT: Equipment, exclusive of an
antenna, that is part of a personal wireless telecommunications facility.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: An antenna, equipment, and
related improvements used, or designed to be used, to provide wireless
transmission of voice, data video streams, images, or other information
including, but not limited to, cellular phone service, personal communication
service, paging, and Wi-Fi antenna service.
SMALL CELL FACILITIES: A personal wireless telecommunications facility
consisting of an antenna and related equipment either installed singly or as
part of a network to provide coverage or enhance capacity in a limited defined
area. Generally single- service provider installation.
TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose
of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guy towers, or monopole towers, and that is not a utility pole, an alternative
antenna structure, or a City owned infrastructure. Except as otherwise provided
for by this chapter, the requirements for a tower and associated antenna
facilities shall be those required in this chapter.
UTILITY POLE: An upright pole designed and used to support electric cables,
telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service cables, which are
used to provide lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function.
VARIANCE OR VARIATION: A grant of relief by the City.
WI-FI ANTENNA: An antenna used to support Wi-Fi broadband internet access
service based on the IEEE 802.11 standard that typically uses unlicensed
spectrum to enable communication between devices. (Ord. 1706, 11-20-2017)
8-12-2: STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS:
Personal wireless telecommunication facilities will be permitted to be placed
in right-of-way within the jurisdiction of the City as attachments to existing
utility poles, alternative antenna structures, or City-owned infrastructure
subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   Number Limitation And Co-Location: The City or his/her designee may
regulate the number of personal wireless telecommunications facilities allowed
on each utility pole or unit of City-owned infrastructure. No more than two (2)
personal wireless telecommunications facilities will be permitted on utility
poles or alternative antenna structure of ninety feet (90') or less. No more
than three (3) personal wireless telecommunications facilities will be
permitted on utility poles or alternative antenna structures in excess of
ninety feet (90') and less than one hundred twenty feet (120'). This chapter
does not preclude or prohibit co-location of personal wireless
telecommunication facilities on towers or monopoles that meet the requirements
as set forth elsewhere in this section or as required by Federal law.
   (B)   Separation And Clearance Requirements: Personal wireless
telecommunication facilities may be attached to a utility pole, alternative
antenna structure, monopole, or City-owned infrastructure only where such pole,
structure or infrastructure is located no closer than a distance equal to one
hundred percent (100%) of the height of such facility to any residential
building and no closer than three hundred feet (300') from any other personal
wireless telecommunication facility. A separation or lesser clearance may be
allowed by the City or his/her designee as an administrative variance to this
chapter when the applicant establishes that the lesser separation or clearance
is necessary to close a significant coverage or capacity gap in the applicant's
services or to otherwise provide adequate services to customers, and the
proposed antenna or facility is the least intrusive means to do so within the
right-of-way.
   (C)   City-Owned Infrastructure: Personal wireless telecommunication
facilities can only be mounted to City-owned infrastructure including, but not
limited to, streetlights, traffic signal, towers or buildings, if authorized by
a license or other agreement between the owner and the City.
   (D)   New Towers: No new monopole or other tower to support personal
wireless telecommunication facilities in excess of sixty feet (60') is
permitted to be installed on right-of-way within the jurisdiction of the City
unless the City Council finds, based on clear and convincing evidence provided
by the applicant, that locating the personal wireless telecommunications
facilities on the right-of-way is necessary to close a significant coverage or
capacity gap in the applicant's services or to otherwise provide adequate
services to customers, and the proposed new monopole or other tower within the
right-of-way is the least intrusive means to do so.
   (E)   Attachment Limitations: No personal wireless telecommunication antenna
or facility within the right-of-way will be attached to a utility pole,
alternative antenna structure, tower, or City-owned infrastructure unless all
of the following conditions are satisfied:
      1.   Surface Area Of Antenna: The personal wireless telecommunication
antenna, including antenna panels, whip antennas or dish-shaped antennas,
cannot have a surface area of more than seven (7) cubic feet in volume.
      2.   Size Of Above-Ground Personal Wireless Telecommunication Facility:
The total combined volume of all above-ground equipment and appurtenances
comprising a personal wireless telecommunication facility, exclusive of the
antenna itself, cannot exceed thirty two (32) cubic feet.
      3.   Personal Wireless Telecommunication Equipment: The operator of a
personal wireless telecommunication facility must, whenever possible, locate
the base of the equipment or appurtenances at a height of no lower than eight
feet (8') above grade.
      4.   Personal Wireless Telecommunication Services Equipment Mounted At
Grade: In the event that the operator of a personal wireless telecommunication
facility proposes to install a facility where equipment or appurtenances are to
be installed to minimize the visibility of the facility, screening must be
installed at least three feet (3') from the equipment installed at-grade and
eight feet (8') from a roadway.
      5.   Height: The top of the highest point of the antenna cannot extend
more than seven feet (7') above the highest point of the utility pole,
alternative antenna support structure, tower or City-owned infrastructure. If
necessary, the replacement or new utility pole, alternative support structure
or City-owned infrastructure located within the public right-of-way may be no
more than ten feet (10') to seventy feet (70') higher than existing poles
adjacent to the replacement or new pole or structure, or no more than ninety
feet (90') in height overall, whichever is less.
      6.   Color: A personal wireless telecommunication facility, including all
related equipment and appurtenances, must be a color that blends with the
surroundings of the pole, structure, tower or infrastructure on which it is
mounted and use nonreflective materials which blend with the materials and
colors of the surrounding area and structures. Any wiring must be covered with
an appropriate cover.
      7.   Antenna Panel Covering: A personal wireless telecommunication
antenna may include a random, cap or other antenna panel covering or shield, to
the extent such covering would not result in a larger or more noticeable
facility and, if proposed, such covering must be of a color that blends with
the color of the pole, structure, tower or infrastructure on which it is
mounted.
      8.   Wiring And Cabling: Wires and cables connecting the antenna to the
remainder of the facility must be installed in accordance with the Electrical
Code currently in effect. No wiring and cabling serving the facility will be
allowed to interfere with any wiring or cabling installed by a cable television
or video service operator, electric utility or telephone utility.
      9.   Grounding: The personal wireless telecommunication facility must be
grounded in accordance with the requirements of the Electrical Code currently
in effect in the City.
      10.   Guy Wires: No guy or other support wires will be used in connection
with a personal wireless telecommunication facility unless the facility is to
be attached to an existing utility pole, alternative antenna support structure,
tower or City owned infrastructure that incorporated guy wires prior to the
date that an applicant has applied for a permit.
      11.   Pole Extensions: Extensions to utility poles, alternative support
structures, towers and City-owned infrastructure utilized for the purpose of
connecting a personal wireless telecommunications antenna and its related
personal wireless telecommunications equipment must have a degree of strength
capable of supporting the antenna and any related appurtenances and cabling and
capable of withstanding wind forces and ice loads in accordance with the
applicable structural integrity standards as set forth in subsection (E)12 of
this section. An extension must be securely bound to the utility pole,
alternative antenna structure, tower or City-owned infrastructure in accordance
with applicable engineering standards for the design and attachment of such
extensions.
      12.   Structural Integrity: The personal wireless telecommunication
facility, including the antenna, pole extension and all related equipment must
be designed to withstand a wind force and ice loads in accordance with
applicable standards established in chapter 25 of the National Electric Safety
Code for utility poles, rule 250-B and 250-C standards governing wind, ice, and
loading forces on utility poles, in the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) in TIA/EIA section 222-G established by the Telecommunications Industry
Association (TIA) and the Electronics Industry Association (EIA) for steel
wireless support structures and the applicable industry standard for other
existing structures. For any facility attached to City-owned infrastructure or,
in the discretion of the City, for a utility pole, tower, or alternative
antenna structure, the operator of the facility must provide the City with a
structural evaluation of each specific location containing a recommendation
that the proposed installation passes the standards described above. The
evaluation must be prepared by a professional structural engineer licensed in
the State of Illinois.
   (F)   Signage: Other than signs required by Federal law or regulations or
identification and location markings, installation of signs on a personal
wireless telecommunication facility is prohibited.
   (G)   Screening: If screening is required under subsection (E)4 of this
section, it must be natural landscaping material or a fence subject to the
approval of the City and must comply with all regulations of the City.
Appropriate landscaping must be located and maintained and must provide the
maximum achievable screening, as determined by the City from view of adjoining
properties and public or private streets. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no
such screening is required to extend more than nine feet (9') in height.
Landscape screening when permitted in the right-of-way must be provided with a
clearance of three feet (3') in all directions from the facility. The color of
housing for ground- mounted equipment must blend with the surroundings. For a
covered structure, the maximum reasonably achievable screening must be provided
between such facility and the view from adjoining properties and public or
private streets. In lieu of the operator installing the screening, the City, at
its sole discretion, may accept a fee from the operator of the facility for the
acquisition, installation, or maintenance of landscaping material by the City.
   (H)   Permission To Use Utility Pole Or Alternative Antenna Structure: The
operator of a personal wireless telecommunication facility must submit to the
City written copies of the approval from the owner of a utility pole, monopole,
or an alternative antenna structure, to mount the personal wireless
telecommunication facility on that specific pole, tower, or structure, prior to
issuance of the City permit.
   (I)   Licenses And Permits: The operator of a personal wireless
telecommunication facility must verify to the City that it has received all
concurrent licenses and permits required by other agencies and governments with
jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and operation of said
facility and will be maintained within the corporate limits of the City.
   (J)   Variance Requirements: Each location of a personal wireless
telecommunication facility within a right-of-way must meet all of the
requirements of this chapter, unless a variance has been obtained in accordance
with the standards for construction of facilities on the right-of-way in
chapter 11 of this title.
   (K)   Abandonment And Removal: Any personal wireless telecommunication
facility located within the corporate limits of the City that is not operated
for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, shall be considered abandoned
and the owner of the facility must remove same within ninety (90) days of
receipt of written notice from the City notifying the owner of such
abandonment. Such notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt-requested, by the City to such owner at the last known address of such
owner. In the case of personal wireless telecommunication facilities attached
to City owned infrastructure, if such facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of such
facility through the terms of the applicable license agreement or through
whatever actions are provided by law for removal and cost recovery. (Ord. 1706,
11-20-2017)
8-12-3: PERMITS AND APPLICATION FEES AND PROCEDURES:
Permits for placement of personal wireless telecommunication facilities in
right-of-way within the City are required. Except as otherwise provided for in
this chapter, the procedures for the application for, approval of, and
revocation of such a permit must be in compliance with City permit application
requirements in the standards for construction of facilities on the right-of-
way in chapter 11 of this title. Any applications must demonstrate compliance
with the requirements of this section. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, or Federal, State or local law, all applications
for permits pursuant to this section must be accompanied by a fee in the amount
of no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The application fee will
reimburse the City for regulatory and administrative costs with respect to the
work being performed. (Ord. 1706, 11-20-2017)
8-12-4: CONFLICT OF LAWS:
Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter regarding the
siting and installation of personal wireless telecommunication facilities are
more restrictive than comparable conditions imposed elsewhere in any other
local law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the regulations of this
chapter will govern. (Ord. 1706, 11-20-2017)
CHAPTER 13
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
8-13-1: Purpose And Scope
8-13-2: Definitions
8-13-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
8-13-4: Dispute Resolution
8-13-5: Indemnification
8-13-6: Insurance
8-13-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the City's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the City exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act.
   (B)   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   (C)   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
state or federal laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating state or federal laws
or regulations. (Ord. 1726, 7-2-2018; amd. Ord. 1845, 6-20-2022)
8-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency (RF) radiation, to be operated or operating from a fixed
location pursuant to Federal Communications Commission (FCC) authorization, for
the provision of personal wireless service and any commingled information
services. The antenna does not include an unintentional radiator, mobile
station or device.
APPLICABLE CODES: Uniform Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing or Mechanical
Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to
those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person or entity that submits an application and the agents,
employees and contractors of such person or entity.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the City for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities at a specified location, and a request that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well
as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5),
as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as
amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties or sites that are either: a) listed in the National
Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at
47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the City
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order or
local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the City in public
rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the City to perform an action or
initiate, continue or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical or other emergency services to respond
to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include City- owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under or within which the
equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is
acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the City.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
1726, 7-2-2018; amd. Ord. 1845, 6-20-2022)
8-13-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   (A)   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
subsection (C)9 of this section, regarding height exceptions or variances, but
not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in rights-
of-way in any zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned
exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
   (B)   Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the City to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      1.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the City, together with the City's Small Facilities
Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small
wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act
of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application
as it is proposed to be installed;
         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
         (g)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the City, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
         (h)   Certification by a radio engineer that a new, replacement or
modified small wireless facility operates within all applicable FCC standards.
      2.   Application Process: The City shall process applications as follows:
         (a)   Order Of Processing: The first completed application shall have
priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on
the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
         (b)   Existing Utility Pole: An application to collocate a small
wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or
replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the City
fails to approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the
submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75)
days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice
shall not preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the time
limits as provided under this hapter.
FCC regulation provides that an application to collocate a small wireless
facility using an existing structure shall be granted or denied within sixty
(60) days of submission of a completed application. Delays beyond that time
limit are available only in exceptional circumstances. These FCC time limits
may be enforced through litigation.
         (c)   New Utility Pole: An application to collocate a small wireless
facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the
submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five
(105) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice
shall not preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the time
limits as provided under this chapter.
FCC regulation provides that an application to collocate a small wireless
facility using a new structure shall be granted or denied within ninety (90)
days of submission of a completed application. Delays beyond that time limit
are available only in exceptional circumstances. These FCC time limits may be
enforced through litigation.
         (d)   Denial: The City shall deny an application which does not meet
the requirements of this chapter.
If the City determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that
concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions contained
herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced
before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of
the provider.
The City shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code
provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the
documentation to the applicant on or before the day the City denies an
application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the
revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of denial is sent
to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The City shall
approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial shall
require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the City's review period.
The applicant must notify the City in writing of its intention to proceed with
the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with
the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited
in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure
requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
         (e)   Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an
approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility
pole, the City and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment
Agreement, provided by the City for the initial collocation on a Municipal
utility pole by the applicant. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on
a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the City and the
applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment
Agreement.
      3.   Completeness Of Application: Within ten (10) days after receiving an
application, the City shall determine whether the application is complete and
notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the City must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the City fails to provide notification to the applicant within ten
(10) days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in
the City's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the City.
FCC regulation allows ten (10) days for determination of completion, and that
ten (10) day time frame replaces the thirty (30) day period provided in the
state Act.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the City sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
      4.   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the City;
or
         (b)   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      5.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the City shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the City may
remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The City may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      6.   Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period
of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the City makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or
the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable City codes
or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits
shall be subject to the applicable City Code provisions or regulations in
effect at the time of renewal.
      7.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the City by personal
delivery at the City's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked
on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
   (C)   Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
      1.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The City may reserve space on
Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the City's electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the City reasonably determines
that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      2.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      3.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with
industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a
public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the
interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
The City may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such
interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of
Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      4.   No Collocation On Electric Distribution System Poles: The wireless
provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on City utility poles
that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the
communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the
pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may
be located in the communications space on the City utility pole and on the top
of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies
with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      5.   Public Safety Compliance: The wireless provider shall comply with
all applicable codes, including acoustic regulations, and local code provisions
or regulations that concern public safety.
      6.   Design Standards Compliance: The wireless provider shall comply with
written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility
poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are
set forth in a City ordinance, written policy adopted by the City, a
comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers
of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic
district.
      7.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation
requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required
to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or
category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems
on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole,
the City may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within two hundred
feet (200') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the applicant
shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the
criteria in this paragraph.
      8.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         (a)   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility
pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in
place on the date the application is submitted to the City, that is located
within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or
wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the City, provided the City may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation
for such facility; or
         (b)   Fifty feet (50') above ground level. The fifty foot (50') limit
provided by FCC regulation replaces the limit of forty five feet (45') under
the Act.
      9.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions
set forth in the Spring Valley Illinois Land Development Code.
      10.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the City and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground- mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      11.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      12.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
      13.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the City and the wireless provider agree to extend this
period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility pole or
by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided
the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after
the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the
additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred sixty
(360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void
unless the City grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   (D)   Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
      1.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures. The fees established by this
chapter are equal to the limit imposed by the Act and represent a reasonable
approximation of the City's objectively reasonable costs. The City shall
regularly review the fees imposed and may adjust the fees by further amendment
to this chapter. The safe harbor rate established by the FCC of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for up to five (5) wireless facilities and one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each additional facility in a consolidated application
may be exceeded only if justified based on the City's reasonable approximation
of its costs.
      2.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
      3.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      4.   The City shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the City at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications and certifications consistent
with subsection (B)1 of this section; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
      5.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the City to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   (E)   Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      1.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the City or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-
of-way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure without
the consent of the property owner;
      2.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      3.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the
Illinois Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public
commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do
not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless
facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the
Illinois Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to
that term in section 3-105 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a)
to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or
video service or b) to obtain any required permission to install, place,
maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this chapter.
   (F)   Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the City and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of- way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
City utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the City's utility poles pursuant
to applications submitted to the City before June 1, 2018, subject to
applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the City on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the City
makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
(2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the City
that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement
remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small
wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the City's utility
poles pursuant to applications submitted to the City before the wireless
provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph.
   (G)   Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the City an
annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a City utility
pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars ($200.00)
per year or 2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider's use of space on the City utility pole.
If the City has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the
fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after the
first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   (H)   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after receipt of written notice from the City notifying the wireless
provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the City to the owner at the last known address of the wireless
provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days
of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the City if it sells or
transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the City. Such
notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider. (Ord. 1726, 7-2-2018; amd. Ord. 1845, 6-20-2022)
8-13-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Bureau County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
City shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per Municipal
utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 1726, 7-2-2018)
8-13-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City harmless against any and
all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or
arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the City
improvements or right-of- way associated with such improvements by the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and
privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless provider has no
obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as
may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the City or its employees or
agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have
against the City with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages,
however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. 1726, 7-2-2018)
8-13-6: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and
expense, the following insurance:
   (A)   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   (B)   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; and
   (C)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the City improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits
consistent with its requirements of other users of City improvements or rights-
of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the City as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the City in a commercial general liability policy prior to the
collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirement required by the City. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the City evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self- insure the insurance
coverage limits required by the City. (Ord. 1726, 7-2-2018; amd. Ord. 1845, 6-
20-2022)
TITLE 9
TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Terms Defined
9-1-1: TERMS DEFINED:
Wherever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles
and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of city departments or public
service corporations as are designated or authorized by the chief of police.
CROSSWALK: That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation of curb and property lines at intersections or any other portion
of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb
lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two (2) or more streets
or highways which join one another at an angle whether or not one such street
or highway crosses the other.
JOHN F. KENNEDY DRIVE: The paved portion of roadway running in an easterly and
westerly direction in front of John F. Kennedy School in the city of Spring
Valley between Strong Avenue extended and Richards Street extended, said
property being owned by school district 99, Bureau County, Illinois.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every "vehicle", as herein defined, which is self-propelled.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS: All signs, markings and devices, other than signals,
not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of guiding, directing,
warning or regulating traffic.
OPERATOR: Any person who is in actual physical control of the vehicle.
PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a roadway,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading, or in obedience of traffic regulations or traffic signs
or signals.
PARKING METER: A mechanical device located upon a public street or sidewalk in
a place regularly designed as a parking zone as hereinafter defined, which
device shall record a certain number of minutes by the use of a clock mechanism
determining the period of time for which parking privileges may be extended to
the person so depositing a coin.
PARKING METER ZONE: A certain designated and marked off section of the public
street within the marked boundaries where the vehicle may be temporarily parked
and allowed to remain for such period of time as the parking meter attached
thereto may indicate.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer of the police department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every road or driveway not open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
RICHARDS STREET EXTENDED: The paved portion of Richards Street extending north
of the northernmost statutorily dedicated portion of Richards Street owned by
school district 99, Bureau County, Illinois.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street or a highway between the regularly
established curb lines or that part devoted to vehicular traffic.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent
property lines, which is improved for pedestrian use.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: Every way set apart for public travel.
STRONG AVENUE EXTENDED: The paved portion of Strong Avenue extending north of
the northernmost statutorily dedicated portion of Strong Avenue owned by school
district 99, Bureau County, Illinois.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances
either singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: Any device using colored lights, or words, and any
combination thereof, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated,
by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (1972 Code; amd.
Ord. 828, 10-3-1994)
CHAPTER 2
AUTHORITY AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
9-2-1: Police To Direct Traffic
9-2-2: Public Employees To Obey Traffic Regulations
9-2-3: Exemptions To Authorized Emergency Vehicles
9-2-4: Pushcarts, Bicycles Or Animals
9-2-5: St. Margaret's Hospital Roads
9-2-6: Township High School District 502 Roads
9-2-7: Spring Valley Elementary School District 99 Roads
9-2-8: Exemptions For Authorized School Bus Vehicles
9-2-1: POLICE TO DIRECT TRAFFIC:
The police department is hereby authorized, empowered and ordered to exercise
all powers and duties with relation to the management of street traffic and to
direct, control, stop, restrict and regulate, and when necessary, temporarily
divert or exclude, in the interest of public safety, health and convenience,
the movement of pedestrians, animal and vehicular traffic of every kind, in
streets, parks and on bridges in the city. All vehicles and the drivers or
persons in charge thereof, shall at all times obey all orders given by any
policeman or other traffic officers, any of the provisions of this title to the
contrary notwithstanding. The chief of police shall make and enforce temporary
regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. (1972 Code)
9-2-2: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the U.S. government, this state, county or city
and it shall be unlawful for any said operator to violate any of the provisions
of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title. (1972 Code)
9-2-3: EXEMPTIONS TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
The provisions of this title regulating the movement, parking and standing of
vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as defined in this
title, while the driver of such vehicle is operating the same in an emergency
in the necessary performance of public duties. This exemption shall not,
however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequence of a
reckless disregard of the safety of others. (1972 Code)
9-2-4: PUSHCARTS, BICYCLES OR ANIMALS:
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a
roadway, and every person driving any animal shall be subject to the provisions
of this title applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this title with reference to the equipment of vehicles and except
those provisions which by their very nature can have application. (1972 Code)
9-2-5: ST. MARGARET'S HOSPITAL ROADS:
All traffic laws under this title are applicable to land owned by St.
Margaret's Hospital situated within the corporate limits of the city of Spring
Valley by virtue of agreement pursuant to section 11-209 of the motor vehicle
code 1  of the state of Illinois and ordinance 207 of the city. (1972 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS.
9-2-6: TOWNSHIP HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 502 ROADS:
All traffic laws under this title are applicable to land owned by Township High
School district 502 situated within the corporate limits of the city by virtue
of agreement pursuant to section 11-209 of the motor vehicle code of the state
of Illinois and ordinance 218 of the city. (1972 Code)
9-2-7: SPRING VALLEY ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT 99 ROADS:
All traffic laws under this title are applicable to land owned by school
district 99, Bureau County, Illinois, situated within the corporate limits of
the city by virtue of an agreement pursuant to section 11-209 of the motor
vehicle code of the state of Illinois, and the ordinance codified herein. (Ord.
828, 10-3-1994)
9-2-8: EXEMPTIONS FOR AUTHORIZED SCHOOL BUS VEHICLES:
The provisions of this title limiting the movement of traffic on Strong Avenue
north of its intersection with Fourth Street in the city to southbound traffic
only shall not apply to school bus vehicles being used to transport
schoolchildren to and from John F. Kennedy School in the city. This exemption
shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequence
of a reckless disregard for the safety of others. (Ord. 828, 10-3-1994)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Traffic Signs And Signals
9-3-2: Obedience To Traffic Signs And Signals
9-3-3: Traffic Control Signal Legend
9-3-4: Display Of Unauthorized Signs And Signals Prohibited
9-3-5: Interference With Signs And Signals
9-3-6: Designation Of Crosswalks
9-3-7: Safety Zones And Lanes For Traffic
9-3-8: Stop And Slow Signals
9-3-9: Police Signals
9-3-1: TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
   (A)   The council shall, by resolution, determine and designate the
character or type of all official traffic signs and signals.
Subject to this determination, the chief of police is hereby authorized, and as
to those signs and signals required hereunder, it shall be his duty to place
and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, all official traffic signs
and signals. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose
shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the
city.
   (B)   No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be
enforceable against an alleged violator, if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, the sign herein required is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. (1972 Code)
9-3-2: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for any operator to disobey the instructions of any
official traffic sign or signal placed in accordance with the provisions of
this title, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. (1972 Code)
9-3-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic at an intersection is alternately directed to proceed and to
stop by the use of signals exhibiting colored lights or the words "Go",
"Caution", "Wait" and "Stop" said lights and terms shall indicate as follows,
except as provided in section
9-4-1 of this title.
   (A)   Green or "Go": Traffic facing the signal may proceed except that
vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to pedestrians and vehicles
lawfully within a crosswalk or the intersection at the time the signal was
exhibited.
   (B)   Yellow or "Caution" or "Wait", when shown following the green or "Go":
Traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the intersection unless so
close to the intersection that a stop cannot be made in safety.
   (C)   Red or "Stop": Traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the intersection and remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone. (1972
Code)
9-3-4: DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon or
in view of any street any unofficial sign, signal or device which purports to
be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or signal, or
which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view any
official traffic sign or signal. Every such prohibited sign, signal or device
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police is hereby
empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed, without notice. (1972
Code)
9-3-5: INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully deface, injure, move, obstruct
or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal. (1972 Code)
9-3-6: DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS:
The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish and designate and shall
thereafter maintain, or cause to be maintained, by appropriate devices, marks
or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in
his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and
at such other places as he may deem necessary. (1972 Code)
9-3-7: SAFETY ZONES AND LANES FOR TRAFFIC:
   (A)   The chief of police is hereby empowered to establish safety zones of
such kind and character and at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent
with the provisions of this title.
   (B)   The chief of police is also authorized to mark lanes for traffic on
street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with the
provisions of this title. (1972 Code)
9-3-8: STOP AND SLOW SIGNALS:
   (A)   The chief of police, by and with the consent of the council, shall
have authority to erect stop signals or devices at any intersection of streets,
alleys or public places where the public safety so requires, and when any stop
sign or device has been erected or installed by such authority all vehicles
shall come to a complete stop before proceeding beyond such stop sign or
device, and shall yield the right of way to vehicles traveling upon the
intersecting street, alley or public place.
   (B)   The chief of police, by and with the consent of the council, shall
have authority to erect slow signals or devices at any place upon public
streets, alleys or ways where the public safety so requires, and when any slow
sign or device has been erected or installed by such authority no operator of
any vehicle shall proceed beyond or past such slow sign except in a careful and
cautious manner with the vehicle under the complete control of the operator.
(1972 Code)
9-3-9: POLICE SIGNALS:
One blast of a police whistle shall indicate that the east and west traffic
must stop and the north and south traffic may proceed; two (2) blasts indicate
that the north and south traffic must stop and the east and west traffic may
proceed. Three (3) or more blasts is a signal alarm, and indicates the approach
of danger. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Pedestrians' Right Of Way
9-4-2: Rights And Duties At Controlled Intersections
9-4-3: Use Right Half Of Crosswalks
9-4-4: Soliciting
9-4-1: PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT OF WAY:
   (A)   The operator of any vehicle shall yield the right of way to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any
unmarked crosswalk at the end of a block except at intersections where the
movement of traffic is being regulated by police officers or traffic control
signals, and on the through streets set forth in section
9-7-1 of this title.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, it shall be unlawful
for the operator of any other vehicle approaching from the rear to overtake and
pass such stopped vehicle.
   (C)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked or unmarked crosswalk shall yield the right of way to vehicles upon the
roadway; provided, that this provision shall not relieve the driver of a
vehicle from the duty to exercise due care for the safety of pedestrians. (1972
Code)
9-4-2: RIGHTS AND DUTIES AT CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS:
At intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or by
police officers, operators of vehicles shall yield the right of way to
pedestrians crossing or those who have started to cross the roadway on a green
or "Go" signal, and in all other cases pedestrians shall yield the right of way
to vehicles lawfully directly ahead on a green or "Go" signal.
Pedestrians shall cross all streets at right angles and shall under no
circumstances cross a street intersection diagonally unless it be for the
purpose of conversing with a traffic officer, and at intersections where a
traffic officer is stationed, pedestrians shall cross with the released
traffic. (1972 Code)
9-4-3: USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS:
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right one- half (1/2) of
the crosswalks. (1972 Code)
9-4-4: SOLICITING:
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall stand in a highway for the purpose of soliciting
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle within the city of Spring Valley
except at the intersection of St. Paul Street and Spalding Street, eastbound
Illinois Route 29 at its intersection with U.S. Route 6 and Illinois Route 89,
and the intersection of U.S. Route 6 and Illinois Route 89 after filling out
the requisite petition and city council approval and if the soliciting agency
shall be:
      1.   Registered with the attorney general as a charitable organization as
provided by "an act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for
charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof, and making an
appropriation therefor", approved July 26, 1963, as amended;
      2.   Engaged in a statewide fundraising activity; and
      3.   Liable for any injuries to any person or property during the
solicitation which is causally related to an act of negligence of the
soliciting agent. Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be
eighteen (18) years of age or more and shall be wearing a high visibility
safety vest.
      4.   Must have liability insurance limits of at least one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) and list the city of Spring Valley as an additional insured and
the city of Spring Valley must have the documentation in its possession at
least seven (7) days prior to the fundraising activity.
   (D)   No person shall stand on or in the proximity of a highway for the
purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or
about to be parked on a highway.
   (E)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
guilty of a class A misdemeanor. (Ord. 1376, 5-12-2008)
CHAPTER 5
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
9-5-1: Stopping Prohibited In Specified Places
9-5-2: Stopping Prohibited On Obstructed Roadways
9-5-3: Passenger And Loading Zones
9-5-4: Bus Stops And Taxicab Stands
9-5-5: Parking In Bus Stops Or Taxicab Stands
9-5-6: Parking Of Buses Or Taxicabs In Other Than Designated Stands
9-5-7: Parking Restricted In Certain Places
9-5-8: Parking Prohibited On Certain Streets
9-5-9: Parking Limited During Certain Hours In Designated Places
9-5-10: Standing Or Parking Close To Curb
9-5-11: Parking Vehicle For Sale Prohibited
9-5-12: Building And Shipping Entrances; No Parking Signs
9-5-13: Parking Restrictions After Snowfall
9-5-14: Parking Restrictions For Street Cleaning
9-5-15: U-Turns Prohibited
9-5-16: Parking Restrictions On Certain Streets
9-5-17: Trucks Prohibited, Residential Districts
9-5-18: Two Hour Parking Limit Established
9-5-19: Towing Authorization
9-5-20: Establishment Of Fifteen Minute Parking Places
9-5-1: STOPPING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such
vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control sign or signal: (Ord. 284, 7-15-1975)
   (A)   Within the limits of intersections. (Ord. 1676, 4-24-2017)
   (B)   On a crosswalk.
   (C)   Within fifteen feet (15') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station.
   (D)   Within ten feet (10') of a fire hydrant.
   (E)   In front of a private driveway.
   (F)   On a sidewalk.
   (G)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
   (H)   That portion of the City right-of-way between the curb and the
exterior line of any lot or parcel of land not subdivided commonly referred to
as the berm but excepting therefrom any berm adjacent to the property of the
owner or tenant in possession of private property. (Ord. 284, 7-15-1975)
9-5-2: STOPPING PROHIBITED ON OBSTRUCTED ROADWAYS:
Whenever in the course of building operations or other similar operations it
becomes necessary in the prosecution of the same to temporarily obstruct a
portion of a roadway, the contractor or other person in charge thereof shall
notify the Chief of Police of such intended obstruction, whereupon the Chief of
Police shall give to the contractor or other person the authority to place "No
Parking" signs alongside of such temporary obstruction and on the opposite side
of the roadway therefrom, and the contractor or other person shall cause such
signs to be placed at such places during the obstruction; provided, that the
expense of procuring and furnishing such signs shall be borne by the contractor
or other person; and provided further, that such signs shall be in form and
nature as may be designated from time to time by the Council, by resolution.
(1972 Code)
9-5-3: PASSENGER AND LOADING ZONES:
   (A)   The Council shall have authority to determine the location of
passenger zones and loading zones and shall erect and maintain or cause to be
maintained appropriate signs indicating the same.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or
park said vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a
passenger zone.
   (C)   No freight or express shall be loaded or unloaded to or from any
streetcar or interurban car upon any public street in the City. (1972 Code)
9-5-4: BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS:
The Council is hereby authorized to establish bus stops and taxicab stands on
such public streets in such places and in such number as it shall determine to
be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus
stop or taxicab stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. (1972 Code)
9-5-5: PARKING IN BUS STOPS OR TAXICAB STANDS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle other than a bus to stand
or park in an officially designated bus stop, or for any vehicle other than a
taxicab to stand or park in an officially designated taxicab stand, except that
the operator of any passenger vehicle may temporarily stop in any such stop or
stand for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading
of passengers. (1972 Code)
9-5-6: PARKING OF BUSES OR TAXICABS IN OTHER THAN DESIGNATED STANDS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bus or taxicab to stand or park
upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop
or taxicab stand respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the
operator of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while engaged in
loading or unloading passengers. (1972 Code)
9-5-7: PARKING RESTRICTED IN CERTAIN PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any operator to stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a
street, other than an alley, in such manner or under such conditions as to
leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway for free
movement of vehicular traffic, except that an operator may stop temporarily
during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in
obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals or a police
officer.
   (A)   Parking in front of the United States Post Office in the City of
Spring Valley for a distance of one hundred feet (100') east of the
intersection of Erie Street and Spalding Street on the north side of Erie
Street same being in Walsh's Subdivision of block 18 of the original town
addition shall be restricted to patrons of the United States Post Office.
   (B)   Parking in front of the General Telephone Company business building on
the west side of Spalding Street adjacent to the south sixty five feet (65') of
Lot 1 in block 9 in Devlin's First Addition shall be restricted to patrons of
the General Telephone Company business building. (1972 Code)
   (C)   The operator of any vehicle is prohibited from stopping, standing, or
parking the vehicle on the east side of Spalding Street between its
intersection with Dakota Street and the alley between Dakota Street and First
Street. (Ord. 1590, 12-8-2014)
9-5-8: PARKING PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, except in an emergency, or except for
such length of time only as may be necessary to take on or let off passengers,
or to load, unload or deliver merchandise or material, at any time on the
following described portions of the following streets:
Cleveland Street, south side, between Lawrence Avenue and John Mitchell Avenue.
Cleveland Street, south side, between Spalding Street and Greenwood Street.
Cleveland Street, south side, between Terry Street and Taylor Street.
Cleveland Street, south side, from Mary Street to Strong Avenue.
Dakota Street (FA Route 689 [IL 89/U.S. 6]), north and south sides, from Strong
Avenue to the eastern boundary of the corporate limits of the City of Spring
Valley, except for designated parking lane on both sides of Dakota Street
between Richards Street and Hennessey Street and on both sides of Dakota Street
between Spalding Street and Greenwood Street. Parking in the designated parking
lanes shall be parallel parking only, diagonal parking shall be strictly
prohibited. Such parallel parking shall be so executed that the wheels of the
vehicles nearest the curb shall not be further away from the curb than twelve
inches (12").
Dakota Street, north side, between Ladd Road and westerly thereof, to the
southwest corner of Lot 16 in block 2 of the H.J. Miller's Addition to the City
of Spring Valley.
Dakota Street, north side, between Rose Street and Gertrude Street.
Dakota Street, north side, for a distance of seventy five feet (75') east of
the intersection of Dakota Street and Taylor Street.
Dakota Street, north side, from its intersection with Spalding Street east for
a distance of two hundred eight feet (208').
Dakota Street, north side, from the west right-of-way line of Richards Street,
westerly for a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150').
Devlin Street, both sides, from Strong Avenue to John Mitchell Avenue.
Devlin Street, north side, between Greenwood Street and Power Street.
Devlin Street, north side, from Cornelia Street to Hennessey Street.
Devlin Street, south side, from Hennessey Street to John Mitchell Avenue.
Erie Street, north side, from Power Street to Spalding Street.
Erie Street, south side, from Gallagher Street to Power Street.
Erie Street, south side, from Spalding Street to John Mitchell Avenue.
Erie Street, south side, on street adjacent to Lincoln School.
Erie Street, south side, west of Spalding Street.
Greenwood Street, west side, from Dakota Street to Cleveland Street.
Greenwood Street, west side, from First Street to Dakota Street.
Hennessey Street, west side, between Devlin Street and Minnesota Street.
Illinois Route 89, also known as Spalding Street, east side and west side, from
Devlin Street south to the south boundary of the corporate limits of the City
of Spring Valley.
Iowa Street, north side, between Power Street and Cornelia Street.
Iowa Street, north side, one hundred feet (100') east of its intersection with
Strong Avenue.
Iowa Street, south side, from Cornelia Street to Strong Avenue.
Janie Avenue, south side, from the western boundary of the intersection of
Janie Avenue and Strong Avenue continuing two hundred ten feet (210') to the
west on the south side of Janie Avenue.
John Mitchell Avenue, east side, between Cleveland Street and Erie Street.
Mary Street, east side.
Minnesota Street, north side, from Cornelia Street to Terry Street.
Minnesota Street, south side, from Terry Street to Strong Street.
North Barton Street, both the east and west sides of the 200 block, between
Cleveland Street and Erie Street.
Power Street, east side, between Dakota Street and Erie Street.
Power Street, east side, between First Street and Second Street.
Power Street, east side, from St. Paul Street to Devlin Street.
Power Street, west side, from a point eighty feet (80') northerly of the north
line of the alley situated between Dakota Street and Cleveland Street and to
the south right-of-way line of Dakota Street.
Richards Street and Hennessey Street from a point on the south curb line of
Dakota Street southerly for a distance of one hundred thirty feet (130').
Richards Street, east side, between Dakota Street and Fourth Street.
Richards Street, west side, between First Street and West Second Place.
St. Paul Street, south side, from Terry Street to Strong Avenue.
St. Paul Street, south side, from the west right-of-way line of Terry Street
westerly for a distance of fifty eight feet (58').
St. Paul Street, south side, west of Terry Street.
Spalding Street, along either side, from Dakota Street to Cleveland Street.
Spalding Street, east side, from Third Street south to alley.
Spalding Street (FA Route 689 [IL 89/U.S. 6]) east and west side between Dakota
Street and the south boundary of the corporate limits of the City of Spring
Valley, except for designated parking lanes on both sides of the road between
Cleveland Street and Devlin Street. Parking in the designated lanes shall be
parallel parking only, diagonal parking shall be strictly prohibited. Such
parallel parking shall be so executed that the wheels of the vehicles nearest
the curb shall not be further away from the curb than twelve inches (12").
Strong Avenue, both sides, from Caroline Street to Devlin Street.
Strong Avenue, west side, from Dakota Street to First Street.
Strong Avenue, west side, from St. Paul Street to Iowa Street.
Taylor Street, east side, from First Street to Second Street.
Taylor Street, west side, from First Street to Dakota Street.
Taylor Street, west side, from First Street to Second Street.
Terry Street, east side, from Cleveland Street to Erie Street.
U.S. Route 6, both sides, from Dalzell Road (County Highway 35/FAS 252) and
extending westerly plus 0.51 mile to the Burlington Northern Railroad Bridge in
Spring Valley.
West Dakota Street, north side, of the 900 block.
West Second Place, north side and south side, of the 400 block.
West Second Place, south side and on the north side, for a distance of eighty
five feet (85'), commencing at a point one hundred fifty three feet (153')
westerly of the west right-of-way line of Hennessey Street, thence westerly
from said point, a distance of eighty five feet (85') as aforesaid.
First Street, north side, between Cornelia Street and Mary Street.
First Street, north side, from Mary Street to Greenwood Street.
First Street, south side, from Greenwood Street to Taylor Street.
Second Street, north side, from Spalding Street to Terry Street.
Second Street, south side, from Power Street to Spalding Street.
Third Street, north side, from the west right-of-way line of Greenwood Street
westerly for a distance of fifty feet (50').
Third Street, south side, from Greenwood Street to Strong Avenue, except
between Spalding Street and Hennessey Street where parking is prohibited on the
north side.
Third Street, south side, from Strong Avenue to Richards Street.
Fourth Street, north side, between Power Street and Greenwood Street.
Fourth Street, north side, from Power Street to Greenwood Street.
Fourth Street, south side, from Greenwood Street to Hennessey Street.
Fifth Street, south side, from Greenwood Street to Terry Street.
Sixth Street, north side, from Greenwood Street to Terry Street.
(Ord., 2-2-1976; amd. Ord., 4-18-1977; Ord. 515, 7-6-1981; Ord. 516, 8-3-1981;
Ord., 10-19-1981; Ord. 536, 2-1-1982; Ord. 541, 4-19-1982; Ord. 546, 8-2-1982;
Ord. 577, 3-5-1984; Ord. 599, 2-4-1985; Ord. 637, 7-7-1986; Ord. 691, 5-1-1989;
Ord. 728, 12-3-1990; Ord. 740, 5-6-1991; Ord. 800, 9-7-1993; Ord. 802, 10-4-
1993; Ord. 833, 12-19-1994; Ord. 839, 8-7-1995; Ord. 860, 8-5-1996; Ord. 1077,
8-19-2002; Ord. 1190, 12-19-2005; Ord. 1329, 4-2-2007; Ord. 1385, 8-4-2008;
Ord. 1407, 2-2-2009; Ord. 1446, 1-4-2010; Ord. 1470, 8-30-2010; Ord. 1515, 9-
24-2012; Ord. 1588, 11-24-2014; Ord. 1632, 2-1-2016; Ord. 1633, 2-1-2016; Ord.
1738, 1-28-2019)
9-5-9: PARKING LIMITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS IN DESIGNATED PLACES:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, except in an emergency, or except for
such length of time only as may be necessary to take on or let off passengers,
or to load, unload or deliver merchandise or material, at any time on the
following described portions of the following streets: (Ord. 828, 10-3-1994)
   (A)   Parking Prohibited On Certain Streets During Designated Hours Of The
Day:
      1.   West of Power Street from Devlin Street north to alley during the
hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (1972 Code)
      2.   Parking on the north side of Dakota Street beginning at a point two
hundred eight feet (208') east of the intersection of Dakota Street and
Spalding Street and continuing east to the intersection of Dakota Street and
Greenwood Street shall be limited to one hour parking. (Ord. 1407, 2-2-2009)
      3.   It shall be unlawful to park any semitrailer except for such time
only as may be necessary to load, unload, or deliver merchandise or material at
any time on Spalding Street between Dakota Street and Illinois Street, and on
Dakota Street between Cornelia Street and Strong Avenue.
"Semitrailer" is defined as any vehicle without motive power designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is
carried by another vehicle. (Ord. 552, 11-1-1982)
      4.   North side of John F. Kennedy Drive between Strong Avenue extended
and Richards Street extended between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on school days when school is in session. (Ord. 828,
10-3-1994)
9-5-10: STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB:
Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or
signals, the operator of a vehicle shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle
in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the
direction of traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within six
inches (6") of the edge of the roadway, except as provided in the following
subsections:
   (A)   Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking,
vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or
signs.
   (B)   No vehicle shall remain standing in any street for the purpose of
unloading or loading merchandise for a longer period than thirty (30) minutes
in any one place, unless parked in the manner provided for in this section.
(1972 Code)
9-5-11: PARKING VEHICLE FOR SALE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon a street to
display the same for sale. (1972 Code)
9-5-12: BUILDING AND SHIPPING ENTRANCES; NO PARKING SIGNS:
Special no parking spaces in front of shipping entrances, and the entrances of
churches, hotels, theaters, office buildings or any other buildings where a
large number of people are accustomed to gather may be provided and established
by compliance with the following conditions: Any owner or occupant of such
building adjacent to a street or alley desiring a certain "no parking" space
immediately in front of the entrance of such building shall make application to
the council setting forth all relevant information and stating the number of
feet and the time desired for such purposes. The council shall have authority
to grant or refuse such applications in their discretion or to grant the same
with such restrictions or limitations as they may fix. In case such application
is granted the council shall issue to the applicant a permit, setting forth the
location of the "no parking" space, the number of feet frontage and the time
limit fixed, and such other limitations as may be pertinent. Such permit may,
at any time, be withdrawn, or further limited by the council. To enforce the
provisions of the permit, the holder of the same shall have the right to place
"no parking" signs on the sidewalk, within the time limit fixed in the permit,
marking the limits of the no parking space. The signs shall be of exact size,
character and description required by the council, but shall be provided at the
expense of the holder of the permit. (1972 Code)
9-5-13: PARKING RESTRICTIONS AFTER SNOWFALL:
   (A)   Unlawful Parking: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the
following designated streets of the City (as posted with the appropriate snow
route signs) after a snowfall of two inches (2") or more has occurred:
      1.   All streets of the City of Spring Valley located North of Seventh
Street;
      2.   All areas of the City of Spring Valley located West of John Mitchell
Avenue;
      3.   Dakota Street (U.S. Route 6) between Cornelia Street and Richards
Street;
      4.   Dakota Street (U.S. Route 6) between Greenwood Street and Cornelia
Street;
      5.   East Erie Street between Spalding Street and Greenwood Street (but
only the portion of Erie Street located one hundred fifteen feet (115') east of
the intersection of Erie Street and Spalding Street);
      6.   John Mitchell Avenue between Dakota Street and Devlin Street;
      7.   Johnson’s Addition Subdivision and all areas of the City of Spring
Valley located west of Johnson’s Addition Subdivision;
      8.   Richards Street between Dakota Street and the John F. Kennedy School
property;
      9.   Spalding Street (Illinois Route 89) between Dakota Street and
Illinois Street;
      10.   St. Paul Street between Cornelia Street and Terry Street;
      11.   Strong Avenue between Dakota Street and the John F. Kennedy School
property;
      12.   Sunset Farm Subdivision;
      13.   Webster Park Subdivision;
      14.   Greenwood Street between Dakota Street and St. Paul Street; and
      15.   Taylor Street between Dakota Street and Second Street.
   (B)   Parking Prohibited Across from Driveways: It shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle opposite a driveway on any street
within the corporate limits of the City of Spring Valley after a snowfall of
two inches (2") or more has occurred. The operator or owner of any vehicle
lawfully parked opposite a driveway on any street in the City of Spring Valley
prior to a snowfall of two inches (2") shall move the vehicle when notified to
do so by a member of the Spring Valley Police Department or not more than eight
(8) hours after the snowfall has ended, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 1888, 5-6-2024)
9-5-14: PARKING RESTRICTIONS FOR STREET CLEANING:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on Thursday of each week between the
hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in order to permit
the cleaning of said street, same being:
   (A)   St. Paul Street between Power Street and Terry Street.
   (B)   Dakota Street between Cornelia Street and Strong Avenue.
   (C)   Spalding Street between Illinois Street and Dakota Street.
Any vehicles parked on said streets during said period and not removed by the
owner shall be towed away by the police department at the expense of the owner
of such vehicle. Signs indicating prohibited parking shall be posted in each
block of the aforesaid designated areas. (1972 Code)
9-5-15: U-TURNS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make U-turns at any of
the following designated intersections:
   (A)   St. Paul Street and Spalding Street.
   (B)   St. Paul Street and Hennessey Street.
   (C)   St. Paul Street and Terry Street.
   (D)   St. Paul Street and Power Street.
   (E)   St. Paul Street and Greenwood Street.
   (F)   St. Paul Street and Cornelia Street. (Ord. 337, 9-7-1976)
9-5-16: PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN STREETS:
   (A)   Parking is hereby prohibited within fifteen feet (15') of the alley
intersecting Strong Avenue between Dakota Street and Cleveland Street.
   (B)   Parking is hereby prohibited within ten feet (10') of any driveway
intersecting Dakota Street between Strong Avenue and Richards Street.
   (C)   Parking is hereby prohibited Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. on the east side of Strong Avenue north from Dakota Street to Mary
Jane Lane.
   (D)   The city superintendent shall post necessary signs in said designated
streets and areas.
   (E)   Automobiles, trucks and other vehicles shall be permitted to park in
the designated parking lanes on both sides of Spalding Street (IL 89) between
Illinois Street and Cleveland Street. Parking in this area shall be parallel
parking only, diagonal parking being hereby expressly prohibited. Such parallel
parking shall be so executed that the wheels of the vehicles nearest the curb
shall not be farther away from the curb than twelve inches (12"). Parking will
not be permitted within the limits of intersections as determined by the state
from intersection studies.
   (F)   Trucks having a gross weight rating in excess of eight thousand
(8,000) pounds and trailers, whether attached or detached from a truck or cab,
shall be prohibited from parking on the east or west side of Greenwood Street
between Cleveland and Dakota Street, on the north side of Cleveland Street
between Spalding Street and Power Street and on the south side of Dakota Street
for one hundred feet (100') west of the intersection of Dakota Street and
Greenwood Street.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of section
9-5-16 shall be fined forty dollars ($40.00) for each offense.
(Ord., 3-15-1976; amd. Ord. 995, 9-5-2000; Ord. 1788, 9-21-2020; Ord. 1897, 7-
15-2024)
9-5-17: TRUCKS PROHIBITED, RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
No person shall park any tractor, semitrailer, trailer or "truck" as defined in
section
9-15-1 of this title on public property or private property in a residential
district except when said vehicle is actually delivering, unloading or loading
personal property to and from premises in such district. (Ord. 851, 1-15-1996)
9-5-18: TWO HOUR PARKING LIMIT ESTABLISHED:
   (A)   Except as may otherwise be prohibited, the parking of vehicles on the
following streets for a period of more than two (2) hours for each parking
occasion during the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. on Monday through Saturday, inclusive, is hereby prohibited:
Greenwood Street and Spalding Street between the alley south of St. Paul Street
and the alley north of St. Paul Street.
St. Paul Street between Hennessey and Power Street;
   (B)   Except as may otherwise be prohibited, the parking of vehicles on the
following street for a period of more than two (2) hours for each parking
occasion on any day between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M. is hereby prohibited:
On the north side of Cleveland Street between Spalding Street and Hennessey
Street. (Ord. 1009, 1-22-2001)
9-5-19: TOWING AUTHORIZATION:
The police department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty are
hereby authorized to remove and tow away or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, any car or vehicle illegally parked in any place
where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the
use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any
emergency vehicle; or any vehicle which has been parked in the two (2) hour
limit zone for a period of twelve (12) consecutive hours during said restricted
time, or which violates any section of this chapter. (Ord. 593, 12-3-1984)
9-5-20: ESTABLISHMENT OF FIFTEEN MINUTE PARKING PLACES:
There shall hereby be established one 15-minute parking place, designated by an
appropriate sign, on the west side of Greenwood Street immediately north of the
intersection between Greenwood Street and St. Paul Street. Said fifteen (15)
minute parking space shall be the first available parking space on the
northwest corner of the intersection between Greenwood Street and St. Paul
Street in the city.
There shall hereby be established one 15-minute parking place, designated by an
appropriate sign, on the east side of Greenwood Street immediately south of the
intersection between Greenwood Street and St. Paul Street. Said fifteen (15)
minute parking space shall be the first available parking space on the
southeast intersection between Greenwood Street and St. Paul Street in the
city. (Ord., 2-2-1987)
CHAPTER 6
OPERATION OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-6-1: Drive On Right Side
9-6-2: Turning At Intersections
9-6-3: Limitations On Turning Around
9-6-4: Emerging From Alley Or Private Driveway
9-6-5: Driving On Sidewalk
9-6-6: Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicle
9-6-7: Vicinity Of Fire Apparatus
9-6-8: Driving While Under Influence Of Alcohol Or Drugs
9-6-9: Reckless, Negligent Or Careless Driving
9-6-10: Starting, Stopping Or Turning Signals
9-6-11: Duty To Report Accidents
9-6-12: Right Of Way
9-6-1: DRIVE ON RIGHT SIDE:
Upon all streets, except upon one-way streets, the operator of a vehicle shall
drive the same upon the right one-half (1/2) of the street and the operator of
a slow moving vehicle shall drive the same as close as possible to the right
hand edge or curb of the street unless it is impracticable to travel on such
side of the street, and except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
subject to the limitations applicable by law in overtaking and passing.
The foregoing provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prevent the
marking of lanes for traffic upon any street and the location of designated
lanes for traffic moving in a particular direction or at designated speeds.
(1972 Code)
9-6-2: TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS:
   (A)   Right Turns: The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the right
at an intersection or into an alley or driveway shall approach the point of
turning in the traffic lane nearest the right hand edge or curb of the street,
and in turning, shall keep as close as practicable to the right hand curb or
edge of the street.
   (B)   Turning Left: The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left
at an intersection or into a driveway shall approach the point of turning in
the lane for traffic to the right of and next to the center of the roadway,
and, unless otherwise directed by "turning markers", the operator of a vehicle
in turning left at an intersection shall pass to the right of the center of the
intersection before turning. Upon streets laned for traffic and upon one-way
streets a left turn shall be made from the left lane of traffic.
   (C)   Turning Left On "Go" Signal: The operator of a vehicle intending to
turn to the left at an intersection where traffic is controlled by traffic
control signs or by a police officer shall proceed to make such left turn with
proper care to avoid accident and only upon the "Go" signal, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer. (1972 Code)
9-6-3: LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a U-turn, that is
to turn such vehicle so as to head in the reverse direction, between street
intersections, and it shall likewise be unlawful to make any such turn on any
street intersection where the making of such a turn is forbidden by official
traffic signs displayed at such intersection. (1972 Code)
9-6-4: EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator to drive a vehicle out of an
alley, or driveway without bringing such vehicle to a complete stop immediately
prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
such alleyway or driveway in all cases whereon either one or both sides of the
alleyway or driveway there is a building or other structure whether contiguous
to the alleyway or driveway or the main thoroughfare, or within twenty five
feet (25') of either the alleyway or driveway or the main thoroughfare.
   (B)   The operator of a vehicle emerging from a building shall bring such
vehicle to a complete stop immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto
the sidewalk area extending across the driveway leading from such building.
(1972 Code)
9-6-5: DRIVING ON SIDEWALK:
The operator of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway. (1972 Code)
9-6-6: APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE:
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle giving audible signal by
bell, siren or exhaust whistle, the operator of every other vehicle shall
immediately drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to
the right hand edge or curb of the street, clear of any intersection, and shall
stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle shall
have passed, unless otherwise directed by a police officer; and the operator of
every streetcar shall immediately stop such car clear of any intersection and
keep it in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle shall have
passed, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. (1972 Code)
9-6-7: VICINITY OF FIRE APPARATUS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle other than one on official
business, to follow closer than a city block, any fire apparatus traveling in
response to a fire alarm, or to drive into or stop any vehicle between the
street intersections between which the fire apparatus has stopped to answer a
fire alarm. (1972 Code)
9-6-8: DRIVING WHILE UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS:
No person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor may drive or be in
actual physical control of any vehicle within the city. No person who is a
habitual user of or under the influence of any narcotic drug, who is under the
influence of any other drug to a degree which renders him incapable of safely
driving a vehicle, may drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle
within the city. The fact that a person charged with a violation of this
section is or has been entitled to use such drug under the laws of the state of
Illinois does not constitute a defense against any charge of violation of this
section. (1972 Code)
9-6-9: RECKLESS, NEGLIGENT OR CARELESS DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the city in a careless,
reckless, negligent or wanton manner, or carelessly so as to endanger life or
property. (1972 Code)
9-6-10: STARTING, STOPPING OR TURNING SIGNALS:
The operator of any vehicle upon a highway before starting, stopping or turning
from a direct line shall first see that such movement can be made in safety,
and if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement, shall give a clearly
audible signal by sounding the horn, and, whenever the operation of any other
vehicle may be affected by such movement, shall give a signal as required by
law plainly visible to the driver of such other vehicle of the intention to
make such movement. (1972 Code)
9-6-11: DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENTS:
   (A)   The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
injuries or death to any person or property damage to an apparent extent of
fifty dollars ($50.00) or more shall within twenty four (24) hours make a
report of such accident to the police headquarters.
   (B)   The police department shall tabulate and analyze such reports as to
the number, cause and location of street traffic accidents. (1972 Code)
9-6-12: RIGHT OF WAY:
   (A)   All vehicles traveling upon public streets within the city shall give
the right of way to other vehicles approaching along intersecting streets from
the right, and shall have the right of way over those approaching from the
left.
   (B)   Provided, that in all cases police vehicles, fire department vehicles
and vehicles transporting United States mail and ambulances shall have the
right of way over other vehicles.
   (C)   The operator of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to
the left across the path of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction
may make such left turn only after giving a signal as required by the law, and
after affording a reasonable opportunity to the operator of such other vehicle
to avoid a collision. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 7
THROUGH STREETS, ONE-WAY STREETS, YIELD RIGHT OF WAY INTERSECTIONS AND STOP
INTERSECTIONS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Through Streets
9-7-2: Yield Right Of Way Intersections Designated
9-7-3: One-Way Streets Designated
9-7-4: Traffic Control Signals
9-7-5: Stop Intersections Designated
9-7-1: THROUGH STREETS:
Those streets and parts of streets designated in schedule I of this section are
hereby declared to be through streets for the purpose of this section:
   SCHEDULE I
Dakota Street from east city limits to Spalding Street.
Dakota Street from Spalding Street to west city limits.
St. Paul Street from Gallagher Street to Spalding Street.
St. Paul Street from Spalding Street to Terry Street.
Spalding Street from Dakota Street to Seventh Street.
Spalding Street from south city limits to St. Paul Street.
Spalding Street from St. Paul Street to Dakota Street.
When any through street hereinbefore established and not a part of the numbered
route of the state intersects any numbered state route, all vehicles and
traffic on such local through street shall come to a full stop before
proceeding upon the state route and when moving onto the state route shall
yield the right of way to vehicles traveling thereon.
Except as hereinbefore limited, all vehicles approaching any of said portion of
through streets from any street not herein designated as a through street, or
from any alley or driveway, shall be brought to a full stop before proceeding
upon any portion of said streets herein designated as through streets, and when
moving onto such through streets, shall give the right of way to vehicles
traveling thereon.
The chief of police is hereby authorized and required to place and maintain or
cause to be placed and maintained on each and every street intersecting a
through street designated herein, and at or near the property line of the
through street, appropriate signs upon the street (and in addition thereto may
place and maintain any appropriate marks on the roadway), such signs, devices
or marks to bear the word "STOP" and to be located in such position and to be
provided with letters of a size to be clearly legible from a distance of at
least one hundred feet (100') at night or so placed as to be illuminated by
streetlights or by the headlights of approaching motor vehicles. (1972 Code)
9-7-2: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED:
Those intersections designated in schedule II of this section are hereby
declared to be yield right of way intersections for the purpose of this
section. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles on
the first named streets below shall yield the right of way to traffic on the
second named streets below:
   SCHEDULE II
Central Street shall yield to traffic on Oak Street.
Cleveland Street shall yield to traffic on Barton Street.
Cleveland Street shall yield to traffic on Cornelia Street.
Cleveland Street shall yield to traffic on Hennessey Street.
Cleveland Street shall yield to traffic on Lawrence Lane.
Cleveland Street shall yield to traffic on Mary Street.
Cleveland Street shall yield to traffic on Richards Street.
Cleveland Street shall yield to traffic on Taylor Street.
Deerpath Road shall yield to traffic on Oakdale Avenue.
Devlin Street shall yield to traffic on Cornelia Street.
Devlin Street shall yield to traffic on Lawrence Lane.
Devlin Street shall yield to traffic on Power Street.
Devlin Street shall yield to traffic on Taylor Street.
Devlin Street shall yield to traffic on Terry Street.
Dover Drive shall yield to traffic on Yardley Drive.
Erie Street shall yield to traffic on Cornelia Street.
Erie Street shall yield to traffic on Greenwood Street.
Erie Street shall yield to traffic on Hennessey Street.
Erie Street shall yield to traffic on Lawrence Lane.
Erie Street shall yield to traffic on Richards Street.
Erie Street shall yield to traffic on Taylor Street.
Erie Street shall yield to traffic on Terry Street.
Iowa Street shall yield to traffic on Greenwood Street.
Iowa Street shall yield to traffic on Hennessey Street.
Iowa Street shall yield to traffic on Power Street.
Iowa Street shall yield to traffic on Richards Street.
Iowa Street shall yield to traffic on Taylor Street.
Iowa Street shall yield to traffic on Terry Street.
Lance Street shall yield to traffic on Oak Street.
Lawrence Lane shall yield to traffic on Devlin Street.
Mary Street shall yield to traffic on Third Street.
Minnesota Street shall yield to traffic on Cornelia Street.
Minnesota Street shall yield to traffic on Hennessey Street.
Minnesota Street shall yield to traffic on Power Street.
Minnesota Street shall yield to traffic on Strong Avenue.
Minnesota Street shall yield to traffic on Terry Street.
Nelson Street shall yield to traffic on Oak Street.
Rose Street (northbound) shall yield to traffic on Bern Street.
Strong Avenue shall yield to traffic on Devlin Street.
Strong Avenue shall yield to traffic on Erie Street.
Strong Avenue shall yield to traffic on St. Paul Street.
First Street shall yield to traffic on Cornelia Street.
First Street shall yield to traffic on Greenwood Street.
First Street shall yield to traffic on Hennessey Street.
First Street shall yield to traffic on Taylor Street.
First Street shall yield to traffic on Terry Street.
Second Place shall yield to traffic on Taylor Street.
Second Street shall yield to traffic on Cornelia Street (westbound).
Second Street shall yield to traffic on Greenwood Street.
Second Street shall yield to traffic on Hennessey Street.
Second Street shall yield to traffic on Mary Street.
Second Street shall yield to traffic on Power Street.
Second Street shall yield to traffic on Spalding Street.
Second Street shall yield to traffic on Taylor Street.
Third Street shall yield to traffic on Hennessey Street.
Third Street shall yield to traffic on Power Street.
Third Street shall yield to traffic on Terry Street.
Fourth Street shall yield to traffic on Hennessey Street.
Fourth Street shall yield to traffic on Spalding Street.
Fifth Street shall yield to traffic on Greenwood Street.
Fifth Street shall yield to traffic on Hennessey Street.
Fifth Street shall yield to traffic on Spalding Street.
Sixth Street shall yield to traffic on Greenwood Street.
Sixth Street shall yield to traffic on Hennessey Street.
Sixth Street shall yield to traffic on Spalding Street.
Seventh Street shall yield to traffic on Greenwood Street.
(Ord., 12-17-1975; amd. Ord., 6-2-1980; Ord. 769, 4-6-1992; Ord. 780, 10-5-
1992; Ord. 800, 9-7-1993; Ord. 803, 10-18-1993; Ord. 863, 9-3-1996; Ord. 933,
6-21-1999; Ord. 957, 3-6-2000; Ord. 1048, 11-5-2001; Ord. 1051, 11-19-2001;
Ord. 1065, 4-1-2002; Ord. 1066, 4-1-2002; Ord. 1074, 7-15-2002; Ord. 1105, 5-
19-2003; Ord. 1111, 7-7-2003; Ord. 1159, 1-17-2005; Ord. 1162, 2-7-2005; Ord.
1166, 6-6-2005; Ord. 1535, 7-8-2013; Ord. 1585, 10-13-2014)
9-7-3: ONE-WAY STREETS DESIGNATED:
Those streets and parts of streets designated in schedule III of this section
are hereby declared to be one-way streets for the purpose of this section:
(Ord., 12-6-1976)
   SCHEDULE III
 
Name Of Street  Direction Of Traffic Movement
Erie Street     West from Spalding Street to John Mitchell Avenue
J.F.K. Drive    South from John F. Kennedy School to Strong Avenue, except for
                school buses and vehicles transporting special needs children
Oak Street      North from Central Street to U.S. Route 6
St. Paul Street East from John Mitchell Avenue to Terry Street
 
(Ord., 12-6-1976; amd. Ord. 1386, 9-15-2008)
The chief of police is hereby authorized and required to place signs indicating
the direction of traffic at every intersection where the movement in the
opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord., 12-6-1976)
9-7-4: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
The chief of police is authorized to place additional traffic control signs
exhibiting the words "Caution" or "Slow" indicating any dangerous intersection
or traffic area, including the placing of such temporary signs in construction
zones, including the detouring of traffic due to a fire, accident or other
emergency. (1972 Code)
9-7-5: STOP INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED:
Those intersections designated in schedule IV of this section are hereby
declared to be stop intersections for the purpose of this section. When signs
are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles on the first named
streets below shall stop:
   SCHEDULE IV
Bassick Plant entrance at Strong Avenue.
Bern Street at Rose Street.
Bernal Court at Oakdale Court.
Briarcliff Drive at State Route 29.
Briarcliff Drive at Yardley Drive.
Caroline Street at Greenwood Street.
Caroline Street at Spalding Street.
Caroline Street at Taylor Street.
Caroline Street, eastbound and westbound, at Terry Street.
Central Street at Elm Street.
Central Street at Oak Street.
Central Street, eastbound and westbound, at Prairie Street.
Central Street, westbound, at Elm Street.
Century Road at Northwestern Street.
Cleveland Street at Hennessey Street.
Cleveland Street at John Mitchell Avenue.
Cleveland Street at Richard Street.
Cleveland Street at Spalding Street.
Cleveland Street at Taylor Street.
Cleveland Street, eastbound and westbound, at Greenwood Street.
Cleveland Street, eastbound and westbound, at Lawrence Avenue.
Cleveland Street, eastbound and westbound, at Power Street.
Cleveland Street, eastbound and westbound, at Terry Street.
Cornelia Street at Dakota Street.
Cornelia Street at Erie Street.
Cornelia Street at St. Paul Street.
Dakota Street at Ladd Road.
Dakota Street at Mary Street.
Dakota Street at Rose Street.
Dakota Street at Spalding Street (traffic control).
Dakota Street, westbound traffic, at its intersection with Rose Street.
Dalzell Street at Marquette Road.
Devlin Street at Greenwood Street.
Devlin Street at Hennessey Street.
Devlin Street at John Mitchell Avenue.
Devlin Street at Lawrence Avenue.
Devlin Street at Spalding Street.
Devlin Street at Strong Avenue.
Devlin Street at Taylor Street.
Elm Street at Nelson Street.
Elm Street at U.S. Route 6.
Elm Street, northbound and southbound, at Central Street.
Emily Drive, eastbound, at Coal Miners Road.
Erie Street at Cornelia Street.
Erie Street at John Mitchell Avenue.
Erie Street at Spalding Street.
Erie Street at Strong Avenue.
Erie Street, eastbound and westbound, at Power Street.
Erie Street to Hennessey Street.
Erie Street, westbound, at Richards Street
Erie Street to Taylor Street.
Erie Street to Terry Street.
Fork Street at Marquette Road.
Greenwood Street at Dakota Street.
Greenwood Street at St. Paul Street.
Greenwood Street at Third Street.
Greenwood Street at Fourth Street (southbound).
Greenwood Street at Sixth Street (southbound).
Greenwood Street, northbound and southbound, at Devlin Street.
Greenwood Street, northbound and southbound, at Minnesota Street.
Hall High School entrance road at John Mitchell Avenue.
Hall High School Lane at Dakota Street.
Hennessey Street at Caroline Street.
Hennessey Street at Dakota Street.
Hennessey Street at Devlin Street.
Hennessey Street at Erie Street.
Hennessey Street at St. Paul Street.
Hennessey Street at Second Place.
Hennessey Street at Second Street.
Hennessey Street at Fourth Street.
Hennessey Street at Seventh Street.
Illinois Street at Spalding Street.
Iowa Street at Spalding Street.
Iowa Street at Taylor Street.
Iowa Street, westbound, at Strong Avenue.
J.F.K. Drive at Strong Avenue.
Janie Avenue at Strong Street.
John Mitchell Avenue at Dakota Street.
John Mitchell Avenue at Erie Street.
Joseph Ruva Drive at Illinois Route 89/U.S. Route 6.
Kimberly Drive, eastbound, at Coal Miners Road.
Ladd Road at Dakota Street.
Ladd Road at Route 6/29 Junction.
Lance Street at Elm Street.
Lance Street at Prairie Street.
Lawrence Avenue at Devlin Street.
Lawrence Avenue at Erie Street.
Marquette Road northbound and southbound with Marquette Lane.
Mary Jane Lane at Strong Avenue.
Mary Street at Dakota Street.
Mary Street at Erie Street.
Miller Cemetery Road at Northwestern Street.
Miller Cemetery Road at State Route 29.
Minnesota Street at Spalding Street.
Minnesota Street, eastbound and westbound, at Greenwood Street.
Minnesota Street, eastbound and westbound, at Richards Street.
Nelson Street at Elm Street.
No. 3 Coal Miners Road at Northwestern Street.
No. 3 Coal Miners Road at State Route 29.
Northwestern Street at Coal Miners Road.
Northwestern Street at Dover Drive.
Northwestern Street at Pulaski Street.
Oak Street at Central Street.
Oakdale Avenue at Dakota Street.
Peru-Princeton Road, eastbound and westbound, at Spring Creek Drive.
Power Street at Dakota Street.
Power Street at St. Paul Street.
Power Street at Third Street.
Power Street at Fourth Street.
Prairie Street at Marquette Road.
Prairie Street at Nelson Street.
Prairie Street, northbound, at Central Street.
Pulaski Lane at Pulaski Street.
Pulaski Street at Northwestern Street.
Pulaski Street at Thorn Street.
Ravine Street at Marquette Road.
Richards Street at Cleveland Street.
Richards Street at Dakota Street.
Richards Street at Devlin Street.
Richards Street at Erie Street.
Richards Street at St. Paul Street.
Richards Street, northbound and southbound, at Minnesota Street.
Rock Island Street at Marquette Road.
Rose Street at Dakota Street.
Rose Street, northbound, at Bern Street.
St. Bede entrance at Route 6.
St. Bede/Weber Lane at Route 6.
St. Joseph Cemetery at Oak Street.
St. Margaret's Hospital north exit at Mary Street.
St. Margaret's Hospital south exit at Mary Street.
St. Paul Street at Spalding Street.
St. Paul Street at Strong Avenue.
St. Paul Street, eastbound, at Strong Avenue.
Sandy Drive, northbound, at Mary Jane Lane.
Sandy Drive, southbound, at Janie Avenue.
Spalding Street at Dakota Street (traffic control).
Spalding Street at Second Street.
Spalding Street at Seventh Street.
Spalding Street, north side, at Fourth Street.
Stewart-Warner/Bassick entrance at Route 6.
Stewart-Warner/Hobbs entrance at Route 6.
Strong Avenue at Dakota Street.
Strong Avenue at Devlin Street.
Strong Avenue at Erie Street.
Strong Avenue at Fourth Street.
Strong Avenue at its intersection with Iowa Street.
Strong Avenue extended at John F. Kennedy Drive.
Strong Avenue, northbound, at Iowa Street.
Strong Street at its intersection with Minnesota Street.
Strong Street, northbound and southbound, at Janie Avenue.
Sunset Drive at Peru-Princeton Road.
Taylor Street at Cleveland Street.
Taylor Street at Dakota Street.
Taylor Street at Erie Street.
Taylor Street at St. Paul Street.
Taylor Street at Fourth Street.
Taylor Street, northbound and southbound, at Minnesota Street.
Taylor Street, northbound and southbound, at Third Street.
Terry Street at Dakota Street.
Terry Street at Erie Street.
Terry Street at its intersection with Devlin Street.
Terry Street at St. Paul Street.
Terry Street at Fourth Street.
Terry Street, northbound and southbound, at Second Street.
Willow Trail at Greenwood Street.
First Street at Greenwood Street.
First Street at Mary Street.
First Street at Power Street.
First Street at Richards Street.
First Street at Spalding Street.
First Street at Strong Avenue.
Second Place, eastbound, at Richards Street.
Second Place, westbound, at Strong Avenue.
Second Street at Greenwood Street.
Second Street at Hennessey Street.
Second Street at Ladd Road.
Second Street at Mary Street.
Second Street at Power Street.
Second Street at Route 6/29 Junction.
Second Street at Spalding Street.
Second Street, eastbound and westbound, at Richards Street.
Second Street, eastbound and westbound, at Terry Street.
Second Street, westbound, at Strong Avenue.
Third Street at Ladd Road.
Third Street at Mary Street.
Third Street at Power Street.
Third Street at Richards Street.
Third Street at Route 6/29 Junction.
Third Street at Strong Avenue.
Third Street, eastbound and westbound, at Greenwood Street.
Third Street, eastbound and westbound, at Spalding Street.
Third Street, eastbound and westbound, at Taylor Street.
Fourth Street at Hennessey Street.
Fourth Street at Ladd Road.
Fourth Street at Power Street.
Fourth Street at Richards Street.
Fourth Street at Spalding Street.
Fourth Street at Terry Street.
Fifth Street at Terry Street.
Sixth Street at Terry Street.
Seventh Street, eastbound and westbound, at Hennessey Street.
(Ord., 12-15-1975; amd. Ord. 412; Ord., 1-21-1980; Ord., 6-16-1980; Ord. 551,
11-1-1982; Ord. 564, 6-20-1983; Ord. 569, 9-19-1983; Ord. 582, 5-21-1984; Ord.
598, 2-4-1985; Ord., 6-3-1985; Ord., 3-3-1986; Ord. 636, 7-7-1986; Ord., 5-2-
1988; Ord. 720, 6-4-1990; Ord. 724, 7-16-1990; Ord. 769, 4-6-1992; Ord. 774, 7-
6-1992; Ord. 776, 8-3-1992; Ord. 780, 10-5-1992; Ord. 788, 3-15-1993; Ord. 795,
6-21-1993; Ord. 800, 9-7-1993; Ord. 803, 10-18-1993; Ord. 828, 10-3-1994; Ord.
835, 3-6-1995; Ord. 861, 8-19-1996; Ord. 863, 9-3-1996; Ord. 901, 1-19-1998;
Ord. 933, 6-21-1999; Ord. 957, 3-6-2000; Ord. 1048, 11-5-2001; Ord. 1051, 11-
19-2001; Ord. 1065, 4-1-2002; Ord. 1066, 4-1-2002; Ord. 1074, 7-15-2002; Ord.
1079, 9-3-2002; Ord. 1097, 2-17-2003; Ord. 1098, 3-3-2003; Ord. 1104, 5-19-
2003; Ord. 1105, 5-19-2003; Ord. 1111, 7-7-2003; Ord. 1159, 1-17-2005; Ord.
1162, 2-7-2005; Ord. 1166, 6-6-2005; Ord. 1321, 3-5-2007; Ord. 1329, 4-2-2007;
Ord. 1334, 5-7-2007; Ord. 1337, 5-21-2007; Ord. 1358, 9-24-2007; Ord. 1374, 4-
28-2008; Ord. 1386, 9-15-2008; Ord. 1411, 3-2-2009; Ord. 1414, 3-16-2009; Ord.
1491, 8-15-2011; Ord. 1523, 1-21-2013; Ord. 1535, 7-8-2013; Ord. 1552, 12-9-
2013; Ord. 1567, 6-9-2014; Ord. 1584, 10-13-2014; Ord. 1585, 10-13-2014; Ord.
1588, 11-24-2014; Ord. 1699, 9-11-2017; Ord. 1754, 6-17-2019; Ord. 1787, 8-10-
2020)
CHAPTER 8
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
SECTION:
9-8-1: Flag Or Light At End Of Load
9-8-2: Mufflers
9-8-3: Spilling Contents Of Load Upon Streets
9-8-4: Horns
9-8-5: Lights
9-8-6: Obstructions To Operator's View, Driving Mechanism
9-8-7: Prohibition Of The Use Of Mechanical Exhaust Braking Devices
9-8-1: FLAG OR LIGHT AT END OF LOAD:
Whenever the load on any vehicle shall extend more than four feet (4') beyond
the rear of the bed or body thereof, there shall be displayed at the end of
such load in such position as to be clearly visible at all times from the rear
of such vehicle a red flag not less than twelve inches (12") both in length and
width, except that between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2)
hour before sunrise there shall be displayed at the end of such load a red
light plainly visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least two hundred
feet (200') from the rear of the vehicle. (1972 Code)
9-8-2: MUFFLERS:
   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a highway unless such motor
vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant
operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to use a muffler cutout on any motor vehicle on a
highway. (1972 Code)
9-8-3: SPILLING CONTENTS OF LOAD UPON STREETS:
No vehicle shall be driven or moved on a highway unless such vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dripping, sifting,
leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. (1972 Code)
9-8-4: HORNS:
   (A)   A person driving a vehicle within the city must have same properly
equipped with a horn, bell or other device for signaling by sound, to give
warning of its approach; no horn, bell or other signaling device to be used
except as necessary to give warning.
   (B)   Siren signaling devices shall not be used on any vehicle except those
operated by the police department, fire department and authorized public
utility vehicles when on emergency calls. (1972 Code)
9-8-5: LIGHTS:
When upon any public highway in the city during the period from one hour after
sunset to sunrise, every motor bicycle shall carry one lighted lamp and every
motor vehicle two (2) lighted lamps showing white lights, or lights of a yellow
or amber tint, visible at least two hundred feet (200') in the direction toward
which each motor bicycle or motor vehicle is proceeding, and each motor vehicle
or trailer shall also exhibit at least one lighted lamp which shall be so
situated as to throw a red light visible in the reverse direction. No motor
vehicle or motor bicycle, except those used for fire apparatus, police patrols
or ambulances shall have any lamps which show a red or green light in the
direction in which the motor vehicle or motor bicycle is proceeding. On
approaching another vehicle proceeding in an opposite direction, and when
within not less than two hundred fifty feet (250') of same, any person in
charge of a motor bicycle or motor vehicle equipped with electric headlights
shall dim, dip or extinguish such headlights. (1972 Code)
9-8-6: OBSTRUCTIONS TO OPERATOR'S VIEW, DRIVING MECHANISM:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the same
when such vehicle is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat of the
vehicle such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the operator to the
front or sides, or to interfere with the operator's control over the driving
mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any passenger in a vehicle to ride in such a
position as to interfere with the operator's view ahead, or to the sides or to
interfere with the operator's control over the driving mechanism of the
vehicle. (1972 Code)
9-8-7: PROHIBITION OF THE USE OF MECHANICAL EXHAUST BRAKING DEVICES:
   (A)   No person shall operate, or cause to be used or operated, within the
city any mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or
deceleration of any vehicle by converting engine power to compressed air.
   (B)   It shall be affirmative defense that the person operating, or causing
to be used or operated, such mechanical exhaust device in circumstances where
it was necessary to avoid injury or an accident.
   (C)   Any person violating the terms and provisions of this section shall be
subject to penalties as provided in section
9-13-1 of this title.
   (D)   The city shall provide notice of the prohibition created by this
section by posting clearly visible signs on all truck routes at or near the
entrances to the city, utilizing city signs off of state right of way or on
state right of way with Illinois department of transportation authority.
   (E)   Any motion, order, resolution, or ordinance, or part thereof, in
conflict with the terms and provisions of this section shall be and hereby is
to extent of any such conflict hereby superseded and waived.
   (F)   If any sentence, clause or other part of this section shall be found
to be void, invalid, or unconstitutional, then such finding shall not affect
the remaining portions of this section. (Ord. 1042, 9-4-2001)
CHAPTER 9
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
SECTION:
9-9-1: Unattended Vehicles
9-9-2: Coasters, Roller Skates, Similar Devices
9-9-3: Clinging To Moving Vehicles
9-9-4: Driving Through Processions
9-9-5: Starting Parked Vehicle
9-9-6: Crossing Fire Hose
9-9-7: Riding On Handlebars
9-9-8: Zones Of Quiet
9-9-9: Safety Zone
9-9-10: Golf Carts
9-9-1: UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle
to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes thereon and
stopping the motor of the vehicle, and when standing upon a perceptible grade,
without turning the wheels of the vehicle to the curb or the side of the street
or highway. (1972 Code)
9-9-2: COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, SIMILAR DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person rollerskating, or riding in or by means of
any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device to go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk. (1972 Code)
9-9-3: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle,
coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle to cling to, or attach himself
or his vehicle to any other moving vehicle upon any roadway. (1972 Code)
9-9-4: DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSIONS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive between the
vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in
motion; provided, that said vehicles are conspicuously designated. (1972 Code)
9-9-5: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
The driver of a parked vehicle about to start shall give moving vehicles the
right of way and the driver of a parked vehicle shall give a timely and visible
warning in some unmistakable manner before starting. (1972 Code)
9-9-6: CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department
when laid down on any street, private driveway or track to be used at any fire
or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire chief or fire department
official in command. (1972 Code)
9-9-7: RIDING ON HANDLEBARS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle or motorcycle, when upon
the streets, to carry any other person upon the handlebars, frame or tank of
any such vehicle, or for any person to so ride upon any such vehicle. (1972
Code)
9-9-8: ZONES OF QUIET:
The chief of police may declare any street or alley within two hundred feet
(200') of a hospital, school or church a zone of quiet, and in this zone, when
so declared, there shall be no ringing of bells, sounding of horns, gongs or
whistles or itinerant music. (1972 Code)
9-9-9: SAFETY ZONE:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle at any time to drive the
same over or through a "safety zone" as defined in this title. (1972 Code)
9-9-10: GOLF CARTS:
   (A)   Subject to the subsequent provisions of this section, the city shall
allow the operation of golf carts on municipal streets, roads and highways
within the corporate limits of the city where the city has exclusive
jurisdiction over the street, road or highway. Nothing contained in this
section shall allow the operation of a golf cart on U.S. Route 6 or Illinois
Route 89 within the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   Any golf cart operated on a street, road or highway within the
corporate limits of the city must, at a minimum, have the following safety
equipment: brakes, steering apparatus, tires, a rearview mirror, red
reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear, slow moving emblem 1  on
the rear of the golf cart, a headlight that emits a white light visible from a
distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front, a taillamp that emits a red
light visible from at least one hundred feet (100') from the rear, brake
lights, and turn signals. When operated on a roadway, a golf cart shall have
its headlight and taillamps lighted as required by section 12-201 of the
Illinois vehicle code.
   (C)   No person shall operate a golf cart on the streets, roads or highways
within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a permit from
the police department. In order to obtain a permit from the police department
to operate a golf cart on the streets, roads and highways of the city, the
person applying for the permit must possess a valid Illinois driver's license,
provide proof of liability insurance in the minimum amounts set forth under the
mandatory insurance provisions contained in the Illinois vehicle code and the
Illinois insurance code, and prove that they have a physical handicap or
disability which would entitle the person to a handicap license registration
plate under the provisions set forth for issuing said plates in the Illinois
vehicle code. (Ord. 924, 2-15-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. As required of other vehicles in section 12-709 of the Illinois vehicle
  code.
CHAPTER 10
PARKING METER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-10-1: Parking Meter Zones Created
9-10-2: Installation Of Meters
9-10-3: Regulations
9-10-4: Placement; Operation Of Meters
9-10-5: Curb Markings; Spaces Designated
9-10-6: Deposit Of Coins Required
9-10-7: Lawful Occupancy Of Space; Overtime Parking
9-10-8: Injury To Meters
9-10-9: Deposit Of Unlawful Coin
9-10-10: Violations; Report Of Police Officers
9-10-11: Appearance; Payment Of Fine
9-10-12: Purpose; Disposition Of Coins
9-10-13: Meter Collectors; Bond Required
9-10-1: PARKING METER ZONES CREATED:
Parking meter zones as defined herein are hereby created on the following
streets of the city:
Greenwood Street from Erie Street to St. Paul Street; and from St. Paul Street
to Devlin Street.
Spalding Street from Erie Street to Devlin Street.
St. Paul Street from Power Street to Terry Street. (Ord., 12-6-1976)
9-10-2: INSTALLATION OF METERS:
In the parking meter zones the mayor shall cause parking meters to be installed
in such numbers and at such places as may be necessary to the regulations,
control and inspection of the parking of vehicles therein, including the
reservation of loading zones for commercial vehicles and shall cause parking
meter spaces to be designated as hereinafter provided. (1972 Code)
9-10-3: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or to permit a vehicle to remain
parked in any parking meter zone without use of a parking meter except on
Sundays and legal holidays in the state of Illinois during the periods
hereinafter designated:
Monday from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
Tuesday from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M.
Wednesday from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M.
Thursday from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
Friday from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
Saturday from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. (1972
Code)
9-10-4: PLACEMENT; OPERATION OF METERS:
The parking meters installed in the parking meter zones as established and
provided for in section
9-10-1 of this chapter shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to
the individual parking places hereinafter described. Each parking meter shall
be placed or set in such manner as to show or display by a signal that the
parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking
meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time
established by the city and when operated shall indicate on and by its dial and
pointer the duration of the period of legal parking and on the expiration of
such period, shall indicate illegal or overparking. (1972 Code)
9-10-5: CURB MARKINGS; SPACES DESIGNATED:
The mayor shall have markings painted or placed upon the curb and/or upon the
street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the
parking space for which the meter is to be used and each vehicle parking
adjacent to any parking meter shall park within the lines or markings so
established. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to park any
vehicle across any such line or marking or to park the vehicle in such position
that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines
or markings.
When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the adjacent
curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked so
that the foremost part of the vehicle shall be alongside of and next to the
parking meter. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal to
the curb or sidewalk any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked
with the foremost part of such vehicle directed at and next to the meter. (1972
Code)
9-10-6: DEPOSIT OF COINS REQUIRED:
When any vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a parking meter
is located in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the operator of
the vehicle shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately deposit or
cause to be deposited a one cent ($0.01) or five cent ($0.05) coin of the
United States, in the parking meter, and put the meter in operation, and
failure to deposit such coin and put the meter in operation shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and shall subject the person to the penalty
prescribed hereinafter. (1972 Code)
9-10-7: LAWFUL OCCUPANCY OF SPACE; OVERTIME PARKING:
Upon placing the meter in operation as aforesaid, the parking space may be
lawfully occupied by the vehicle for a period of twelve (12) consecutive
minutes for each one cent ($0.01) coin of the United States deposited therein
up to one hundred twenty (120) minutes, or for a period of sixty (60)
consecutive minutes for each five cent ($0.05) coin of the United States
deposited therein up to one hundred twenty (120) minutes and payment of the
aforesaid amounts for the foregoing periods shall be made for parking in the
areas set forth hereinbefore. If any vehicle shall remain parked in any such
parking space beyond the parking time limit as fixed by the coins deposited in
the meter for such parking space, the parking meter shall by its dial and
pointer indicate such illegal parking and in that event, the vehicle shall be
considered parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time and
shall constitute a violation of this chapter and the owner or operator thereof
shall be punished as hereinafter set forth. (1972 Code)
9-10-8: INJURY TO METERS:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any
person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy or
impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this chapter. (1972 Code)
9-10-9: DEPOSIT OF UNLAWFUL COIN:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter to
deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter, any slug, device or
metallic substitute, or any other substitute for a one cent ($0.01) or five
cent ($0.05) coin of the United States. (1972 Code)
9-10-10: VIOLATIONS; REPORT OF POLICE OFFICERS:
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city, acting in accordance
with instructions issued by the chief of police to report:
   (A)   The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been
parking in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The state license number of such vehicle.
   (C)   The time the vehicle is parking in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter.
   (D)   Any other facts or knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. Each such police
officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator
thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this
chapter instructing such owner or operator to report to the police department
in regard to such violation. Each such owner or operator may within twenty four
(24) hours of the time when such notice was attached to such vehicle pay to the
officer in charge the sum of twenty five cents ($0.25) at the police station or
deposit twenty five cents ($0.25) in the collection box as a penalty for and in
full satisfaction of such violation; provided further, that one recheck, if the
vehicle continues to remain parked in violation the officer shall attach a
second notice, and the owner or operator may within twenty four (24) hours of
the time when such second notice was attached to the vehicle: pay to the
officer in charge the sum of one dollar ($1.00) at the police station or
deposit one dollar ($1.00) in the collection box as a penalty for such second
violation. The failure of the owner or operator to make such payment within
twenty four (24) hours shall render the owner or operator subject to the
penalties provided in this code.
Each such police officer shall also attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner
or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a
provision of this chapter instructing the owner or operator to report to the
police department in regard to such violation. (1972 Code)
9-10-11: APPEARANCE; PAYMENT OF FINE:
Each owner or operator may, within twenty four (24) hours of the time when the
notice was attached to such vehicle pay to the desk sergeant at the police
station as a penalty, for and in full satisfaction of the violation, the sum of
fifty cents ($0.50). The failure of the owner or operator to make such payment
within twenty four (24) hours, shall render the owner or operator subject to
the general penalties provided for by this code. (1972 Code)
9-10-12: PURPOSE; DISPOSITION OF COINS:
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided herein are
hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and
control of traffic upon the streets, and also the cost of supervision and
regulation of the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones created
hereby, and to cover the cost of purchasing, leasing, acquiring, installation,
operation, maintenance, supervision, regulation and control of the parking
meters described herein. (1972 Code)
9-10-13: METER COLLECTORS; BOND REQUIRED:
The mayor shall designate such collectors and methods as are necessary to
properly collect all coins deposited in the meter boxes. Collectors shall be
only such employees as are now or hereafter duly bonded in a sum of not less
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the faithful performance of their
duties. All money so collected shall be deposited with the clerk; provided,
however, a separate fund shall be maintained at all times of such money so
deposited. (1972 Code)
CHAPTER 11
SPEED
SECTION:
9-11-1: Speed Restrictions
9-11-2: Special Speed Limits While Passing Schools
9-11-3: Traffic Not To Be Obstructed
9-11-4: Special Speed Limits In City Park Areas
9-11-5: Speed Limits Enacted For Certain Areas
9-11-1: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street not under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois state department of public works and buildings, or
the county, in an urban district within the city at a speed in excess of thirty
(30) miles per hour, or in an alley at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles
per hour.
Provided, that if the mayor and city council by ordinance, set other limits as
provided by statute 1  after an engineering or traffic survey, then such limits
shall govern the rate of speed on the streets indicated in such ordinance.
Appropriate signs shall be posted showing such speed limits. (1972 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS.
9-11-2: SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS WHILE PASSING SCHOOLS:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles
per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public
thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to and from a school during
school days when schoolchildren are present, said school zone shall include any
public thoroughfare hereafter designated as a school zone by the council,
including areas of traffic to and from schools located within the corporate
limits of the city. Appropriate signs shall be posted to indicate this
restriction. Said zones shall include the following:
Dakota Street from Cornelia Street to Power Street.
Dakota Street from Lawrence Avenue to Ladd Road.
Dakota Street from Strong Avenue to Terry Street.
Erie Street from Barton Street to Power Street.
John Mitchell Avenue from Dakota Street to Devlin Street.
Ladd Road from Fourth Street to Dakota Street.
Mary Street from Dakota Street to Erie Street.
Richards Street from Dakota Street to Fourth Street.
Strong Avenue from Dakota Street to Fourth Street. (1972 Code)
9-11-3: TRAFFIC NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED:
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon the street in such a
manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon. (1972
Code)
9-11-4: SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS IN CITY PARK AREAS:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles
per hour while passing any city park area, except in the area of Kirby Park
where no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of fifteen
(15) miles per hour. Appropriate signs shall be posted to indicate this
restriction. (1972 Code)
9-11-5: SPEED LIMITS ENACTED FOR CERTAIN AREAS:
   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty
(20) miles per hour on the following designated streets:
   Hickory Road.
Marquette Road from Dakota Street to the south corporate limits of the city.
Oakridge Drive.
Ramblewood Lane.
St. Paul Street from the intersection of Cornelia Street to the intersection of
Gallagher Street.
Timber Ridge Drive. (Ord., 4-18-1977; amd. Ord. 427, 11-20-1978; Ord. 818, 7-5-
1994)
   (B)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty
five (25) miles per hour on the following designated streets:
Dakota Street from John Mitchell Avenue to Marquette Road.
Greenwood Street from Dakota Street to the Peru-Princeton Road.
Power Street from Dakota Street to Fifth Street.
St. Paul Street from the intersection of Cornelia Street to the intersection of
Power Street. (Ord., 6-20-1977; amd. Ord. 818, 7-5-1994)
Appropriate signs shall be posted by the superintendent of public works to
indicate the aforesaid speed restrictions. (Ord., 6-20-1977)
   (C)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of fifteen
(15) miles per hour on John F. Kennedy Drive between Strong Street extended and
Richards Avenue extended. (Ord. 828, 10-3-1994)
   (D)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of forty
five (45) miles per hour on County Road 1500 North Avenue from Illinois Route
89 east to the village of Dalzell city limits. (Ord. 1043, 9-4-2001)
   (E)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty
(20) miles per hour on the following streets located within the corporate
limits of the city of Spring Valley: Mary Jane Lane, Janie Avenue, Sandy Drive
and Tyler Huge Road. (Ord. 1588, 11-24-2014)
CHAPTER 12
BICYCLES
SECTION:
9-12-1: Effect Of Regulations
9-12-2: Traffic Laws Apply To Persons Riding Bicycles
9-12-3: Requirement Of License
9-12-4: License Application
9-12-5: Licenses Issued
9-12-6: Transfer Of Bicycle Ownership
9-12-7: Attachment Of License
9-12-8: Inspection Of Bicycles
9-12-9: Equipment On Bicycles
9-12-10: Operation Of Bicycles
9-12-11: Bicycle Dealers
9-12-12: Penalty
9-12-13: License Not To Be Mutilated
9-12-14: Suspension And Removal
9-12-1: EFFECT OF REGULATIONS:
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform
any act required in this chapter. The parent of any child and the guardian of
any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter. The regulations applicable to
bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon a highway or public
way or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to
those exceptions stated herein.
For the purposes of sections
9-12-2,
9-12-10,
9-12-12, and
9-12-14 of this chapter, a "bicycle" shall be defined as any device propelled
by human power upon which any person may ride having two (2) tandem wheels,
except scooters and similar devices, and specifically including skateboards and
in-line skates. For all other sections of this chapter, a "bicycle" shall be
defined as any device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride
having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than sixteen inches (16")
in diameter. (Ord. 892, 8-18-1997)
9-12-2: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES:
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions
of the traffic ordinances of the city applicable to the driver of a vehicle
except as to special regulations of this chapter and except as to those
provisions of the ordinances which, by their nature, can have no application.
(1972 Code)
9-12-3: REQUIREMENT OF LICENSE:
No bicycle shall be ridden on the streets of the city or public way by the
owner or any other person unless properly licensed. (1972 Code)
9-12-4: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for license to own and operate a bicycle shall be made to the chief
of police upon a form to be provided by the chief of police. The application
shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty five cents ($0.25) to be paid at the
time of issuance of the license, which fee shall be in full payment of said
license for one year. (1972 Code)
9-12-5: LICENSES ISSUED:
The chief of police shall have authority to issue, upon written application,
bicycle licenses, which shall be effective for one year. All such licenses
shall be dated May 1 of the year issued, except the license issued on August 1,
1972, shall expire on April 30, 1973. The license issued shall bear the year
1972 on it. The chief of police shall register all licenses issued and shall
keep records of all fees collected for issuance of such licenses. Said records
shall be public records. All license fees collected by the chief of police
shall be turned over to the city clerk, who, in turn, shall turn same over to
the city treasurer. (1972 Code)
9-12-6: TRANSFER OF BICYCLE OWNERSHIP:
Upon the sale or transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee thereof shall
remove and surrender to the chief of police the attached license, or may have
such license assigned gratis to another bicycle owned by him. (1972 Code)
9-12-7: ATTACHMENT OF LICENSE:
Upon the issuance of a license, such license shall be firmly attached to the
frame of the bicycle in such a position as to be plainly visible from the rear.
The removal of any such license except by proper authority or upon transfer of
ownership shall be a violation of this chapter. (1972 Code)
9-12-8: INSPECTION OF BICYCLES:
Under the supervision of the chief of police, each bicycle shall be inspected
before licensing and the chief of police shall have the authority to refuse to
issue a license for any such bicycle found to be in an unsafe mechanical
condition. (1972 Code)
9-12-9: EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES:
   (A)   Brakes On Bicycles: Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake
adequate to control the movement of and to stop such bicycle whenever
necessary.
   (B)   Lamps And Reflectors On Bicycles: Every bicycle shall be equipped with
a lamp on the front exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at
least five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the
rear. Every such reflector shall be so designed and maintained as to be visible
at night one hundred feet (100') from such bicycle when directly in front of a
motor vehicle displaying lawfully lighted headlamps. A lamp exhibiting a red
light visible from a distance of one hundred feet (100') to the rear may be
used in addition or in lieu of rear reflector, except that any bicycle not used
after sunset and before sunrise need not be equipped with said lights, but it
shall be a violation of this chapter to operate any bicycle after sunset and
before sunrise without such equipment.
   (C)   Audible Signal: At the option of the owner, it is permissible to have
a horn or bell, but no siren or whistle is allowed on a bicycle. (1972 Code)
9-12-10: OPERATION OF BICYCLES:
   (A)   Riding On Bicycles: A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other
than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor carry
any other person upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and
regular seat thereon, nor shall any person ride upon a bicycle other than as
above authorized. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time
than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
   (B)   Right Of Way On Sidewalks: Pedestrians shall have the right of way at
all times over bicycles and a person riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk or
sidewalk crossing shall either turn off the sidewalk when meeting or passing
pedestrians or shall dismount until the pedestrians have passed. No bicycle
shall be ridden at any time on a public sidewalk in front of any place of
business or in front of any public building. No person of the age of twelve
(12) years or older shall ride a bicycle at any time on a public sidewalk in
front of a private residence except those persons actually delivering messages,
mail, newspapers, magazines, advertising matter or merchandise.
   (C)   Speed Of Bicycles: No person riding a bicycle shall ride faster than
is reasonable and proper in regard to the safety of the rider and others.
   (D)   Clinging To Vehicles: Any person riding upon any bicycle shall not
attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon a roadway.
   (E)   Riding In A Group: Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not
ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside
for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (F)   Carrying Articles: No person riding a bicycle shall carry any package,
bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping both hands upon the
handlebars.
   (G)   Trick Riding: No rider of a bicycle shall remove both hands from the
handlebars, or feet from the pedals, or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding
on any street; nor shall any person operating a bicycle upon a public highway
participate in any race for speed or endurance contest with any other vehicle,
except under permit from, and under the supervision of, the chief of police.
   (H)   Parking Bicycles: No person shall park a bicycle upon a roadway.
Bicycles parked in an alley, in a public driveway, on a sidewalk, or on a
public path must be in such a position as not to interfere with the safety or
movement of the vehicular or pedestrian traffic. (1972 Code)
9-12-11: BICYCLE DEALERS:
All persons engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand
bicycles are required to make a written report each month to the chief of
police giving the name and address of the person from or to whom each bicycle
is purchased or sold, the description thereof, the frame number thereof, and
the number of the license found thereon. (1972 Code)
9-12-12: PENALTY:
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not less than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than five
dollars ($5.00) or by revocation of such person's license for a period not to
exceed six (6) months or by both such fine and license revocation. (1972 Code)
9-12-13: LICENSE NOT TO BE MUTILATED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously destroy,
mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle license pursuant to this chapter.
Within seven (7) days after any bicycle registered hereunder shall change
ownership or be dismantled and taken out of operation, the person in whose name
the bicycle has been registered shall report such information to the chief of
police. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate
or alter any license tag, seal or registration card during the time in which
such license tag, seal or registration card shall operate. (1972 Code)
9-12-14: SUSPENSION AND REMOVAL:
The chief of police shall have authority to suspend the registration of and
remove the license from any bicycle operated contrary to any state law or city
ordinance, such suspension and removal to continue for a period not to exceed
ten (10) days. Such suspension and removal shall be in addition to other
penalties provided hereunder. The police department is hereby authorized to
seize and impound a bicycle of any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter and require said violator to acquaint himself or
herself with the rules of the road or of this chapter pertaining to the
violation for which the bicycle was impounded before the same is released.
(1972 Code)
CHAPTER 13
PENALTY
SECTION:
9-13-1: Penalty
9-13-2: Arrests
9-13-3: Prima Facie Proof
9-13-4: Parking Fines
9-13-1: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this title, except as provided in section
9-13-4 of this chapter, shall be fined not less than twenty dollars ($20.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 883, 6-2-
1997)
9-13-2: ARRESTS:
Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title shall be
released upon proper bail being furnished as required by law. (1972 Code)
9-13-3: PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
The fact that an automobile which is illegally operated or parked is registered
in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person
was in control of the automobile at the time of such violation. (1972 Code)
9-13-4: PARKING FINES:
Any person violating the following provisions of this title shall be fined as
set forth below. Any person disputing the validity of a ticket issued pursuant
to any of the following sections of this title shall be entitled to an
administrative hearing before the chief of police at which time said individual
may present evidence to the chief of police limited to the following issues: a)
whether the violation alleged in the ticket in fact occurred; b) whether the
individual received notification of the parking citation; and c) whether the
individual made the payments called for in this section within the time periods
provided for herein.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of sections
9-5-1 through
9-5-12 of this title shall be fined twenty dollars ($20.00) for each offense
and, if said fine is not paid within seven (7) days after the date of the
issuance of the parking citation the fine shall be forty dollars ($40.00) for
each offense.
   (B)   Any person violating sections
9-5-13 and
9-5-14 of this title shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense
and, if said fine is not paid within seven (7) days after the issuance of the
parking citation, the fine shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense.
   (C)   Any person violating section
9-16-1 of this title shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) and, if said
fine is not paid within seven (7) days after the date of the issuance of the
parking citation, the fine shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
offense.
   (D)   Any person who shall fail to pay a parking fine provided for herein,
or request an administrative hearing as set forth herein, within seven (7) days
after the date of the issuance of the parking citation, shall be deemed to be
in violation of this code and shall be subject to being served with a
nontraffic complaint in Bureau County circuit court requiring the defendant to
appear in Bureau County circuit court. (Ord. 883, 6-2-1997)
CHAPTER 14
CONTROL OF UNWARRANTED NOISES
SECTION:
9-14-1: Operation Of Motors Restricted
9-14-2: Horns, Signaling Devices
9-14-3: Test Procedures To Conform
9-14-4: Test Procedures, Maximum Noise
9-14-5: Nuisances Declared
9-14-6: Violation; Penalty
9-14-1: OPERATION OF MOTORS RESTRICTED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor for a
consecutive period longer than two (2) minutes while such vehicle is standing
on private property and located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of
property zoned and used for residential purposes except where such vehicle is
standing within a completely enclosed structure.
This section shall not apply to buses operated for the transportation of
passengers while standing in established bus turnarounds, bus terminals, bus
parking lots and bus storage yards.
   (B)   No person shall sell, or offer for sale, use or operate a new motor
vehicle that produces a maximum noise exceeding the following noise limit at a
distance of fifty feet (50') from the centerline of travel under test
procedures established by section
9-14-3 of this chapter:
 
Vehicle                                 Manufacture           Limit
Motorcycle                              After January 1, 1976 70 dB(A)
Passenger cars and other motor vehicles After January 1, 1976 70 dB(A)
Truck                                   After January 1, 1976 75 dB(A)
 
The manufacturer, distributor, importer or designated agent shall certify in
writing to the commissioner that his vehicles sold within the city comply with
the provisions of this section.
   (C)   No person shall operate within the speed limits specified in this
section either a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles of a type subject to
registration at any time or under any condition of grade, load, acceleration or
deceleration in such manner as to exceed the following noise limit for the
category of motor vehicle, based on a distance of not less than fifty feet
(50') from the centerline of travel under the procedures established by section
9-14-4 of this chapter.
 
Type Of Vehicle                       Noise Limit In Relation To Posted Speed
                                      Limit 35 MPH Or Less
Motorcycle after January 1, 1976      70 dB(A)
Truck after January 1, 1976           75 dB(A)
Any other motor vehicle after January 70 dB(A)
1, 1976
 
   (D)   No person shall modify or change the exhaust muffler, intake muffler
or any other noise abatement device of a motor in a manner such that the noise
emitted by the motor vehicle is increased above that emitted by the vehicle as
originally manufactured. Procedures used to establish compliance with this
paragraph shall be those used to establish compliance of a new motor vehicle
with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord., 12-15-1975)
9-14-2: HORNS, SIGNALING DEVICES:
No person shall sound any horn or audible signal device of any motor vehicle of
any kind while not in motion, nor shall such horn or signal device be sounded
under any circumstances except as required by law, nor shall it be sounded for
any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. (1972 Code)
9-14-3: TEST PROCEDURES TO CONFORM:
Test procedures to determine whether maximum noise emitted by new motor
vehicles sold or offered for sale meet the noise limits stated in subsection
9-14-1(B) of this chapter shall be in substantial conformity with standards and
recommended practice established by the Society Of Automotive Engineers, Inc.,
including SAE standard J331; SAE recommended practice J184; SAE recommended
practice J366 and SAE standard J986. (1972 Code)
9-14-4: TEST PROCEDURES, MAXIMUM NOISE:
Test procedures to determine whether maximum noise emitted by motor vehicles in
use meet the noise limits stated in subsection
9-14-1(C) of this chapter shall be in substantial conformity with standards and
recommended practice established by the Society Of Automotive Engineers, Inc.,
including, SAE standard J986; SAE standard J331; recommended practice J366 and
recommended practice J184. (1972 Code)
9-14-5: NUISANCES DECLARED:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair any cause of action, or
legal remedy therefor, of any person or the public for injury or damage arising
from the emission or release into the atmosphere or ground from any source
whatever or noise or earthshaking vibration in such place or manner, or at such
levels, so as to constitute a common law nuisance. (1972 Code)
9-14-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or
refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifteen dollars
($15.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first offense,
and not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for the second and each subsequent offense, in any one hundred eighty
(180) day period, or shall be punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration in
the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months under the procedure set
forth in section 1-2-1.1 of the Illinois municipal code 1  as amended, or by
both fine and imprisonment. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded
as committed each day of which such person shall continue or permit such
violation, or failure to comply as permitted to exist after notification
thereof. (1972 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1.
CHAPTER 15
TRUCK ROUTES
SECTION:
9-15-1: Definitions
9-15-2: Trucks To Be Operated Only On Truck Routes
9-15-3: Exceptions
9-15-4: Truck Routes Established
9-15-5: Deviations From Truck Routes To Reach Destination Points
9-15-6: Enforcement
9-15-7:    Permitting
9-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms shall have the meaning
given herein:
TRUCK: Any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, and
whose body weight or whose combined body and load weight exceeds eight thousand
(8,000) pounds and whose body and load length exceeds twenty five feet (25').
TRUCK ROUTE: A way over certain streets, as designated herein, over and along
which trucks coming into and going out of the city must operate. (Ord. 851, 1-
15-1996; amd. Ord. 1857, 9-7-2022)
9-15-2: TRUCKS TO BE OPERATED ONLY ON TRUCK ROUTES:
All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along the truck
routes herein established and on the other designated streets over which truck
travel is permitted. (Ord., 4-4-1977)
9-15-3: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not prohibit:
   (A)   Delivery Truck: Operation of trucks upon any street which is necessary
to the conduct of business at a destination point, provided streets upon which
such traffic is permitted are used until reaching a street that provides the
shortest distance to a truck route from the point of destination or origin
within the city, as the case may be.
Delivery Trucks: The operation of a delivery truck upon any street to a point
for the delivery of property or a point of origin for picking up property when
such operation shall be on a street providing.
   (B)   Emergency Vehicles: The operation of emergency vehicles upon any
street in the city.
   (C)   Public Utilities: The operation of trucks owned or operated by the
city, public utilities, any contractor or material man, while engaged in the
repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements, or street
utilities within the city.
   (D)   Detoured Trucks: The operation of trucks upon any officially
established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon
the street for which such detour is established. (Ord., 4-4-1977; amd. Ord.
1857, 9-7-2022)
9-15-4: TRUCK ROUTES ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established within the city the following truck routes:
   (A)   U.S. Route 6.
   (B)   State Route 89.
   (C)   In addition to those streets in the city constituting a part of a
truck route as established herein, all state of Illinois marked highways and no
other streets shall be used for truck traffic. (Ord., 4-4-1977)
9-15-5: DEVIATIONS FROM TRUCK ROUTES TO REACH DESTINATION POINTS:
   (A)   Outside Origin:
      1.   One Inside Destination Point: All trucks entering the city for a
destination point in the city shall proceed only over an established truck
route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the city street, upon
which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving
the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the
shortest permissible route.
      2.   Multiple Inside Destination Points: All trucks entering the city for
multiple destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes
and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street, upon which such
traffic is permitted, nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the
first destination point a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by
the shortest permissible route and proceed on the established truck route and
shall deviate only at the intersection with the city street nearest to the next
destination point. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck
shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route.
   (B)   Inside Origin:
      1.   Outside Destination Point: All trucks, on a trip originating in the
city, and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the city shall
proceed by the shortest direction permitted to a truck route as herein
established.
      2.   Inside Destination Points: All trucks, on a trip originating in the
city and traveling in the city for destination points in the city shall proceed
to a designated truck route by the shortest permissible route and proceed
according to the procedure designated in subsection (A)2 of this section.
   (C)   Outside Origin, Outside Destination:
      1.   All trucks, on a trip originating outside of the city and traveling
within the city to a destination point outside of the city shall remain on
designated truck routes without deviation. (Ord., 4-4-1977; amd. Ord. 540, 4-
19-1982; Ord. 1857, 9-7-2022)
9-15-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   The superintendent of public works and the chief of police of the city
shall cause all truck routes to be clearly posted to give notice that this
section is in effect and shall further cause signs to be placed at the
following:
No. 3 Coal Mine Road and State Route 29, Millers Cemetery Road and State Route
29, Ladd Road at U.S. Route 6 and State Route 29, Greenwood Street at the Peru-
Princeton Road and at the intersection of Dakota Street, Briarcliff Road at
State Route 29, Marquette Highway at Rock Island Street, and State Route 89 at
the viaduct over the railroad tracks on the south end of Spring Valley,
necessary to give notice that this section is in effect.
      1.   No truck signs shall be posted at the intersection of U.S. Routes 6
and 89 and County Road 1500 N. (commonly referred to as Golf Course Road) and
the intersection of Peru-Princeton Road and North Greenwood Street.
   (B)   Any police officer in the city shall have the authority to require any
person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a
truck route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any
public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining
whether this chapter and the statutes of the State of Illinois governing motor
vehicles have been complied with.
   (C)   The city clerk shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck
routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted; the maps shall be
kept on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be available to the
public. (Ord., 4-4-1977; amd. Ord. 540, 4-19-1982; Ord. 1857, 9-7-2022)
9-15-7: PERMITTING:
   (A)   Permits: The owner or operator of any vehicle not otherwise exempt as
provided herein may apply in writing to the municipal officers for a permit to
operate on a posted way or bridge notwithstanding the restrictions described in
this chapter. The municipal officers may issue a permit only upon all of the
following findings:
      1.   No other route is reasonably available to the applicant;
      2.   It is a matter of economic necessity and not mere convenience that
the applicant use the way or bridge; and
      3.   The applicant has tendered cash, a bond or other suitable security
running to the City in an amount sufficient, in their judgment, to repair any
damage to the way or bridge which may reasonably result from the applicants use
of the same.
Even if the corporate authorities or their designated agent make the foregoing
findings, they need not issue a permit if they determine the applicant's use of
the way or bridge could reasonably be expected to create or aggravate a safety
hazard or cause substantial damage. They may also limit the number of permits
issued or outstanding as may, in their judgment, be necessary to preserve and
protect the roadways.
   (B)   Factors To Consider:
      1.   The gross registered weight of the vehicle;
      2.   The current and anticipated condition of the way or bridge;
      3.   The number and frequency of vehicle trips proposed;
      4.   The cost and availability of materials and equipment for repairs;
      5.   The extent of use by other exempt vehicles; and
      6.   Such other circumstances as may, in their judgment, may be relevant.
The municipal officers may issue permits subject to reasonable conditions,
including, but not limited to restriction on the actual load weight and the
number of frequency of vehicle trips, which shall be clearly noted on the
permit.
   (C)   Administration And Enforcement: This rule shall be administered and
may be enforced by the City Clerk, Chief of Police, or their designee.
   (D)   Penalties: Any violation of this section shall be a civil infraction
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each violation shall be deemed a separate
offense. In addition to any fine, the City may seek restitution for the cost of
repairs to any damaged way or bridge and reasonable attorney's fees and costs.
(Ord. 1857, 9-7-2022)
CHAPTER 16
HANDICAPPED PARKING
SECTION:
9-16-1: Designated Spaces
9-16-2: Private Property Handicapped Parking Designated
9-16-3: Penalty
9-16-1: DESIGNATED SPACES:
The city council hereby designates certain parking areas located within the
corporate limits of the city as handicapped parking spaces. It shall be
unlawful for any person not having a handicapped license plate issued by the
Illinois secretary of state's office to park in any parking space designated
for handicapped parking. (Ord. 828, 10-3-1994)
9-16-2: PRIVATE PROPERTY HANDICAPPED PARKING DESIGNATED:
It shall be unlawful for any person not having a handicapped license plate
issued by the Illinois secretary of state's office to park in any parking space
designated for handicapped parking by either St. Margaret's Hospital, Township
High School district 502 or Spring Valley elementary district 99. (Ord. 828,
10-3-1994)
9-16-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter by parking in a handicapped parking space
without first obtaining handicapped license plates issued by the Illinois
secretary of state's office, shall be subject to a fine of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 1386, 9-15-2008)
CHAPTER 17
VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
9-17-1: Definitions
9-17-2: Weight Limits
9-17-3: Applicable Highways And Roads
9-17-4: Exceptions
9-17-5: Maximum Weight Restrictions
9-17-6: Excess Weight Permit
9-17-7: Prohibited; Fine
9-17-8: Sign Location
9-17-9: Violation; Fine
9-17-10: Deposit Of Fines
9-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to all provisions contained in this
chapter:
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES: Cultivated plants or agricultural produce grown
including, but is not limited to, corn, soybeans, wheat, oats, grain, sorghum,
canola, and rice. Livestock including, but not limited to, hogs, equine, sheep,
and poultry. Ensilage and fruits and vegetables.
IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY: Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for
agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations, including farm
wagons, wagon trailers or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for
lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry, provided that no farm wagon,
wagon trailer or like vehicle having a gross weight of more than thirty six
thousand (36,000) pounds shall be included hereunder.
TANDEM AXLE: Any two (2) or more consecutive axles whose centers are more than
forty inches (40") and not more than seventy two inches (72") apart, measured
to the nearest inch between any two (2) adjacent axles in the series.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway.
VEHICLE WEIGHT: The total of the weight of the vehicle, plus the weight of the
load thereon. (Ord. 1413, 3-16-2009)
9-17-2: WEIGHT LIMITS:
The superintendent of public works of the city of Spring Valley shall erect, or
cause to be erected and maintained, signs designating by word or symbol the
provisions of this section. For a period not to exceed ninety (90) days in any
one calendar year, when city highways and roads by reason of deterioration,
rain, snow, or other climate conditions, will be seriously damaged or destroyed
unless the permissible weight of vehicles therein is restricted. The vehicle
weight limits on certain city roads, specifically designated in this chapter,
shall be as follows:
   (A)   Weight limits per axle shall not exceed:
Eight thousand (8,000) pounds per single axle with two (2) tires.
Ten thousand (10,000) pounds per single axle with four (4) tires.
Twenty thousand (20,000) pounds per tandem axle.
In no event shall gross vehicle weight exceed forty thousand (40,000) pounds.
   (B)   Weight limits of high flotation applicators shall not exceed:
Nine thousand (9,000) pounds per axle with one tire.
Eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds per axle with two (2) tires. (Ord. 1413, 3-
16-2009)
9-17-3: APPLICABLE HIGHWAYS AND ROADS:
This chapter shall fully apply to the following described highways and roads
within the corporate limits of the city of Spring Valley:
Northview Drive, a.k.a. 1360th North, west of its intersection with Illinois
Route 89.
Peru-Princeton Road, a.k.a. 1350th North, east of its intersection with
Illinois Route 89.
Spring Creek Road, a.k.a. 1500 North Road.
The Old North Road. (Ord. 1413, 3-16-2009)
9-17-4: EXCEPTIONS:
The following exceptions shall apply to the provisions contained in this
chapter:
   (A)   Implements of husbandry that are tillage implements, refuse trucks,
school buses, fire apparatus and other emergency vehicles are exempt.
   (B)   The city superintendent of public works is hereby authorized to lift
and waive any weight limits on city highways and roads for a period of time
that he reasonably deems safe and necessary, when the temperature has not
exceeded twenty five degrees Fahrenheit (25°F) for a period of at least forty
eight (48) consecutive hours. (Ord. 1413, 3-16-2009)
9-17-5: MAXIMUM WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
The following weight restrictions shall apply on the roads designated in this
chapter:
   (A)   The maximum gross weight of any vehicle in a combination having five
(5) or more axles upon any city highway or road shall be seventy three thousand
two hundred eighty (73,280) pounds as provided for in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/15-111.
   (B)   The maximum wheel and axle loads and the maximum gross weights of
vehicles and combination of vehicles upon city highways or roads shall be as
provided for in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111 insofar as said section
addresses nondesignated highways. (Ord. 1413, 3-16-2009)
9-17-6: EXCESS WEIGHT PERMIT:
Upon application in writing and for good cause shown, or upon showing an undue
hardship or showing that said vehicle cannot reasonably be dismantled or
disassembled, the city superintendent of public works may issue a special
permit, at his discretion, in writing, authorizing the applicant to operate or
move a vehicle of excess maximum weight temporarily upon a city highway or
road. However, the city superintendent of public works may require such
applicant to indemnify the city against any damage to road surfaces. Also, the
city superintendent of public works may require such personal undertaking, or
other securities as may be deemed necessary, to compensate for any damage to
the city highway or road prior to granting said permit. (Ord. 1413, 3-16-2009)
9-17-7: PROHIBITED; FINE:
The city superintendent of public works is hereby authorized to permit the
operation of trucks or commercial vehicles on any city highway or road during
any period or periods that he determines that such highway or road by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow or other climate conditions will be seriously damaged
or destroyed unless the use of said highways or roads by trucks or other
commercial vehicles is prohibited during the period or periods in question.
When the city superintendent of public works acts pursuant to this section, he
shall erect and maintain signs designating the provisions of this section.
Whenever any vehicle is operated on any highway or road closed pursuant to the
provisions of this section, the owner of said vehicle shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any penalty
imposed pursuant to the penalty provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1413, 3-16-
2009)
9-17-8: SIGN LOCATION:
The city superintendent of public works shall erect and maintain signs
designating the weight restrictions imposed by this chapter at the beginning
and end of each highway or road affected. (Ord. 1413, 3-16-2009)
9-17-9: VIOLATION; FINE:
Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such
violations, and either the owner or driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted
for such violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of any violation
of this chapter shall be fined according to the following schedule:
Pounds Overweight Fine
0 to 2,000        $50.00 unless the overweight can be shifted or removed to
                  conform to all legal weight limits
Pounds Overweight Fine
0 to 2,000        $50.00 unless the overweight can be shifted or removed to
                  conform to all legal weight limits
2,001 to 2,500    $135.00
2,501 to 3,000    165.00
3,001 to 3,500    260.00
3,501 to 4,000    300.00
4,001 to 4,500    425.00
4,501 to 5,000    475.00
5,001 or more     The fine shall be computed at the rate of $75.00 for each
                  increment of 400 pounds overweight or fractions thereof
 
In addition, any person, firm or corporation convicted of three (3) or more
violations of this chapter within any twelve (12) month period shall be fined
an additional amount of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the third and each subsequent
conviction within the twelve (12) month period; provided, however, that with
regard to a firm or corporation, a third or subsequent conviction shall mean a
third or subsequent conviction attributable to any employee-driver. Any driver
of a vehicle who refuses to stop and submit his vehicle and load after being
directed to do so by an officer, or removes or causes the removal of the load
or part of it prior to weighing, shall be fined not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). In any event
any of the foregoing penalty provisions are declared invalid, the owner or
driver shall nevertheless be deemed guilty and shall be fined in an amount not
to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 1413, 3-16-2009)
9-17-10: DEPOSIT OF FINES:
Any fines collected for violations of this chapter shall be deposited into the
general fund of the city of Spring Valley. (Ord. 1413, 3-16-2009)
CHAPTER 18
GOLF CARTS/NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-18-1: Definitions; Where Permitted
9-18-2: Compliance With Illinois Vehicle Code
9-18-3: Permits
9-18-4: Additional Requirements
9-18-5: Violations
9-18-6: Impoundment
9-18-7: Operation
9-18-1: DEFINITIONS; WHERE PERMITTED:
   (A)   Definitions:
    CITY STREETS: Any of the streets within the boundaries of the city of
Spring Valley which have a posted maximum speed of thirty (30) miles per hour
and is not a state highway.
   GOLF CART: A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs, supervising the play of
golf or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf
course.
   NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLE: Any road ready electric or gas powered four (4) wheel
vehicle which has a maximum possible speed of twenty five (25) miles per hour.
This term includes reference to golf carts.
   (B)   Where Permitted: The operation of golf carts/neighborhood vehicles
(maximum 25 miles per hour) shall be permitted on streets under the
jurisdiction of the city of Spring Valley and/or with its intersection
controlled by a traffic light or four-way stop sign upon or across any highway
under the jurisdiction of the state of Illinois as set forth in section 11-
1426.1 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 . (Ord. 1546, 9-30-2013, eff. 11-1-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1.
9-18-2: COMPLIANCE WITH ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE:
   (A)   The operation of golf carts/neighborhood vehicles within the city
shall be in accordance with all provisions of the Illinois vehicle code 1 ,
including, without limitation, section 11-1426.1 thereof 2 . All golf carts/
neighborhood vehicles must have, at a minimum: 1) the equipment and other items
set forth in section 11-1426.1(e) of the Illinois vehicle code 3  and 2) a type
1 or type 2 seat belt assembly conforming to 59 CFR 571.209 at each designated
seating position.
   (B)   No golf carts/neighborhood vehicles may be operated on a roadway
unless it is "road ready" and equipped as follows:
      1.   Brakes and brake light;
      2.   Steering wheel apparatus;
      3.   Tires;
      4.   Rearview mirrors;
      5.   Approved "slow moving" emblem on the rear of the vehicle 4 ;
      6.   Red reflector warning devices in front and rear; (Ord. 1546, 9-30-
2013, eff. 11-1-2013)
      7.   Headlights that emit a white light visible from at least one hundred
feet (100') from the front, which must be illuminated when in operation;
      8.   Tail lamps that emit a red light visible from at least one hundred
feet (100') from the rear, which must be illuminated when in operation; (Ord.
1577, 8-18-2014)
      9.   A golf cart/neighborhood vehicle must have its headlights and tail
lamps lighted at all times when in operation as required by section 12-201 of
the Illinois vehicle code;
      10.   Windshields;
      11.   Horn with two hundred fifty feet (250') of hearing distance;
      12.   Requirement of lap seat belt for drivers and passengers; and
      13.   Any additional requirements which may be amended.
   (C)   Each driver and passenger of a golf cart/neighborhood vehicle operated
on a street within the city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened seat
belt; except that a child less than eight (8) years of age shall be protected
in the same manner as such children are required to be protected when riding in
motor vehicles under the child passenger protection act 5 . (Ord. 1546, 9-30-
2013, eff. 11-1-2013)
 
Notes
1 2. 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
2 3. 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1.
3 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1(e).
4 2. 625 ILCS 5/12-709.
5 3. 625 ILCS 25/1 et seq.
9-18-3: PERMITS:
   (A)   No person shall operate a golf cart/neighborhood vehicle within the
city without first obtaining a permit, or being listed as an additional
operator under a permit, as provided herein. Permits shall expire on April 30
of each year. The cost of the permit shall be as set forth in this chapter.
Applications for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the city, shall
be executed by the applicant and each additional operator and shall contain the
following: (Ord. 1577, 8-18-2014)
      1.   Name and address of applicant;
      2.   Name and address of any additional operators;
      3.   Name of liability insurance carrier and policy number;
      4.   The serial number, make, model and description of golf cart/
neighborhood vehicle;
      5.   Signed waiver of liability by applicant releasing the city of Spring
Valley and its employees, and agreeing to indemnify and hold the city harmless
from any and all future claims resulting from the operation of their golf cart/
neighborhood vehicle on the Spring Valley streets;
      6.   Such other information as the city may require; and
      7.   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The vehicle must be inspected and approved by the police
department;
         (b)   A physically handicapped applicant or operator must submit a
certificate signed by a physician, certifying that the applicant is able to
safely operate a golf cart/neighborhood vehicle on city streets;
         (c)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance
with the provisions of the Illinois statutes regarding minimum liability
insurance for passenger motor vehicles to be operated on the roads of the state
of Illinois;
         (d)   The applicant must provide a copy of the driver's license of the
applicant and each operator.
         (e)   All city permit fees are paid and up to date.
   (B)   Permits may be renewed upon demonstration of compliance with the
requirement for initial issuance of a permit and the payment of the permit fee.
The cost of the permit is fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 1546, 9-30-2013, eff.
11-1-2013)
9-18-4: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements shall apply to the operation of golf carts/
neighborhood vehicles within the city of Spring Valley:
   (A)   The applicant and all operators must be at least eighteen (18) years
of age.
   (B)   A city decal evidencing that a permit has been obtained shall be
prominently displayed on the rear of the golf cart/neighborhood vehicle. (Ord.
1546, 9-30-2013, eff. 11-1-2013)
9-18-5: VIOLATIONS:
The city of Spring Valley may choose to immediately suspend or revoke a permit
granted hereunder upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any
provision of this chapter or there is evidence that permittee cannot safely
operate a qualified golf cart/neighborhood vehicle on designated roadways.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
petty offense and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Any second or subsequent offense shall result in the
revocation of the permit for a period of not less than one year nor more than
three (3) years. To the extent that any violation of this chapter also
constitutes a violation of a criminal statute of the state of Illinois, then
the violator shall be subject to criminal prosecution. (Ord. 1546, 9-30-2013,
eff. 11-1-2013)
9-18-6: IMPOUNDMENT:
Golf carts/neighborhood vehicles shall be subject to impoundment to the same
extent as other vehicles as set forth in title 6, chapter 12, "Impoundment And
Towing Of Vehicles", of this code. (Ord. 1546, 9-30-2013, eff. 11-1-2013)
9-18-7: OPERATION:
The operator of a golf cart/neighborhood vehicle on public roadways must obey
all traffic laws of the state of Illinois and the city of Spring Valley.
Golf carts/neighborhood vehicles may not be operated on streets and highways
and roads under the jurisdiction of the Illinois department of transportation
including State Highway 6 (Dakota Street) and Highway 89 (Spalding Street)
except to cross the street or highways at approved intersections.
A person operating or who is in actual physical control of a golf cart/
neighborhood vehicle as described herein on a roadway while under the influence
of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any
combination thereof is subject to sections 11-500 through 11-502 of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes 1 . (Ord. 1546, 9-30-2013, eff. 11-1-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-500 - 11-502.
TITLE 10
RESERVED
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
TITLE 11
RESERVED
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
TITLE 12
RESERVED
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
TITLE 13
RESERVED
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
TITLE 14
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
SECTION:
14-1-1: Title
14-1-2: Effective Date
14-1-3: Authority
14-1-4: Applicability And Jurisdiction
14-1-5: Minimum Requirements
14-1-6: Purpose And Intent
14-1-7: Flood Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
14-1-8: Zoning Map
14-1-9: Interpretation Of Zoning District Boundaries
14-1-10: Word Usage And Construction Of Language
14-1-11: Conflicting Provisions
14-1-12: Transitional Provisions
14-1-13: Severability
14-1-1: TITLE:
This title will be known and cited as the LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE OF SPRING
VALLEY, ILLINOIS. References herein to "this title" will be interpreted as
referring to the land development code. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-1-2: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions of this title become effective on November 1, 2007. (Ord. 1379,
6-9-2008)
14-1-3: AUTHORITY:
This title is adopted under the statutory authority conferred by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-1-4: APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION:
This title applies to all lands and waters within the corporate limits of the
city of Spring Valley. All structures and land uses constructed or commenced
and all enlargements of, additions to, changes in and relocations of existing
structures and uses are subject to the requirements of this title. (Ord. 1379,
6-9-2008)
14-1-5: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The standards in this title are minimum requirements. Other local, state and
federal regulations may also apply. The issuance of any permit, certificate or
approval in accordance with the standards and requirements of this title does
not relieve the recipient of such permit, certificate or approval from the
responsibility of complying with all other applicable requirements. (Ord. 1379,
6-9-2008)
14-1-6: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this title is to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of existing and future residents of the city of Spring Valley by:
   (A)   Implementing the comprehensive plan;
   (B)   Classifying land within the city into zoning districts;
   (C)   Regulating the location and use of all structures, lands and waters;
   (D)   Regulating the intensity of uses and structures through building
coverage, density and dimensional standards;
   (E)   Ensuring protection from fire, flood and other dangers;
   (F)   Lessening congestion and promoting the safety and efficiency of
streets and highways;
   (G)   Improving pedestrian safety;
   (H)   Providing adequate privacy, light, air, sanitation, and drainage;
   (I)   Preventing overcrowding and avoiding undue population concentration;
   (J)   Facilitating the adequate provision of public facilities and
utilities;
   (K)   Providing adequate and aesthetically pleasing stormwater management
facilities;
   (L)   Stabilizing and protecting property values;
   (M)   Furthering the appropriate use of land and conservation of natural
resources;
   (N)   Maintaining and enhancing the aesthetic appearance and physical design
of the city;
   (O)   Encouraging the effective use of signs as a means of communication for
businesses, organizations and individuals, and minimizing the possible adverse
effects of signs on nearby public and private property;
   (P)   Ensuring sound development and community growth by establishing
minimum standards for subdivision design;
   (Q)   Promoting aesthetically pleasing development by establishing minimum
standards for installation of landscaping and screening materials;
   (R)   Minimizing the adverse impacts of noise, dust, glare and other
objectionable activities or impacts;
   (S)   Promoting the development of land for the highest possible use and
protecting against deterioration and obsolescence that would adversely affect
the living environment or tax base;
   (T)   Providing common grounds of understanding and a sound working
relationship between the city and developers and to safeguard the interests of
the homeowner, the subdivider, the investor and the city;
   (U)   Managing growth within the city by concentrating development within
the effective operating range of existing public utilities and improvements;
   (V)   Causing the cost of design and installation of improvements in new,
platted subdivisions to be borne by the persons purchasing the lots rather than
by any direct or indirect burden upon existing property owners beyond the
limits of the subdivision;
   (W)   Coordinating new subdivision design with the design of the city as a
whole to allow for the proper capacity of all types of improvements on the
basis of an orderly sequence of subdivisions as a part of neighborhoods and
neighborhoods as a part of the community;
   (X)   Securing the rights of the public with respect to public lands and
waters;
   (Y)   Improving land records by establishing standards for surveys and
plats; and
   (Z)   Providing for the administration and enforcement of this title and
providing penalties for its violation. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-1-7: FLOOD WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this title is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of
study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be
increased by manmade or natural causes. This title does not imply that
development either inside or outside of floodplain areas will be free from
flooding or flood damage. This title does not create liability on the part of
the city or any officer or employee thereof, or the federal emergency
management agency, for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this
title or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-
2008)
14-1-8: ZONING MAP:
   (A)   Adoption: The location and boundaries of the zoning districts
established by this title are shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map Of The City
Of Spring Valley, Illinois". That map, together with all notations, references,
data and other information shown on the map, is hereby adopted as part of this
chapter. The map must remain on file and available to the public in the office
of the zoning administrator of the city of Spring Valley.
   (B)   Annual Revision: The city council will publish a revised zoning map no
later than March 31 of each year clearly showing the zoning district
classifications of the city for the preceding calendar year. If in any calendar
year no changes are made to zoning classifications or city boundaries, the city
is not required to publish a zoning map for that calendar year. (Ord. 1379, 6-
9-2008)
14-1-9: INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Rules for the interpretation of zoning district boundaries are as follows:
   (A)   Zoning district boundaries will be construed to follow:
      1.   Corporate limits;
      2.   United States public land survey lines;
      3.   Property lines;
      4.   Centerlines of streets, highways, alleys, easements, railroad rights
of way or extensions of such lines;
      5.   Soil mapping unit lines.
   (B)   Vacation of public streets and alleys will cause the vacated land to
be automatically placed in the same district as the abutting side to which the
vacated land reverts.
   (C)   Annexations to or consolidations with the city subsequent to the
effective date specified in section
14-1-2 of this chapter will be classified in the most restrictive zoning
district of contiguous property within the city of Spring Valley. However,
parcels consisting of twenty (20) or more acres, and presently used for
agricultural purposes, may, at the petitioner's election, be zoned agricultural
district upon annexation. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-1-10: WORD USAGE AND CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE:
   (A)   Meanings And Intent: All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions
used in this title will be construed according to the purpose and intent set
out in section
14-1-6 of this chapter.
   (B)   Headings, Illustrations And Text: In case of any difference of meaning
or implication between the text of this title and any heading, drawing, table,
figure, or illustration, the text controls.
   (C)   Lists And Examples: Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of
items or examples that use terms such as "including", "such as", or similar
language are intended to provide examples; not to be exhaustive lists of all
possibilities.
   (D)   Computation Of Time: The time in which an act is to be done will be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day
is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the city, that day will be
excluded.
   (E)   References To Other Regulations, Publications And Documents: Whenever
reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document,
that reference will be construed as referring to the most recent edition of
such resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document or to the relevant
successor document, unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (F)   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or another officer or employee of the city to perform an
act or duty, that provision will be construed as authorizing the department
head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have
authority.
   (G)   Technical And Nontechnical Terms: Words and phrases will be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law
will be construed and understood according to such meaning. (See also chapter
14, "Terminology", of this title.)
   (H)   Public Officials And Agencies: All public officials, bodies, and
agencies to which references are made are those of the city of Spring Valley,
unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (I)   Mandatory And Discretionary Terms: The words "shall", "will" and
"must" are mandatory. The words "may" and "should" are discretionary and
advisory terms.
   (J)   Conjunctions: Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary,
conjunctions will be interpreted as follows:
      1.   "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or
events apply; and
      2.   "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events may apply.
   (K)   Tenses And Plurals: Words used in one tense (past, present or future)
include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. (Ord.
1379, 6-9-2008)
14-1-11: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Conflict With State Or Federal Regulations: If the provisions of this
title are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the more
restrictive provision will control, to the extent permitted by law.
   (B)   Conflict With Other City Regulations: If the provisions of this title
are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with provisions found in
other adopted city ordinances, the more restrictive provision will control. No
text amendment, variance or condition on a special use permit or any other
development approval under this title may diminish the provisions of any other
more restrictive city ordinance.
   (C)   Conflict With Private Easements, Agreements, Covenants Or
Restrictions: This title is not intended to annul or interfere with any private
easement, agreement, covenant, restriction or other private legal relationship.
The city is responsible for enforcing this title; it does not enforce private
agreements, easements, covenants or restrictions except those specifically
required for the administration and enforcement of this title, even where the
private agreements are more restrictive than the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-1-12: TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Violations Continue: Any violation of the previous zoning or
subdivision regulations of the city will continue to be a violation under this
title and will be subject to penalties and enforcement under chapter 13 of this
title, unless the use, development, construction or other activity is
consistent with the express terms of this title, in which case enforcement
action will cease, except to the extent of collecting penalties for violations
that occurred before the effective date specified in section
14-1-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Completion Of Development:
      1.   Permits Issued Before Effective Date: Any building, development or
sign for which a permit was lawfully issued before the effective date specified
in section
14-1-2 of this chapter may be completed in conformance with the issued permit.
If the building, development or sign is not completed within the time allowed
under the original permit, then the building, development or sign may be
constructed, completed or occupied only in strict compliance with this title.
      2.   Preliminary Plats Approved Before Effective Date: If a preliminary
plat was approved before the effective date specified in section
14-1-2 of this chapter, final plat approval may be granted in accordance with
the preliminary plat. If a final plat is not approved within the time
requirements specified by prior ordinance or a schedule included with the
preliminary plat approval, the plan commission may grant one or more
extensions. If a final plat is not approved within the time required, including
any extensions, then the completion of the subdivision and construction of
buildings may only occur if the final plat complies with all requirements of
this title. If the final plat is not in compliance with this title, then a
modified final plat must be submitted and approved pursuant to the procedures
of chapter 11 of this title.
   (C)   Special (Conditional) Uses:
      1.   Any use that was legally established before the effective date
specified in section
14-1-2 of this chapter without a conditional use permit and which after the
effective date is located within a zoning district that requires a special use
permit for the subject use under this title, will be issued a special use
permit without following the procedures of section
14-11-5 of this title. Any use that was legally established prior to the
special use permit requirement of this title for the subject use in the zoning
district in question will similarly be issued a special use permit without
following the procedures of section
14-11-5 of this title. Expansions and modifications of such uses will be
subject to section
14-11-5 of this title. Even if a special use permit is issued pursuant to this
section, those uses or structures that do not comply with applicable standards
of this title, including the use regulations of chapter 3 of this title, will
be deemed nonconforming and be subject to the regulations of chapter 12 of this
title.
      2.   Any use that was legally established before the effective date
specified in section
14-1-2 of this chapter with a conditional use permit and which after the
effective date is located within a zoning district that requires a special use
permit for the subject use, may continue to be operated under the terms of the
original conditional use permit and will hereby be referred to as a special
use. The use will be subject to all applicable standards of this chapter,
including the use standards of chapter 3 of this title and the nonconformity
regulations of chapter 12 of this title. Expansions and modifications of such
uses will be subject to section
14-11-5 of this title.
      3.   Any use that was legally established before the effective date
specified in section
14-1-2 of this chapter with a conditional use permit and which after the
effective date is located within a zoning district that does not require a
special use permit for the subject use, will continue to be subject to all
applicable standards of this title, including the use standards of chapter 3 of
this title and the nonconformity regulations of chapter 12 of this title. (Ord.
1379, 6-9-2008)
14-1-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any court of competent jurisdiction rules any provision of this title
invalid, that ruling will not affect any provision of this title not
specifically included in the judgment. If any court of competent jurisdiction
rules invalid the application of any provision of this title to a particular
property, building, other structure, or use, that ruling will not affect the
application of this title to any property, building, other structure, or use
not specifically included in the judgment. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
14-2-1: Residential Districts
14-2-2: Commercial Districts
14-2-3: Industrial Districts
14-2-4: Agricultural District
14-2-5: Operational Performance Standards
14-2-1: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Establishment Of Districts: The following residential districts are
established in the city of Spring Valley:
 
Abbreviation District Name
   RE     Estate residential district
   R1A    Single-family residential district
   R1     Single-family residential district
   R2     Single-family residential district
   R3     General residential district
 
   (B)   District Descriptions:
      1.   RE, Estate Residential District: The RE district is intended to
accommodate the development of detached single-family houses on large,
individual lots.
      2.   R1A, R1, And R2, Single-Family Residential Districts: The R1A, R1
and R2 districts are intended to accommodate the development of single-family
houses on lots of various sizes.
      3.   R3, General Residential District: The R3 district is intended to
accommodate a variety of housing types, including multi-family dwellings,
attached residential dwellings such as townhouses, and detached single-family
dwellings.
   (C)   Allowed Uses: Uses are allowed in accordance with the use table in
section
14-3-1 of this title.
   (D)   Dimensional Standards: All development in residential districts must
comply with the dimensional standards in section
14-4-1 of this title.
   (E)   Additional Requirements:
      1.   Only One Principal Building: Only one principal building may be
located, erected, or moved onto any lot of record in any single-family
residential district.
      2.   Operational Performance Standards: All uses in the residential
districts must comply with the operational performance standards in section
14-2-5 of this chapter.
      3.   Outdoor Storage, Display And Work Areas: All allowed uses in all
residential districts must be conducted within completely enclosed buildings
unless otherwise expressly stated in this title. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-2-2: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Establishment Of Districts: The following commercial districts are
established in the city of Spring Valley:
 
Abbreviation District Name
   B1     Downtown commercial district
   B2     Community retail and service district
   B3     Professional services district
   B4     General commercial district
 
   (B)   District Descriptions:
      1.   B1, Downtown Commercial District: The B1 district is intended to
accommodate retail and service businesses in pedestrian oriented, storefront
style buildings with residential dwelling units above the ground floor.
      2.   B2, Community Retail And Service District: The B2 district is
intended to accommodate a wide variety of retail, service, and limited
wholesale businesses of varying sizes that are primarily automobile oriented.
      3.   B3, Professional Office District: The B3 district is intended to
accommodate professional office uses primarily in residential style structures
and to serve as a transitional district between downtown commercial areas and
adjacent residential neighborhoods.
      4.   B4, General Commercial District: The B4 district is intended to
accommodate retail, service and limited wholesale businesses, including those
with extensive outdoor sales areas or outdoor display of heavy equipment for
sale or rent.
   (C)   Allowed Uses: Uses are allowed in accordance with the use table in
section
14-3-1 of this title.
   (D)   Dimensional Standards: All development in commercial districts must
comply with the dimensional standards in section
14-4-2 of this title.
   (E)   Additional Requirements:
      1.   B1 District Character Standards:
         (a)   Building Location: All street facing building facades must be
located within five feet (5') of the sidewalk, with the exception that a
maximum of fifty percent (50%) of any street facing facade may be set back
farther than five feet (5') from the sidewalk where the setback area is
utilized for outdoor dining, public seating or other usable pedestrian oriented
public space. Similarly, the first floor of the building may be set back if the
public sidewalk is covered by a recessed entryway that is supported by
structural elements of the building or overhanging upper stories that maintain
the presence of the building up on the street.
         (b)   Doors And Entrances: Buildings must have a primary entrance
facing the street. Building entrances may include direct entrances to
individual businesses, lobby entrances, or pedestrian oriented courtyards or
plazas leading to multiple businesses.
         (c)   Building Transparency: A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the
street facing facade between four feet (4') and ten feet (10') in height must
consist of clear, nonreflective windows that allow views into the interior of
the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2456.gif]
 
         (d)   Parking And Access: Off street parking must be located to the
side or rear of the principal building on the lot. No curb cuts or driveway
openings are permitted along the front property line when alternative access is
possible, such as from an alley or side street.
         (e)   Building Materials: The front exterior facade of buildings must
be primarily clad with brick, stone, Dryvit, fiber cement siding (such as
Hardie Board), decorative concrete block or other natural materials. Plain
concrete block and metal are prohibited on front facades, but may be used on
interior, side and rear walls.
      2.   B3 District Character Standard: The front exterior facade of
buildings within the B3 district must be primarily clad with brick, stone,
drivit, decorative concrete block or other natural materials. Plain concrete
block and metal is prohibited on front facades, but may be used on interior,
side and rear walls.
      3.   Operational Performance Standards: All uses in the commercial
districts must comply with the operational performance standards in section
14-2-5 of this chapter.
      4.   Outdoor Storage, Display And Work Areas:
         (a)   B1 And B3 Districts: All allowed uses in the B1 and B3 districts
must be conducted within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise
expressly stated in this chapter.
         (b)   B2 And B4 Districts: Outdoor storage, display and work areas are
permitted, subject to the following requirements:
            (1)   Maximum Size: Outdoor storage, display and work areas may
cover no more than the following area on a lot:
 
                           B2 B4
Maximum percent of lot area 10 50
 
            (2)   Screening: Outdoor storage areas must be screened in
accordance with the requirements of chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-
2008)
   (F)   Agricultural Uses Permitted: Agricultural activities are a permitted
use in all commercial districts under the Spring Valley land development code
until property located within the commercial district is developed for its
intended zoning use. (Ord. 1578, 8-18-2014)
   (G)   Medical Cannabis Dispensaries: Additionally, medical cannabis
dispensaries shall be allowed as a special use in any commercial district
classification under the Spring Valley, Illinois, land development code,
subject to the following special use conditions:
      1.   The medical cannabis dispensary organization operating in strict
compliance with the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act 1 ,
as amended, and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
      2.   A dispensary may not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of
the property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility or another dispensary. A registered dispensing organization
may not be located in a house, apartment, condominium or any area zoned for
residential use.
      3.   A dispensary may not be located in the offices of a physician.
      4.   A dispensary may only be open to the public between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. any day of the week,
including holidays.
      5.   A dispensary may not utilize amplified music outdoors.
      6.   Medical cannabis inventory and cannabis infused products may not be
displayed or stored in an area accessible to the public.
      7.   A dispensary shall have appropriate security measures, in accordance
with state regulations, to deter and prevent the theft of cannabis and
unauthorized entrance into areas containing cannabis.
      8.   Medical cannabis may not be consumed on the site of a dispensary.
      9.   Exterior signage shall comply with the zoning ordinance, except that
signs or exterior building surfaces depicting or simulating cannabis, cannabis
infused products, smoking or cannabis paraphernalia shall not be permitted.
      10.   The mayor and city council may condition a special use permit on a
requirement that the dispensary organization defend and indemnify the city of
Spring Valley, and its officers and employees, from and against any claim
arising from the organization's operations. (Ord. 1583, 10-13-2014; amd. Ord.
1879, 8-7-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
14-2-3: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Establishment Of Districts: The following industrial districts are
established in the city of Spring Valley:
 
Abbreviation District Name
M1           Limited manufacturing district
M2           General manufacturing district
 
   (B)   District Descriptions:
      1.   M1, Limited Manufacturing District: The M1 district is intended to
provide for a wide range of light manufacturing, warehousing, wholesaling,
office and support service uses whose operations have minimal impact on
adjacent properties.
      2.   M2, General Manufacturing District: The M2 district is intended to
provide for those manufacturing, warehousing, wholesaling or transportation
terminal uses whose operations have a greater impact on the surrounding area
than those in the M1 district, including extensive outdoor storage and
operations. It is also the intent of this district to ensure that intensive
industrial operations are not conducted near residential areas.
   (C)   Allowed Uses: Uses are permitted in accordance with the use table in
section
14-3-1 of this title and any use permitted in commercial districts as defined
in section
14-2-2 of this chapter is also permitted as a special use in any M1 or M2
district in accordance with the special use provisions set forth in section
14-11-4 of this title.
   (D)   Dimensional Standards: All development in manufacturing districts must
comply with the dimensional standards in section
14-4-2 of this title.
   (E)   Additional Requirements:
      1.   Operational Performance Standards: All uses in the industrial
districts must comply with the operational performance standards in section
14-2-5 of this chapter.
      2.   Outdoor Storage, Display And Work Areas: Outdoor storage, display
and work areas are permitted in the M1 and M2 districts, subject to the
following requirements:
         (a)   Maximum Size: Outdoor storage, display and work areas may cover
no more than the following area on a lot:
 
                           M1 M2
Maximum percent of lot area 20 80
 
         (b)   Screening: Outdoor storage areas must be screened according to
the requirements of chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
   (F)   Permitted Uses In Industrial Districts: Agricultural activities are
permitted in any industrial district under the Spring Valley, Illinois, land
development code until such times as all or a portion of the land is developed
for an industrial use in accordance with the Spring Valley, Illinois, land
development code.
   (G)   Medical Cannabis Cultivation Centers: A medical cannabis cultivation
center operating in compliance with the compassionate use of medical cannabis
pilot program act 1  as amended, and pursuant to the regulations promulgated
thereunder, shall be deemed a special use in any M1 limited manufacturing
district, subject to the following additional requirements which must be met in
order to obtain a special use permit for a cannabis cultivation center:
      1.   The cultivation center must be currently registered with the
Illinois department of agriculture (or a successor agency) and be in good
standing;
      2.   A cultivation center may not be located within two thousand five
hundred feet (2,500') of the property line of a preexisting public or private
preschool or elementary or secondary school or daycare center, daycare home,
group daycare home, part day childcare facility or an area zoned for
residential use;
      3.   Medical cannabis inventory and cannabis infused products may not be
displayed or stored in an area accessible to the public;
      4.   A cultivation center shall have appropriate security measures, in
accordance with state regulations, to deter and prevent the theft of cannabis
and unauthorized entrance into areas containing cannabis;
      5.   All cultivation of cannabis must take place in an enclosed, locked
facility accessed by the department of agriculture during the registration
process. The cultivation center location shall only be accessed by the
cultivation center, department of agriculture staff performing inspections,
department of public health staff performing inspections, law enforcement or
other emergency personnel, and contractors working on jobs unrelated to medical
cannabis, such as installing or maintaining security devices or performing
electrical wiring;
      6.   Medical cannabis may not be consumed on the site of a cultivation
center;
      7.   Exterior signage shall comply with the land development code, except
that signs or exterior building surfaces depicting or simulating cannabis,
cannabis infused products, smoking or cannabis paraphernalia shall not be
permitted; and
      8.   The mayor and city council may condition a special use permit on a
requirement that the cultivation center organization defend and indemnify the
city of Spring Valley, and their officers and employees, from and against any
claim arising from the organization's operation.
(Ord. 1578, 8-18-2014; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
14-2-4: AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT:
   (A)   Establishment: The A agricultural district is hereby established in
the city of Spring Valley.
   (B)   District Description: The A district is established to provide for
agricultural activities and to serve as a "holding designation" for lands,
pending rezoning to another zoning district consistent with the comprehensive
plan.
   (C)   Allowed Uses: Uses are allowed in accordance with the use table in
section
14-3-1 of this title.
   (D)   Dimensional Standards: All development in the agricultural district
must comply with the dimensional standards in section
14-4-2 of this title.
   (E)   Additional Requirements: All uses in the agricultural district must
comply with the operational performance standards in section
14-2-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-2-5: OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All uses in all districts must comply with the following standards unless any
local, state or federal regulation establishes a more restrictive standard, in
which case the more restrictive standard applies.
   (A)   Noise:
      1.   Applicability: No activity or use may be conducted in a manner that
generates a level of sound greater than that allowed by this subsection. These
regulations do not apply to the following:
         (a)   Noises not directly under the control of the property owner or
tenant;
         (b)   Noises from safety signals, warning devices or emergency
pressure release valves;
      (c)   Noises from construction and maintenance activities between seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.; and
         (d)   Noises from moving sources such as automobiles, trucks,
railroads and airplanes.
      2.   Maximum Noise Levels:
Center Frequency (Cycles Per Second) Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
                                     (Decibels)
Center Frequency (Cycles Per Second) Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
                                     (Decibels)
31.5                                 76
63                                   71
125                                  67
250                                  65
500                                  50
1,000                                45
2,000                                39
4,000                                34
8,000                                32
 
   (B)   Heat And Vibration: No heat or vibration from any use may be
detectable at any point beyond the property line of the lot where the use is
located.
   (C)   Dust And Air Pollution:
      1.   Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from sources
such as storage areas, yards, roads and conveying equipment must be kept to a
minimum by appropriate landscaping, screening, sheltering, paving, fencing,
wetting, collecting or other means. No particulate matter may be visible to an
observer looking directly upward at any point beyond the property line.
      2.   This requirement does not apply when the wind speed is greater than
twenty five (25) miles per hour. Determination of wind speed will be by a one
hour average or hourly recorded value at the nearest official station of the
U.S. weather bureau or by wind speed instruments operated on the site.
   (D)   Discharge And Disposal Of Radioactive And Hazardous Waste: The
discharge of fluid and the disposal of solid radioactive and hazardous waste
materials must comply with all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
No operation that produces radioactive or hazardous waste material may occur
without prior notice to the zoning administrator. Notice must be given at least
three (3) weeks before the operation begins. Radioactive and hazardous material
waste must be transported, stored and used in conformance with all applicable
local, state and federal regulations.
   (E)   Electromagnetic Interference: Electromagnetic interference may not
adversely affect the operation of any equipment located beyond the property
line of the lot where the interference originates.
   (F)   Odors: The release of odorous or potentially odorous matter, either by
bacterial decomposition or chemical reaction, that is perceptible from beyond
the property line is prohibited.
   (G)   Toxic Substances: The storage, handling or transport of toxic
substances must comply with all state of Illinois pollution control board
requirements and all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
   (H)   Water Pollution: All uses must comply with the state of Illinois
pollution control board rules and regulations, 35 Illinois administrative code,
subtitle C, "water pollution", and all applicable local, state and federal
regulations.
   (I)   Fire And Explosion Hazards: Materials that present potential fire and
explosion hazards must be transported, stored and used only in conformance with
all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
CHAPTER 3
USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
14-3-1: Use Table
14-3-2: Use Specific Standards
14-3-3: Accessory Uses And Structures
14-3-4: Temporary Uses
14-3-1: USE TABLE:
   (A)   Use Groups: The use table classifies land uses into major groupings:
residential, public and civic, commercial, industrial, agricultural and other.
These are referred to as "use groups".
   (B)   Use Categories: Each use group is further divided into "use
categories". These categories classify land uses based on common
characteristics, such as the type of products sold, site conditions, or the
amount of activity on the site. Use categories are described in detail in
section
14-14-1 of this title. Some use categories are further divided into specific
use types, which are also described in section
14-14-1 of this title.
   (C)   Determination Of Land Use Category: When a land use cannot be
classified into a use category or appears to fit into multiple categories, the
zoning administrator is authorized to determine the most appropriate use
category.
   (D)   Permitted Uses: Uses identified with a "P" in the use table are
permitted by right in the designated zoning districts, subject to compliance
with all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   Special Uses: Uses identified with an "S" in the use table may be
allowed in the designated zoning districts if approved in accordance with the
special use approval procedure of section
14-11-5 of this title. Approved special uses are subject to compliance with all
other applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   Prohibited Uses: Uses identified with a "-" in the use table are
expressly prohibited. Uses not listed in the use table are also prohibited.
   (G)   Use Standards: The "use standard" column in the use table provides a
cross reference to additional standards that apply to some uses, whether or not
they are allowed as a permitted use or special use. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
   RE R1A R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 M1 M2 A Use Standard
                          RE R1A R1 R2 R3 B1 B2 B3 B4 M1 M2 A Use Standard
Residential uses:                                              
 Household living:                                            
    Dwelling units
  located above the     -  -   -  -  -  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  
    ground floor
  Employee living       -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  
    quarters
    Manufactured home                                         Subsection
  park                  -  -   -  -  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 14-3-2(G) of this
                                                              chapter
  Multi-family dwelling -  -   -  -  P1 -  -  P  -  -  -  -  
    (3+ units)
    Single-family                                             Subsection
  dwelling, attached    -  -   -  -  P1 -  -  P  -  -  -  - 14-3-2(A) of this
                                                              chapter
  Single-family         P  P   P  P  P  -  -  P  -  -  -  P  
    dwelling, detached
    Two-family conversion
  of single-family      -  S   S  S  P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  
    dwelling
  Two-family dwelling   -  -   -  P  P  -  -  P  -  -  -  -  
    (duplex)
 Group living:                                                
  Assisted living       -  -   -  S  S  -  P  P  -  -  -  -  
    Community residence,                                      Subsection
  large                 S  S   S  S  S  -  -  S  -  -  -  - 14-3-2(F) of this
                                                              chapter
    Community residence,                                      Subsection
  small                 P  P   P  P  P  -  -  P  -  -  -  - 14-3-2(F) of this
                                                              chapter
  Group living not      S  S   S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  
    otherwise classified
  Nursing care facility -  -   -  -  S  -  P  P  -  -  -  -  
  Transitional          -  -   -  -  S  -  S  -  -  -  -  -  
    residence
Public and civic uses:                                         
 College or university   -  -   -  -  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  -  
 Cultural exhibit or     S  S   S  S  S  P  P  P  P           
  library
 Daycare:                                                     
  Daycare center        -  -   -  -  -  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  
  Daycare home          P  P   P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  
 Hospital                -  S   -  -  S  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  
 Parks and recreation    P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  S  
 Place of public         -  -   -  -  -  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  
  assembly
 Post office             S  S   S  S  S  S  P  P  P  P  P  S  
 Public safety services  S  S   S  S  S  S  P  P  P  P  P  S  
 Religious assembly      S  S   S  S  S  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  
 School                  S  S   S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  
 Social club or lodge    -  -   -  -  -  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  
 Utilities:                                                   
  Major                 S  S   S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  
  Minor                 P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Commercial uses:                                               
                                                              Subsection
 Adult use               -  -   -  -  -  -  S  -  S  S  S  - 14-3-2(C) of this
                                                              chapter
 Animal services:                                             
  Shelters and kennels  -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  S  
  Veterinary services   -  -   -  -  -  P  P  -  P  P  S  -  
 Art gallery             -  -   -  -  -  S  S  S  -  S  S  -  
 Bank and financial                                           
  services:
  Banks                 -  -   -  -  -  P  P  P  P  S  S  -  
  Consumer loan         -  -   -  -  -  -  P  -  P  S  S  -  
    establishment
  Pawnshop              -  -   -  -  -  -  S  -  S  S  S  -  
  Payday loan store     -  -   -  -  -  -  P  -  P  S  S  -  
 Body art services       -  -   -  -  -  S  S  -  S  S  S  -  
 Business support        -  -   -  -  -  P  P  P  P  S  S  -  
  service
 Construction sales and  -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  
  service
 Eating and drinking                                          
  establishments:
  Restaurant            -  -   -  -  -  P  P  P  P  S  S  -  
  Tavern                -  -   -  -  -  P  P  -  P  S  S  -  
 Entertainment and                                            
  spectator sports:
  Indoor                -  -   -  -  -  P  P  -  P  P  S  -  
  Outdoor               -  -   -  -  -  S  S  -  S  S  S  -  
 Funeral and interment                                        
  services:
  Cemetery              S  S   S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  
  Cremating             -  -   -  -  -  S  S  S  S  S  S  -  
  Funeral home          -  S   S  S  S  P  P  P  P  S  S  -  
                                                              Subsection
 Gas station             -  -   -  -  -  -  P  -  P  S  S  - 14-3-2(E) of this
                                                              chapter
 Lodging:                                                     
                                                              Subsection
  Bed and breakfast     -  S   S  S  P  P  P  P  -  S  S  P 14-3-2(D) of this
                                                              chapter
  Boarding house        -  -   -  -  P  P  P  P  -  S  S  -  
  Hotel or motel        -  -   -  -  -  P  P  -  P  S  S  -  
 Medical cannabis        -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -  
  cultivation center
 Medical cannabis        -  -   -  -  -  S  S  S  S  S  S  -  
  dispensary
 Medical or dental       -  S   S  S  S  P  P  P  P  S  S  -  
  clinic
 Miniwarehouse           -  -   -  -  -  -  S  -  S  P  P  -  
 Office                  -  -   -  -  -  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  
 Personal and consumer   -  -   -  -  -  P  P  P  P  S  S  -  
  services
 Retail sales            -  -   -  -  -  P  P  -  P  S  S  -  
 Sports and recreation,                                       
  participant:
  Indoor                -  -   -  -  -  -  P  -  P  P  P  -  
  Outdoor               -  -   -  -  -  -  P  -  -  S  S  -  
                                                              Subsection
  Shooting ranges                       S  S     S  S       14-3-2(I) of this
                                                              chapter
 Vehicle sales and                                            
  service:
  Car wash              -  -   -  -  -  -  P  -  P  S  S  -  
  Heavy equipment sales -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  
    or rental
    Light equipment and
  vehicle sales or      -  -   -  -  -  -  P  -  P  P  P  -  
    rental
  Motor vehicle repair, -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  P  -  
    major
  Motor vehicle repair, -  -   -  -  -  -  P  -  P  P  P  -  
    minor
    Vehicle, recreational
  vehicle or boat       -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  
    storage/towing
Industrial uses:                                               
  Manufacturing,
 production, and                                              
  industrial services:
  Commercial uses       -  -   -  -  -  P  P  P  P  S  S  -  
  General               -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  
  Limited               -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  
  Research laboratory   -  -   -  -  -  -  P  -  P  P  P  -  
  Trucking/freight      -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -  
    terminal
  Warehousing and       -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  
    wholesaling
 Waste related use:                                           
  Junkyard              -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  
  Recycling facility    -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  
  Sanitary landfill     -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  
Agricultural uses:                                             
  Farming               -  -   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  
Other uses:                                                    
                                                              Section
 Accessory use           P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P 14-3-3 of this
                                                              chapter
  Drive-through                                               Subsection
 facilities              -  -   -  -  -  -  P  S  P  S  S  - 14-3-3(B) of this
                                                              chapter
                                                              Subsection
 Home occupation         P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  S  S  P 14-3-3(C) of this
                                                              chapter
 Parking:                                                     
  Accessory parking     P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
  Nonaccessory parking  -  -   -  -  -  S  S  -  S  -  -  -  
 Planned developments    S  S   S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  
 Wireless communication                                       
  facility:
                                                              Subsection
  Collocated            P  P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P 14-3-2(H) of this
                                                              chapter
                                                              Subsection
  Freestanding          -  -   -  -  -  -  S  -  S  S  S  S 14-3-2(H) of this
                                                              chapter
 
Note:
    1.    Subject to the design review procedures of section
14-11-8 of this title.
(Ord. 1449, 2-15-2010; amd. Ord. 1524, 2-18-2013; Ord. 1583, 10-13-2014; Ord.
1601, 4-13-2015; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-3-2: USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
   (A)   Single-Family Dwelling, Attached: Attached single-family dwelling
units must comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Number Of Units Per Building: No more than eight (8) attached
single-family dwelling units are permitted within a single building.
      2.   Number Of Buildings Per Lot: Multiple buildings containing attached
single-family dwellings are permitted on a single zoning lot.
      3.   Building Separation: Attached dwellings must meet the requirements
for permitted encroachments in subsection
14-4-3(J) of this title. Minimum separation between multiple buildings on a lot
is required as follows:
 
Attached Single-Family Residential      Dimension
Building Separation Standard
Between 1 end wall and another end wall 10 feet
                                        30 feet; driveways, parking areas,
                                        walkways, and landscaping and permitted
                                        encroachments are allowed within the
Between 1 front or rear wall and        required separation area. This may be
another front or rear wall              reduced to 20 feet on the ground floor
                                        where garage doors face garage doors
                                        and are separated by an interior drive,
                                        provided that upper story living spaces
                                        are separated by 30 feet
                                        20 feet; driveways, parking areas,
Between 1 end wall and 1 front or rear  walkways, and landscaping, and
wall                                    permitted encroachments are allowed
                                        within the required separation area
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2458.gif]
 
      4.   Building Design: Attached single-family dwellings must:
         (a)   Be designed with windows and/or doors on all building facades
that face a street to avoid the appearance of blank walls; and
         (b)   Be designed with garage doors facing an alley, where there is an
alley serving the site, or facing an interior driveway whenever possible. Where
garages face a public street, they may not extend beyond the street facing
facade.
      5.   Driveway Access:
         (a)   Attached single-family dwellings must be served by a common
access drive, rather than separate driveway curb cuts where garages face a
public street.
         (b)   Driveways leading from a street to a garage must be of
sufficient depth to ensure that parked vehicles do not overhang the sidewalk or
public street. The distance between the sidewalk and the garage must be at
least twenty feet (20').
      6.   Private Yards:
         (a)   Attached single-family dwellings must provide private yards a
minimum of two hundred (200) square feet in area for each attached single-
family dwelling unit.
         (b)   A private yard may be located next to a front wall, rear wall,
or end wall, provided that it is immediately adjacent to the attached single-
family dwelling unit it serves and is directly accessible from the unit by way
of a door or steps.
         (c)   Required private yards must be landscaped with turf, ground
cover, shrubs, trees or other landscape improvements, such as walkways or
patios.
         (d)   Private yards may be enclosed with fences.
      7.   Common Open Space:
         (a)   In developments with thirty (30) or more attached single- family
dwelling units, one hundred fifty (150) square feet of common open space must
be provided per unit.
         (b)   Common open space must be accessible to all attached single-
family dwelling units and improved with landscaping, recreational facilities,
and/or pedestrian walkways.
         (c)   Common open space must be maintained by a homeowners'
association.
   (B)   Single-Family Dwellings Converted To Two-Family Dwellings:
      1.   A single-family dwelling may be converted to a two-family dwelling
subject to the following criteria:
         (a)   Converted dwellings must maintain the appearance of single-
family dwellings.
         (b)   Converted dwellings must meet the parking requirements of
chapter 5 of this title through existing garages and driveways.
         (c)   Two (2) separate entrances may be permitted when the dwelling is
located on a corner lot, subject to the design review procedure of section
14-11-8 of this title.
   (C)   Adult Use:
      1.   Locational Criteria: Adult uses cannot be located on any site that
is:
         (a)   Within five hundred feet (500') of another existing adult use;
         (b)   Within three thousand feet (3,000') of the boundary of a
residential zoning district or existing residential use; or
         (c)   Within three thousand feet (3,000') of any existing school or
religious assembly use or cemetery.
      2.   Measurement: For the purposes of this subsection, distances will be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects from the nearest point on the property line on the site on which the
adult use exists or is proposed to the nearest point of any property line of a
residential use, residential district, school, religious assembly establishment
and/or any other adult use, as the case may be.
   (D)   Bed And Breakfast: Bed and breakfast establishments must:
      1.   Be owner occupied;
      2.   Have a maximum of eight (8) guestrooms;
      3.   Only serve meals to overnight guests, unless the bed and breakfast
is located on an arterial or collector street as defined by this title, then
meals can be served to a maximum of twenty five (25) people at any one time;
      4.   Provide sufficient off street parking as required by chapter 5 of
this title in a parking area located behind the front building line; and
      5.   Not include retail or other sales on the premises.
   (E)   Gas Station: Gas stations must:
      1.   Have a minimum lot area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
      2.   Limit open storage to no more than four (4) vehicles stored for
minor repairs bearing current license plates. Such storage may not exceed
seventy two (72) hours' duration and may not permit the storage of wrecked
vehicles;
      3.   Install lighting fixtures that are directed downward and shielded to
prevent glare on adjoining properties and roadways;
      4.   Install canopy lighting designed with recessed fixtures to prevent
glare on adjoining properties and roadways;
      5.   Locate and design curb cuts to ensure that they will not adversely
affect the safety and efficiency of traffic and pedestrian circulation on
adjoining streets. Curb cuts for new or expanded gas stations must be a minimum
of one hundred feet (100') apart on each street frontage; and
      6.   Only have accessory drive-through facilities subject to subsection
14-3-3(B) of this chapter.
   (F)   Community Residences:
      1.   Community residences must be located at least one thousand feet
(1,000') from any other community residence, large or small, unless the spacing
requirement is waived in accordance with the special use procedure of section
14-11-5 of this title.
      2.   When requested, waivers must be granted when the decision making
body determines that the proposed community residence will not adversely affect
or be incompatible with the residential character of the neighborhood.
   (G)   Manufactured Home Parks: Manufactured home parks must comply with the
following requirements:
      1.   More Restrictive Requirements Apply: Each park to be constructed,
altered, or expanded under the provisions of this chapter must provide
facilities as required by the mobile home park act 1  of the state of Illinois
and all applicable rules of the Illinois department of public health and other
state agencies. Where the requirements of this subsection conflict with the
requirements of the state of Illinois, the more restrictive requirements will
control. This subsection applies only to construction, alteration, or expansion
of manufactured home parks and does not determine state licensing or govern the
operation of manufactured home parks.
      2.   Single Ownership Of Manufactured Home Parks: A manufactured home
park must be entirely owned by an individual, firm, trust, partnership, public
or private association or corporation. No lots may be individually sold.
      3.   Applications And Licensing Requirements; Inspections:
         (a)   No person may construct, alter, or expand a manufactured home
park unless they hold a valid permit from the state of Illinois that authorizes
the construction of a new, altered or expanded manufactured home park in
accordance with the mobile home park act.
         (b)   A mobile home park may not be constructed, altered or expanded
without first obtaining a special use permit and a mobile home park permit,
according to the requirements of chapter 11 of this title.
         (c)   No person may operate a manufactured home park unless they hold
a valid permit issued by the city council upon completion of the park. The
operator of the manufactured home park must also maintain a valid permit from
the state of Illinois.
         (d)   The zoning administrator has the authority to conduct
inspections of the manufactured home park during and after construction to
ensure compliance with all requirements.
         (e)   All state and local permits and licenses must be prominently
displayed in the office of the manufactured home park for which the permits and
licenses were issued.
      4.   Permitted Manufactured Homes: After the effective date specified in
section
14-1-2 of this title only manufactured homes that were constructed after June
30, 1976, in accordance with the federal "national manufactured housing
construction and safety standards act of 1974" are permitted to locate in a new
or existing manufactured home park.
      5.   Minimum Park Size: Manufactured home parks must be at least five (5)
acres in size. Any expansion of an existing manufactured home park that is
smaller than five (5) acres must bring the total area of the park up to five
(5) acres.
      6.   Dimensional Requirements:
         (a)   All manufactured home parks must meet the following dimensional
requirements:
Standard Dimension
Standard                                                      Dimension
Minimum manufactured home space area                          4,000 square feet
Minimum manufactured home space width                         50 feet
Minimum setback from public street right of way lines         35 feet
Minimum setback from other property lines                     15 feet
Separation between manufactured homes                         30 feet
Separation between manufactured homes and unattached          10 feet
accessory structures (on the same or another site)
Separation between manufactured homes and accessory
structures to other manufactured home park structures such as 30 feet
service or community buildings, laundry buildings, and park
offices
Separation between manufactured home and internal street      15 feet
pavement, parking areas or common areas
 
         (b)   In measuring the minimum separation between manufactured homes,
measurements will be taken from the outermost projection of the manufactured
home or from any attached accessory structure, such as decks, stairs, stoops,
porches, attached carports, and any other structure that is not separated from
the manufactured home by at least ten feet (10').
      7.   Manufactured Home Stands:
         (a)   Each manufactured home stand must consist of four inch (4")
reinforced concrete and be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') wide by fifty five
feet (55') long.
         (b)   Wheels and hitches must not be removed from manufactured home
units.
         (c)   All manufactured homes must be anchored in accordance with the
mobile home tiedown act, 210 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120, and all applicable
state requirements.
      8.   Resident Storage:
         (a)   In manufactured home parks constructed after the effective date
specified in section
14-1-2 of this title, a minimum of eighty (80) square feet/three hundred (300)
cubic feet of storage space must be provided by the owner or operator for each
manufactured home within the park. This required storage space may be located
within a central, community storage building, or in enclosed individual storage
structures on each manufactured home site. On site storage structures must meet
the setback and separation requirements for accessory structures and may not
exceed eight feet (8') in height. All accessory storage structures must be
constructed of a fireproof material. Additional storage buildings are not
permitted on manufactured home sites when the required storage space is
provided either within a community building or on site storage structure.
         (b)   In manufactured home parks constructed prior to the effective
date specified in section
14-1-2 of this title, each manufactured home resident may construct his/her own
storage space. Manufactured home spaces within parks that were not provided
with the required storage space may construct one storage structure up to
eighty (80) square feet in area, three hundred (300) cubic feet in volume, and
eight feet (8') in height. The structure must be completely detached from the
manufactured home, portable, and only used for storage purposes. All other
enclosed or unenclosed accessory storage structures are prohibited.
      9.   Internal Street System:
         (a)   General Requirements: All internal streets must be privately
owned and maintained by the park owner. For the purposes of this section, all
streets providing vehicular access within the park will be referred to as the
"park street system".
         (b)   Primary Entrance Road: The primary entrance road connecting the
park street system with a public street must have a minimum pavement width of
twenty seven feet (27').
         (c)   Secondary Entrance Road: All parks of twenty (20) or more acres
in size and/or parks that can accommodate one hundred fifty (150) or more
manufactured homes must also have at least one secondary entrance road
connecting the park street system with a public street. All secondary roads
must have a minimum pavement width of twenty four feet (24').
         (d)   Separation Between Park Entrances: Where primary and secondary
entrance roads connect to the same public street, they must be at least one
hundred fifty feet (150') apart.
         (e)   Interior Streets: All interior streets in the park street system
must have a minimum pavement width of twenty four feet (24') if on street
parking is prohibited on both sides and thirty six feet (36') if on street
parking is permitted. Cul-de-sacs may not exceed three hundred feet (300') in
length and must be designed at the closed end with a turnaround having an
outside roadway diameter of at least fifty feet (50').
         (f)   Street Construction And Design Standards:
            (1)   Pavement Materials: All streets must be surfaced with seven
inch (7") reinforced concrete or asphalt mix three inches (3") thick on top of
eight inches (8") of crushed stone or gravel.
            (2)   Pavement Design: Primary and secondary entrance roads must be
constructed in accordance with city construction specifications for public
streets, including those for curb and gutter systems. The internal park street
systems may be built to the city's construction standards for alleys.
            (3)   Grade: The grades of all streets must be sufficient to ensure
adequate surface drainage, but may not be more than eight percent (8%). Short
runs with a maximum grade of twelve percent (12%) may be permitted, provided
traffic safety is assured by appropriate paving, adequate leveling areas and
avoidance of lateral curves.
            (4)   Intersections: Streets within the park street system must be
at approximately right angles within one hundred feet (100') of an
intersection. Offset streets must be at least one hundred fifty feet (150')
apart. Intersections of more than two (2) streets at one point should be
avoided.
            (5)   Other City Standards: All streets within the park street
system must be designed and constructed in accordance with all other applicable
city standards for sight distance and horizontal and vertical curve systems.
      10.   Parking: A minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces must be
provided per manufactured home site. The size and paving of each parking space
must comply with the requirements of chapter 5 of this title.
      11.   Pedestrian Access:
         (a)   General Requirements: All parks must provide a safe, convenient
system of walkways that connect individual manufactured home spaces, the park
street system and community facilities. In this section, all walkways that
provide pedestrian access within the park will be referred to as the "park
walkway system".
         (b)   Common Walkways: Common walkways that generally follow the park
street system and provide connections to recreation areas and community
facilities must be provided in all parks. Common walkways must be a minimum of
five feet (5') wide. These walkways must connect to the public sidewalk system
at park entrances (where there are public sidewalks). The city may only require
common walkways on one side of the streets in the park street system.
         (c)   Walkways Connecting Manufactured Home Spaces: All manufactured
home spaces must be connected to the park walkway system by one or more
walkways. Walkways that connect manufactured home spaces to common walkways
within the park must have a minimum width of two feet (2').
         (d)   Surface Materials: The park walkway system must be constructed
of four inch (4") concrete.
      12.   Lighting: All parks must be constructed with sufficient electrical
systems and lighting units that allow for the safe movement of pedestrians and
vehicles at night. Lighting of streets and community buildings and facilities
within the park must provide an average illumination level of at least 0.6
foot- candle and a minimum illumination level of 0.3 foot-candle. All exterior
lighting within the manufactured home park must be installed and maintained by
the operator of the park.
      13.   Street Trees: Street trees must be planted within ten feet (10') of
the street pavement edge. They may be located either between a common walkway
and the street or inside the common walkway where it abuts the street. Required
street trees must be planted at a rate of at least one tree per manufactured
home space. Trees must be a minimum two inch (2") caliper in size. Regardless
of location, all street trees must be installed and maintained by the operator
of the park, upon completion of the park street and walkway system.
      14.   Recreation Areas: All parks must contain one or more recreation
areas that are as centrally located as possible, free of traffic hazards, and
easily accessible to all park residents. In larger manufactured home parks,
some decentralization of recreation areas may be permitted. The size of the
recreation areas is based upon a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet for
each manufactured home space in the park. Each park must provide a minimum of
one acre of outdoor recreation area, regardless of the number of manufactured
home spaces. Recreation areas may consist of the following:
         (a)   Sufficient space for community buildings, facilities, playing
fields, and open space for active and passive adult, senior citizen and child
oriented recreational uses.
         (b)   Suitable landscaping, fencing, and seating areas.
         (c)   Pedestrian walkways that connect recreation areas to the park
walkway system.
         (d)   Swimming pools, provided they are fenced and secured when not in
active use to prevent unauthorized entry. Fencing or other artificial
enclosures must completely enclose the pool area.
         (e)   Swimming pools must be constructed and maintained in accordance
with the requirements of the state department of public health.
      15.   Service Buildings And Community Facilities: Management offices,
repair shops, common storage areas, laundry facilities, indoor recreation
buildings, and commercial uses that provide essential goods and services
exclusively to park residents are allowed as accessory uses and must be
constructed to meet all applicable city building code requirements.
      16.   Site Drainage And Stormwater Management: Every park to be
constructed under the provisions of this chapter must meet the following
standards:
         (a)   Sites proposed to be utilized for manufactured home parks must
be adequately protected against flooding. Manufactured homes in floodplain
areas must be constructed in accordance with section
14-8-8 of this title.
         (b)   The ground surface of every park must be graded and equipped to
drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. Manufactured home parks
are required to meet the stormwater management requirements of section
14-9-14 of this title.
         (c)   Adequate provisions must be made for sewer facilities as
specified in this section.
      17.   Slope Protection: Adequate protective barriers must be provided and
maintained where there is a slope in excess of forty five degrees (45°) and a
change in elevation of six feet (6') or more. Such barriers may include, but
are not limited to, continuous shrubs or fencing.
      18.   Erosion Control:
         (a)   Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park must be
landscaped, paved, or covered with other solid material that is capable of
preventing soil erosion and the emanation of dust during dry weather.
         (b)   Where the topography has a slope of twenty five percent (25%) or
more, a rip wall, cribbing, or other approved system of soil and slope
stabilization must be installed and maintained.
      19.   Landscaping And Screening: All manufactured home parks must be
screened with a ten foot (10') wide buffer strip along all property lines,
except those abutting the public right of way. Where effective visual barriers
do not already exist along property boundary lines, the required buffer strip
must be furnished with screening that is at least six feet (6') in height.
Screening elements can consist of landscaping, berming, fences, and/or walls.
Where a fence, wall, or berm is proposed, landscaping must be used to soften
its appearance within the required buffer strip. Where only landscaping is
utilized, it must consist of a dense planting of deciduous trees, evergreens,
and shrubs that will provide year round screening at a minimum height of six
feet (6'). Fences or walls must not contain electrical charges, barbed wire,
broken glass, or other material designed to inflict bodily harm.
      20.   Water Supply:
         (a)   General: All manufactured home parks must be served by public
water supplies. All such public water supplies must be capable of providing a
sufficient supply of potable water under adequate pressure, to facilities for
manufactured homes, service buildings, fire hydrants, drinking fountains, and
other accessory facilities required by the city. The public water supply system
must be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the
requirements of the Illinois department of public health, Illinois
environmental protection agency and all applicable city requirements.
         (b)   Water Distribution System: The water distribution system must be
constructed of piping, fixtures and other equipment of approved materials. The
system must be designed and maintained to provide water pressure of not less
than twenty (20) pounds per square inch to each manufactured home, service
building, and other locations requiring potable water supply.
         (c)   Individual Water Connections:
            (1)   Individual water service connections must be provided to each
manufactured home space in the park. All water service connections must be
watertight and located at a minimum distance of five feet (5') from sanitary
sewer connections underground. The minimum pipe size of connections is one inch
(1"). Outlets must be constructed to be free of possible contamination from
surface drainage and damage during installation of a manufactured home. Outlets
must be four inches (4") above grade.
            (2)   Adequate provisions must be made to prevent freezing of
service lines, valves and riser pipe, and to protect risers from ground heaving
and thawing actions during freezing weather.
            (3)   Underground stop and waste cocks must not be installed on any
connection.
         (d)   Water Supply For Fire Protection: All parks must provide water
supply facilities. Hydrants must be located within two hundred feet (200') of
any manufactured home, service building, and accessory structure and designed
in accordance with city specifications.
      21.   Sewage Disposal:
         (a)   An adequate and safe sewage system must be provided in all
manufactured home parks for the conveying, treatment, and disposal of sanitary
sewage. The facilities on the site must be designed and installed to connect to
the public sewer system with the approval of the city engineer. All sewage
systems must be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois
department of public health, Illinois pollution control board, and all other
applicable state and city requirements.
         (b)   Each manufactured home site must be provided with a sewer
connection for the combined liquid waste outlet or outlets of each manufactured
home. It is the duty of the owner or operator of the manufactured home park to
provide an approved watertight and odortight connection from the water drainage
to the sewer connection of each manufactured home, to make such connection, and
keep all occupied manufactured homes connected to the sewer while located in
the park. Sewer connections on unoccupied manufactured home sites must be
closed so that they will not emit odors or create a breeding place for flies.
No water or waste is allowed to fall on the ground from a manufactured home.
      22.   Electrical Distribution System: Electrical wiring systems in all
parks must consist of approved wiring, fixtures and equipment that are
installed and maintained in compliance with all applicable state and national
electrical codes. All electrical wires must be located underground.
      23.   Natural Gas System: Natural gas piping systems in all parks must be
installed and maintained in accordance with accepted engineering practices and
applicable requirements of the city of Spring Valley.
      24.   Fuel Oil Supply Systems: Fuel oil supply systems provided for
manufactured homes, service buildings, and other structures must be installed
and maintained in accordance with applicable requirements of the city of Spring
Valley. Underground fuel oil systems must be located a minimum of ten feet
(10') horizontally from water lines and at necessary crossings must be placed
in pipe sleeves extending ten feet (10') from each side of the water pipe.
      25.   Modifications And Additions To Manufactured Homes:
         (a)   General Requirements: All building, plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and electrical connections, alterations or repairs in manufactured
home parks and on individual manufactured homes must be conducted in accordance
with the applicable requirements of the city of Spring Valley.
         (b)   Permanent Additions: Permanent building additions to a
manufactured home unit are prohibited. Roofed patios are permitted, provided
they are not physically attached to the manufactured home unit.
      26.   Occupancy Of Manufactured Homes: Occupancy of a manufactured home
is limited to the design capacity of the manufactured home. This is established
by the number of sleeping spaces provided in the manufactured home.
      27.   Refuse Storage And Collection: The owner or operator of the park
must provide adequate areas for refuse storage, collection, and disposal. The
location of refuse storage areas and method of collection and disposal must be
provided at the time special use approval is granted.
      28.   Park Maintenance:
         (a)   Pursuant to the regulations of this title, it is the
responsibility of the owner or operator of the manufactured home park to
maintain streets, curbing, pedestrian walkways and all community facilities.
         (b)   It is to be the responsibility of the owner or operator of the
manufactured home park to provide for and enforce the general cleanliness of
the manufactured home park.
         (c)   Abandoned vehicles must be removed from any manufactured home
park, at the park owner's expense. An abandoned vehicle is an automobile or
other vehicle that is unlicensed or inoperative.
      29.   Enforcement: The zoning administrator is hereby granted the power
and authority to enter upon the premises of each manufactured home park at any
reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. Failure to conform
to the regulations of this title will be cause for revocation of the
manufactured home park permit and enforcement action in accordance with chapter
13 of this title.
   (H)   Wireless Communication Facilities:
      1.   General Standards:
         (a)   All wireless communications facilities must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the federal communications commission
(FCC), federal aviation administration (FAA) and any other agency of the
federal government authorized to regulate wireless communications facilities.
         (b)   Wireless communications facilities must be designed so as not to
cause interference with radio, TV, or other electrical appliances.
         (c)   Wireless communications facilities must be designed, constructed
and installed to minimize their aesthetic impact on adjoining properties. The
design of wireless communications facilities must, to the maximum extent
possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will
blend the tower and associated equipment with the surrounding area.
         (d)   All wireless communications towers must be painted a neutral
color to avoid visual obtrusiveness.
         (e)   Towers and antennas may not be artificially lighted unless
mandated by the FAA or other applicable authority.
         (f)   No off premises signs are permitted on a wireless communications
facility, except for collocated facilities attached to an existing and approved
sign or its support structure. Wireless communications facilities may have
safety or warning signs in appropriate locations.
      2.   Preferred Sites: When a wireless provider is considering locations
for wireless communications facilities, city owned sites are considered
preferred sites. Prior to applying for a building permit or special use permit,
the provider must contact the city to determine whether there is a city owned
site or facility available that would meet its locational criteria.
      3.   Collocation Of Antenna On Existing Structures:
         (a)   Antenna Design: The antenna and associated equipment of such a
collocated facility must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure or building so as to
make the antenna and associated equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
         (b)   Collocation On An Existing Wireless Communication Facility:
Installation of a wireless antenna and associated equipment on an existing
wireless communication facility is a permitted use in all zoning districts.
         (c)   Collocation By Attachment To An Existing Structure: This
subsection addresses the installation of a tower or antenna on an existing
structure, other than a wireless communication facility tower, including, but
not limited to, buildings, light poles, water towers, commercial signs, church
steeples, and any other freestanding structures. Installation of a wireless
antenna and associated equipment on an existing structure, other than an
existing wireless communication facility, is a permitted use in all zoning
districts, subject to site plan review. Where the facility is proposed on a
city owned structure, the Plan Commission has the authority to forward the site
plan to the city council for review and approval. Such collocated facilities,
including associated equipment and accessory structures, are subject to the
following minimum standards:
            (1)   R, B1 And B3 Districts: In the residential (R) districts and
the B1 and B3 districts, such collocated facilities may not extend above the
highest point of the existing structure by more than:
               A. Ten feet (10'), if the structure is up to forty feet (40') in
height; or
               B. Fifteen feet (15'), if the structure is more than forty feet
(40') in height.
            (2)   Other B, M, And A Districts: In all business (B) districts
other than those specified in subsection (H)3(c)(1) of this section; the
manufacturing (M) districts; and the agricultural (A) district; such collocated
facilities may not extend above the highest point of the existing structure by
more than fifteen feet (15').
            (3)   City Owned Sites: The height of collocated facilities on city
owned sites or facilities may not extend above the highest point of the
existing structure by more than fifteen feet (15').
      4.   Freestanding Facilities: Freestanding facilities require special use
approval. An application for a freestanding facility must include an affidavit
of intent committing the site owner, his successors and assigns, the operator,
and his successors and assigns to allow the shared use of the proposed tower
and to offer at least one potential additional user reasonable terms and
conditions for collocation. Failure to abide by such commitment constitutes a
violation of this chapter and may result in revocation of the building permit
associated with the facility.
         (a)   Demonstration Of Need: Special use approval may not be granted
unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the plan
commission and city council that no existing facility or structure can
accommodate the applicant's proposed facility. Evidence submitted to
demonstrate that no existing facility or structure can accommodate the
applicant's proposed facility may consist of any of the following:
            (1)   No existing wireless communication facilities are located
within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
            (2)   Existing wireless communication facilities are not of
sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements.
            (3)   Existing wireless communication facilities do not have
sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and
associated equipment.
            (4)   The applicant's proposed facility would cause electromagnetic
interference with an antenna on the existing tower, or vice versa.
            (5)   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing wireless communication facility, or to
adapt an existing wireless communication facility for sharing, are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new facility development are presumed to be
unreasonable.
         (b)   Maximum Height: No freestanding facility may have a maximum
height that is more than two hundred feet (200'). Within the two hundred foot
(200') height limit, the facility must accommodate collocation of other
facilities. Freestanding facilities located on city owned sites will have a
height limit that is imposed by the city council.
         (c)   Setbacks:
            (1)   In business and agriculture districts, freestanding
facilities must be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from the rear
property line and twenty feet (20') from the front and side property lines. On
a corner lot, the twenty foot (20') setback requirement applies to both
property lines fronting on the public right of way.
            (2)   In manufacturing districts, freestanding facilities must be
set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from a property line that serves as a
common boundary line between an M and an R district, ten feet (10') from side
property lines, and twenty feet (20') from any public right of way lines. On a
corner lot, the twenty foot (20') setback requirement applies to both property
lines fronting on the public right of way.
         (d)   Number Of Towers Per Zoning Lot: There may be no more than one
freestanding facility per zoning lot.
         (e)   Tower Design: Towers must be of monopole construction
(cylindrical, tapering steel tubes without guywires or lattice design). Towers
must be constructed so that if a failure does occur, the tower will collapse
into itself and will not fall onto structures near the site.
         (f)   Security Fencing: Freestanding facilities must be enclosed by
security fencing not less than six feet (6') in height and must also be
equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device. The anticlimbing device may
not include barbed wire, razor wire, or similar sharp barrier.
         (g)   Landscaping:
            (1)   Wireless communication facilities must be landscaped with a
buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the base of the
tower and associated equipment from residential properties that are adjacent to
or across the street from the site.
            (2)   The standard buffer must consist of a landscape strip at
least five feet (5') wide outside the perimeter of the facility. In locations
where the visual impact of the facility would be minimal, the landscaping
requirement may be reduced or waived altogether.
            (3)   Existing mature trees (more than 3 inches in diameter) and
natural landforms on the site must be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
If mature trees are removed, the same number of trees must be planted on the
site within six (6) months following completion of the tower. In some cases,
such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property
perimeter may be a sufficient buffer.
         (h)   Abandonment Or Discontinuation Of Use Of Facilities:
            (1)   At such time as the operator of a wireless communication
facility plans to abandon or discontinue operation of the facility, the
operator must notify the zoning administrator by certified mail of the proposed
date of abandonment or discontinuation of operation. Such notice must be given
no less than thirty (30) days before abandonment or discontinuation of
operation.
            (2)   In the event that the operator fails to give such notice, the
facility will be deemed abandoned upon such discontinuation of operation.
            (3)   Upon such abandonment or discontinuation of use, the operator
must physically remove the wireless communication facility within one hundred
twenty (120) days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use.
"Physically remove" includes, but is not limited to:
               A. Removal of tower, antennas, mount, equipment shelters or
platforms and security barriers from the subject property;
               B. Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in
accordance with applicable solid waste disposal regulations; and
               C. Restoration of the location of the wireless communication
facility to its natural condition, except that any landscaping and grading must
remain.
            (4)   In the event that the operator fails to remove a wireless
communication facility in accordance with the provisions of this subsection,
upon the city's provision of thirty (30) days' written notice to the operator,
the city or its agents have the authority to enter the subject property and
physically remove the facility. The operator of the facility, or the owner if
different from the operator, is liable to the city for all costs associated
with entry and removal. This liability will be collectible in the same manner
as any other personal liability.
         (i)   Review And Approval Procedures:
            (1)   A building permit is required for each wireless communication
facility installation.
            (2)   When a wireless communication facility requires special use
approval, such approval must be obtained before any building permit may be
issued.
            (3)   Each applicant requesting a permit for a wireless
communication facility must submit with the application a scaled site plan and
a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations and other
documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals,
showing:
               A.   The location and dimension of all improvements;
               B.   Information concerning topography;
               C.   Radio frequency coverage;
               D.   Tower height requirements and setbacks;
               E.   Drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, and adjacent uses;
and
               F.   Any other information deemed by the zoning administrator to
be necessary to assess compliance with this title.
            (4)   Approved wireless communication facilities may be transferred
to successors and assigns of the approved party, subject to all of the
conditions that apply to initial approval.
         (j)   Waiver: In reviewing a special use request, the plan commission
and city council may waive any of the nonfederally mandated requirements of
this subsection pertaining to height limitations, setback requirements, and
landscaping if it determines that the goals of this subsection are better
served thereby.
            (1)   The setback requirements may be modified if the applicant
shows, to the satisfaction of the plan commission and city council, that such
modification will result in a reduction of the visual impact of the wireless
communication facility.
            (2)   The height requirements may be modified if the applicant
shows, to the satisfaction of the plan commission and city council, that
additional height is necessary to enable the applicant to meet its service
coverage requirements, and the facility will be constructed to safely and
effectively accommodate collocation of one or more wireless communication
facilities.
            (3)   The landscaping requirements may be modified if the applicant
shows, to the satisfaction of the plan commission and city council, that the
required landscaping is unnecessary for screening purposes, due to the proposed
location of the facility and lack of visibility from neighboring properties
and/or public right of way. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
   (I)   Shooting Ranges:
      1.   Shooting ranges must have the approval of the chief of police, the
building inspector, the fire chief, the fire marshal, and the city engineer and
further subject to the following criteria:
         (a)   The gun range shall be for the sole purpose of discharging guns.
There shall be no alcohol, no food and no drinks present on the range.
         (b)   There shall be an annual license fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00), issued by the chief of police, with a required thirty (30) day
notice before expiration of an intent to renew.
         (c)   The gun range is subject to inspection by the chief of police
along with anyone else he chooses to accompany him at any time. The chief of
police shall review each application for renewal and shall inspect said
premises each year.
         (d)   The gun range must be constructed in a fashion that would allow
it to comply with the noise standards set forth below and the walls, ceiling
and floor must maintain their integrity without allowing rounds to escape. This
is applicable no matter the kind, size, or caliber of gun that is shot,
notwithstanding who owns the gun.
         (e)   All ammunition that is discharged at the range must be purchased
from the range operator unless the range operator physically inspects the
ammunition and determines that the rounds are factory loads with no steel core.
         (f)   The range may be open from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M., seven (7) days a week.
         (g)   There shall be no one present during shooting except one
customer per shooting stall and no more than a total of fifty (50) people in
the building at any time.
         (h)   The range shall be maintained in a clean, safe and neat
condition at all times.
         (i)   The entire staff of the shooting range must be trained and
certified by National Rifle Association (NRA) trainers and must meet NRA
standards. The certification must be maintained.
         (j)   The range shall comply with external noise criteria set forth in
the EPA title 35, environmental subtitle H: noise chapter I, part 901 and with
NRA standards for internal noise levels. Before an occupancy permit may be
issued, the owner of the range shall supply to the city engineer a written
report from an independent certified auditory engineer that states that the
engineer has tested the range and that it complies with EPA title 35
environmental subtitle H: noise chapter I, part 901 and NRA standards. The
exterior noise shall be measured no more than five feet (5') from all the
exterior walls of the range.
         (k)   Written rules for shooter and spectators shall be provided by
the owner of the range to all shooters and spectators. These rules shall be
submitted to the chief of police annually for his review and approval and
before an occupancy permit is issued. Alcohol, illicit drugs shall be
prohibited. Shooter shall comply with FOID act and the best practices of NRA
guidelines shall be complied with by coaches, supervisor and anyone inside
range.
         (l)   All shooters must wear protective gear that complies with NRA
standards for their eyes and ears.
         (m)   The contractor for heating, air conditioning and ventilation
must construct these systems so they comply with noise standards set forth
above and do not amplify the noise. If the range is built for a capacity of
more than fifty (50) people, a fire sprinkler system shall be required.
         (n)   The range shall comply with all National Institute For
Occupational Safety And Health standards of the U.S. department of health
education and welfare including those relating to exhaust of lead particles and
proper ventilation. The range shall comply with the Spring Valley land
development code and Bureau County health department.
         (o)   Every person licensed shall, at the time of the receiving of
such license, present to the clerk evidence that he has a liability insurance
policy in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in effect. Such
policy shall name the city of Spring Valley as a coinsured.
         (p)   The range shall comply with all NRA safety material, and
practices, including having a proper first aid kit on hand.
         (q)   If the chief of police determines that the operation or
constitution of the gun range violates this code provision or in any other
fashion creates a danger to persons or property, the chief of police may close
the facility on an emergency basis. The owner of the range has the right to
request a hearing before the city council to consider the closure. The hearing
shall occur within twenty one (21) days of the demand.
         (r)   In addition to the previous paragraph, any person, firm or
corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this subsection (I)
violation may be issued and the owner or operator or other violator shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. Each and every day that a violation of the license
provisions is allowed to remain in effect shall constitute a complete and
separate offense. In addition, the appropriate authorities of the city may take
such other action as they deem proper to enforce the terms and conditions of
the ordinance, including suspending or revoking the license to operate the
range.
         (s)   The range shall comply with the Americans with disabilities act.
         (t)   All internal construction specifications shall comply with or
exceed NRA standards.
   (J)   Solar Energy Systems:
      1.   Scope: This subsection applies to all solar energy installations in
the City of Spring Valley.
      2.   Definitions:
ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system whose primary purpose is to
harvest energy by transforming solar energy into another form of energy or
transferring heat from a collector to another medium using mechanical,
electrical, or chemical means.
BUILDING- INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS: An active solar energy system that
is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a
separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or
structural component of the building. Building-integrated systems include but
are not limited to photovoltaic or hot water solar energy systems that are
contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights, and awnings.
GRID-INTERTIE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A photovoltaic solar energy system that is
connected to an electric circuit served by an electric utility company.
GROUND-MOUNT: A solar energy system mounted on a rack or pole that rests or is
attached to the ground. Ground-mount systems can be either accessory or
principal uses.
OFF-GRID SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A photovoltaic solar energy system in which the
circuits energized by the solar energy system are not electrically connected in
any way to electric circuits that are served by an electric utility company.
PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system that captures solar light or
heat without transforming it to another form of energy or transferring the
energy via a heat exchanger.
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: An active solar energy system that converts solar energy
directly into electricity.
RENEWABLE ENERGY EASEMENT, SOLAR ENERGY EASEMENT: An easement that limits the
height or location, or both, of permissible development on the burdened land in
terms of a structure or vegetation, or both, for the purpose of providing
access for the benefitted land to wind or sunlight passing over the burdened
land.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy or wind energy system. Renewable energy
systems do not include passive systems that serve a dual function, such as a
greenhouse or window.
ROOF-MOUNT: A solar energy system mounted on a rack that is fastened to or
ballasted on a building roof. Roof-mount systems are accessory to the principal
use.
ROOF PITCH: The final exterior slope of a building roof calculated by the rise
over the run, typically but not exclusively expressed in twelfths such as 3/12,
9/12, 12/12.
SOLAR ACCESS: Unobstructed access to direct sunlight on a lot or building
through the entire year, including access across adjacent parcel air rights,
for the purpose of capturing direct sunlight to operate a solar energy system.
SOLAR COLLECTOR: A device, structure or a part of a device or structure for
which the primary purpose is to transform solar radiant energy into thermal,
mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy.
SOLAR COLLECTOR SURFACE: Any part of a solar collector that absorbs solar
energy for use in the collector's energy transformation process. Collector
surface does not include frames, supports and mounting hardware.
SOLAR DAYLIGHTING: A device specifically designed to capture and redirect the
visible portion of the solar spectrum, while controlling the infrared portion,
for use in illuminating interior building spaces in lieu of artificial
lighting.
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the
form of heat or light by a solar collector.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A device, array of devices, or structural design feature,
the purpose of which is to provide for generation of electricity, the
collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or
cooling, daylight for interior lighting, or water heating.
SOLAR FARM: A commercial facility that converts sunlight into electricity,
whether by photovoltaics (PV), concentrating solar thermal devices (CST), or
other conversion technology, for the primary purpose of wholesale sales of
generated electricity. A solar farm is the principal land use for the parcel on
which it is located.
SOLAR GARDEN: A commercial solar-electric (photovoltaic) array that provides
retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail power) to individual or
multiple households or businesses residing or located either on-site or off-
site from the location of the solar energy system. A community solar system may
be either an accessory or a principal use.
SOLAR HEAT EXCHANGER: A component of a solar energy device that is used to
transfer heat from one substance to another, either liquid or gas.
SOLAR HOT AIR SYSTEM: An active solar energy system (also referred to as Solar
Air Heat or Solar Furnace) that includes a solar collector to provide direct
supplemental space heating by heating and re-circulating conditioned building
air. The most efficient performance typically uses a vertically mounted
collector on a south-facing wall.
SOLAR HOT WATER SYSTEM: A system (also referred to as Solar Thermal) that
includes a solar collector and a heat exchanger that heats or preheats water
for building heating systems or other hot water needs, including residential
domestic hot water and hot water for commercial processes.
SOLAR MOUNTING DEVICES: Racking, frames, or other devices that allow the
mounting of a solar collector onto a roof surface or the ground.
SOLAR RESOURCE: A view of the sun from a specific point on a lot or building
that is not obscured by any vegetation, building, or object for a minimum of
four (4) hours between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and three o'clock
(3:00) P.M. Standard time on all days of the year.
SOLAR STORAGE UNIT: A component of a solar energy device that is used to store
solar generated electricity or heat for later use.
      3.   Permitted Accessory Special Use. Active solar energy systems shall
be allowed as an accessory use in all zoning classifications where structures
of any sort are allowed, subject to certain requirements as set forth below.
Active solar energy systems that do not meet the visibility standards in (J)2
(c) below will require a special use permit pursuant to Section
14-11-5 of the Spring Valley City Code.
         (a)   Height: Active solar energy systems must meet the following
height requirements:
            (1)   Building or roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not
exceed the maximum allowed height in any zoning district. For purposes of
height measurement, solar energy systems other than building-integrated systems
shall be given an equivalent exception to height standards as building-mounted
mechanical devices or equipment.
            (2)   Ground or pole-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed
twenty feet (20') in height when oriented at maximum tilt.
         (b)   Set-Back: Active solar energy systems must meet the accessory
structure setback for the zoning district and primary land use associated with
the lot on which the system is located.
            (1)   Roof Or Building-Mounted Solar Energy Systems: In addition to
the building setback, the collector surface and mounting devices for roof-
mounted solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of
the building on which the system is mounted or built, unless the collector and
mounting system has been explicitly engineered to safely extend beyond the
edge, and setback standards are not violated. Exterior piping for solar hot
water systems shall be allowed to extend beyond the perimeter of the building
on a side yard exposure. Solar collectors mounted on the sides of buildings and
serving as awnings are considered to be building-integrated systems and are
regulated as awnings.
            (2)   Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems: Ground-mounted solar
energy systems may not extend into the side-yard or rear setback when oriented
at minimum design tilt, except as otherwise allowed for building mechanical
systems.
         (c)   Visibility: Active solar energy systems shall be designed to
blend into the architecture of the building or be screened from routine view
from public right-of-ways other than alleys provide that screening shall not
affect the operation of the system. The color of the solar collector is not
required to be consistent with other roofing materials.
            (1)   Building Integrated Photovoltaic Systems: Building integrated
photovoltaic solar energy systems shall be allowed regardless of whether the
system is visible from the public right-of-way, provided the building component
in which the system is integrated meets all required setback, land use or
performance standards for the district in which the building is located.
            (2)   Solar Energy Systems With Mounting Devices: Solar energy
systems using roof mounting devices or ground-mount solar energy systems shall
not be restricted if the system is not visible from the closest edge of any
public right-of-way other than an alley. Roof-mount systems that are visible
from the nearest edge of the street frontage right-of-way shall not have a
highest finished pitch steeper than the roof pitch on which the system is
mounted, and shall be no higher than twelve inches (12") above the roof.
            (3)   Reflectors: All solar energy systems using a reflector to
enhance solar production shall minimize glare from the reflector affecting
adjacent or nearby properties. Measures to minimize glare include selective
placement of the system, screening on the north side of the solar array,
modifying the orientation of the system, reducing use of the reflector system,
or other remedies that limit glare.
         (d)   Coverage: Roof or building mounted solar energy systems,
excluding building-integrated systems, shall allow for adequate roof access for
fire-fighting purposes to the south-facing or flat roof upon which the panels
are mounted. Ground-mount systems shall not exceed half the building footprint
of the principal structure, and shall be exempt from impervious surface
calculations if the soil under the collector is not compacted and maintained in
vegetation. Foundations, gravel, or compacted soils are considered impervious.
         (e)   Historic Buildings: Solar energy systems on buildings within
designated historic districts or on locally designated historic buildings
(exclusive of State or Federal historic designation) must receive approval of
the community Heritage Preservation Commission, consistent with the standards
for solar energy systems on historically designated buildings published by the
U.S. Department of Interior.
         (f)   Plan Approval Required: All solar energy systems shall require
administrative plan approval by the City of Spring Valley Zoning Administrator
via the review of the application for a building permit.
            (1)   Plan Applications: Plan applications for solar energy systems
shall be accompanied by to-scale horizontal and vertical (elevation) drawings.
The drawings must show the location of the system on the building or on the
property for a ground-mount system, including the property lines.
               A.   Pitched Roof Mounted Solar Energy Systems: For all roof-
mounted systems other than a flat roof the elevation must show the highest
finished slope of the solar collector and the slope of the finished roof
surface on which it is mounted.
               B.   Flat Roof Mounted Solar Energy Systems: For flat roof
applications a drawing shall be submitted showing the distance to the roof edge
and any parapets on the building and shall identify the height of the building
on the street frontage side, the shortest distance of the system from the
street frontage edge of the building, and the highest finished height of the
solar collector above the finished surface of the roof.
            (2)   Plan Approvals: Applications that meet the design
requirements of this chapter, and do not require an administrative variance,
shall be granted administrative approval by the Zoning Administrator and shall
not require Planning Commission review. Plan approval does not indicate
compliance with Building Code or Electric Code.
         (g)   Approved Solar Components: Electric solar energy system
components must have a UL listing or approved equivalent and solar hot water
systems must have an SRCC rating.
         (h)   Compliance With Building Code: All active solar energy systems
shall meet approval of local building code officials, consistent with the State
of Illinois Building Code, and solar thermal systems shall comply with HVAC-
related requirements of the Energy Code.
         (i)   Compliance With State And National Electric Codes: All
photovoltaic systems shall comply with the National Electric Code and the
Illinois State Electric Code.
         (j)   Compliance With State Plumbing Code: Solar thermal systems shall
comply with applicable Illinois State Plumbing Code requirements.
         (k)   Utility Notification: All grid-intertie solar energy systems
shall comply with the interconnection requirements of the electric utility.
Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
      4.   Special Uses: The City of Spring Valley encourages the development
of commercial or utility scale solar energy systems as special uses in all
Commercial Districts, all Industrial Districts, all Agricultural Districts and
on publicly-owned property in any Residential District, subject to the property
owner or operator obtaining a special use permit in accordance with Section
14-11-5 of the Spring Valley City Code and subject to the additional provisions
set forth in this subsection.
         (a)   Solar Gardens: City of Spring Valley permits the development of
community solar gardens, subject to the following standards and requirements:
            (1)   Rooftop Gardens Permitted: Rooftop community systems are
permitted in all Commercial Districts, all Industrial Districts, and publicly-
owned property in any Residential District where buildings are permitted.
            (2)   Ground-Mount Gardens Conditional: Ground-mount community
solar energy systems must be less than five acres in total size, and are
special uses in all Commercial Districts, all Industrial Districts, and on
publicly-owned property in Residential Districts. Ground-mount solar
developments covering more than five acres shall be considered solar farms.
            (3)   Interconnection: An interconnection agreement must be
completed with the electric utility in whose service territory the system is
located.
            (4)   Dimensional Standards: All structures must comply with
setback, height, and coverage limitations for the district in which the system
is located.
            (5)   Other Standards: Ground-mount systems must comply with all
required standards for structures in the district in which the system is
located.
            (6)   Nuisance/Aesthetic Standards: If any solar garden abuts other
residential uses, the special use permit must take into consideration
reflective glare, weed control and potential aesthetic screening so as to
minimize the adverse impact upon surrounding residential uses.
         (b)   Solar Farms: Ground-mount solar energy arrays that are the
primary use on the lot, designed for providing energy to off-site uses or
export to the wholesale market, are permitted under the following standards:
            (1)   Special Use Permit: Solar farms are special uses in
Industrial Districts and Agricultural Districts.
            (2)   Stormwater And NPDES: Solar farms are subject to City of
Spring Valley's stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
provisions and NPDES permit requirements.
            (3)   Ground Cover And Buffer Areas: Top soils shall not be removed
during development, unless part of a remediation effort. Soils shall be planted
to and maintained in perennial vegetation to prevent erosion, manage run off
and build soil. Seeds should include a mix of grasses and wildflowers native to
the region of the project site. Plant material must not have been treated with
systemic insecticides, particularly neonics.
            (4)   Foundations: A qualified engineer shall certify that the
foundation and design of the solar panels racking and support is within
accepted professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
            (5)   Other Standards And Codes: All solar farms shall be in
compliance with all applicable local, state and federal regulatory codes,
including the State of Illinois Uniform Building Code, as amended; and the
National Electric Code, as amended.
            (6)   Power And Communication Lines: Power and communication lines
running between banks of solar panels and to nearby electric substations or
interconnections with buildings shall be buried underground. Exemptions may be
granted by City of Spring Valley in instances where shallow bedrock, water
courses, or other elements of the natural landscape interfere with the ability
to bury lines, or distance makes undergrounding infeasible, at the discretion
of the zoning administrator.
            (7)   Site Plan Required: A detailed site plan for both existing
and proposed conditions must be submitted, showing location of all solar
arrays, other structures, property lines, rights-of-way, service roads,
floodplains, wetlands and other protected natural resources, topography,
electric equipment, and all other characteristics requested by City of Spring
Valley. The site plan should also show all zoning districts, and overlay
districts.
            (8)   Aviation Protection: For solar farms located within five
hundred feet (500') of an airport or within approach zones of an airport, the
applicant must complete and provide the results of the Solar Glare Hazard
Analysis Tool (SGHAT) for the Airport Traffic Control Tower cab and final
approach paths, consistent with the Interim Policy, FAA Review of Solar Energy
Projects on Federally Obligated Airports, or most recent version adopted by the
FAA.
            (9)   Agricultural Protection: Solar farms must comply with site
assessment or soil identification standards that are intended to protect
agricultural soils.
            (10)   Nuisance/Aesthetic Standards: If any solar garden abuts
other residential uses, the special use permit must take into consideration
reflective glare, weed control and potential aesthetic screening so as to
minimize the adverse impact upon surrounding residential uses.
            (11)   Decommissioning\:. A decommissioning plan shall be required
to ensure that facilities are properly removed after their useful life.
Decommissioning of solar panels must occur in the event they are not in use for
twelve (12) consecutive months. The plan shall include provisions for removal
of all structures and foundations, restoration of soil and vegetation and a
plan ensuring financial resources will be available to fully decommission the
site. Disposal of structures and/or foundations shall meet the provisions of
the City of Spring Valley Solid Waste Ordinance. City of Spring Valley shall
require the posting of a bond, letter of credit or the establishment of an
escrow account to ensure proper decommissioning unless specifically waived by
the Spring Valley City Council in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of the
special use permit.
      5.   Conditional Accessory Uses: City of Spring Valley encourages the
installation of productive solar energy systems and recognizes that a balance
must be achieved between character and aesthetic considerations and the
reasonable desire of building owners to harvest their renewable energy
resources. Where the applicant demonstrates that the standards in subsections
(J)3(a), (b), or (c) cannot be met without diminishing, as defined below, the
minimum reasonable performance of the solar energy system, the applicant may
request and the City of Spring Valley may grant a special use permit to the
applicant as part of the permitting process. A special use permit may be
granted, if the following standards are met.
         (a)   Minimum Performance, Defined: The following design thresholds
are necessary for efficient operation of a solar energy system:
            (1)   Fixed-Mount Active Solar Energy Systems: Solar energy systems
must be mounted to face within forty five degrees (45°) of south (one hundred
eighty degrees (180°) azimuth).
            (2)   Solar Electric (Photovoltaic) Systems: Solar collectors must
have a pitch of between twenty degrees (20°) and sixty five degrees (65°).
            (3)   Solar Hot Water Systems: Solar collectors need to be mounted
at a pitch between forty degrees (40°) and sixty degrees (60°).
            (4)   System Location: The system must be located where the lot or
building has a solar resource, as defined in this chapter.
         (b)   Standards For A Special Use Permit: A special use permit shall
be granted if the applicant meets the following safety, performance and
aesthetic conditions:
            (1)   Aesthetic Conditions. The solar energy system must be
designed to blend into the architecture of the building or be screened from
routine view from public right-of-ways other than alleys to the maximum extent
possible while still allowing the system to be mounted for efficient
performance.
            (2)   Safety Conditions: All applicable health and safety standards
are met.
            (3)   Non-Tracking Ground-Mounted Systems: Pole-mounted or ground-
mounted active solar energy systems must be set back from the property line by
one foot.
      6.   Restrictions On Solar Energy Systems Limited: Consistent with 765
ILCS 165/, no homeowners' agreement, covenant, common interest community, or
other contract between multiple property owners within a subdivision of City of
Spring Valley shall prohibit or restrict homeowners from installing solar
energy systems. No energy policy statement enacted by a common interest
community shall be more restrictive than City of Spring Valley's solar energy
standards.
      7.   Renewable Energy Condition For Certain Permits:
         (a)   Condition For Rezoning Or Special Use Permit: The City of Spring
Valley may, in an area where the local electric distribution system was
installed more than twenty (20) years ago, or where the local electric utility
has documented a near-term need for additional distribution substation or
conductor capacity, require on-site renewable energy systems as a condition for
a rezoning or a special use permit subject to the following conditions:
            (1)   The renewable energy condition may only be exercised for new
construction or major reconstruction projects.
            (2)   The renewable energy condition may only be exercised for
sites that have ninety percent (90%) unimpeded solar or wind energy access, and
for which the renewable energy system can reasonably meet all performance
standards and building code requirements.
         (b)   Condition For Planned Unit Development (PUD) Approval: City of
Spring Valley may require on-site renewable energy systems as a condition for
approval of a PUD permit, in order to mitigate for:
            (1)   Risk to the performance of the local electric distribution
system;
            (2)   Increased emissions of greenhouse gases otherwise resulting
from the PUD;
            (3)   Other risks or effects inconsistent with City of Spring
Valley's Comprehensive Plan.
   (K)   Small Wind Energy Systems:
The provisions of this subsection (K) apply to electric generating wind devices
hereinafter referred to as small wind energy systems. These small wind energy
systems shall be special uses in all Commercial Districts, all Industrial
Districts, all Agricultural Districts and in publicly-owned property located in
Residential Districts. For the purpose of this chapter, a small wind energy
system is defined as: one (1) wind turbine generator, including the generator,
tower and associated controls and/or conversion electronics, which converts
wind energy into electricity, has a rated capacity of one hundred (100)
kilowatts or less and is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of
utility power for onsite municipal, educational, commercial, business or
industrial use. Wind energy systems with a rated capacity of more than one
hundred (100) kilowatts shall be governed by subsection (L) of the Spring
Valley City Code.
All small wind energy systems shall be in compliance with all applicable
county, state and federal regulatory standards (including applicable building
codes and electrical codes). No appurtenances shall be connected to any small
wind energy system except in accordance with the Spring Valley Land Development
Code.
All small wind energy systems shall be mounted on a monopole tower specifically
designed for the unit it supports. Guyed towers are not allowed. Applicants
shall submit certificates from equipment manufacturers documenting that the
proposed equipment has been manufactured in compliance with industry standards.
All applications for a building permit to construct a small wind energy system
shall contain, as part of the application, the following information, whether
on the application itself or as attachments thereto:
      1.   Description Of Project: This shall include a legal description for
the location of the small wind energy system, the location of property lines of
adjoining property owners (in the case of leased property, the location of
property lines of property owners adjoining the landlord's property), the
capacity of the proposed small wind energy system, height, type and color of
proposed tower, the diameter of rotor and the direction in which it rotates.
All small wind energy systems shall be new or manufacturer reconditioned and
recertified equipment; no experimental or prototype homemade equipment shall be
approved unless a Variation is granted by the Spring Valley City Council.
      2.   Site Plan: The site plan shall detail the location of the project
area boundaries and must detail compliance with the following:
         (a)   Setback Requirements: All parts of a small wind energy system
shall be subject to setback requirements and this section of the chapter:
            (1)   Setbacks from all property lines of the parcel of land on
which the small wind energy system is located and the right-of-way of all
public roads shall be a minimum of 1.1 times the total height. Total height is
defined as the distance above grade to the tip of the blade in its highest,
twelve o'clock (12:00) position.
            (2)   Setbacks from dwellings shall be a minimum of 1.1 times the
total height.
Distance shall be measured from the foundation at the base of the tower.
Applicant is responsible for ensuring that the project meets any and all
setback requirements from utilities in the vicinity of the proposed small wind
energy system, including, but not limited to gas lines and other utilities.
            (3)   Small wind energy systems may be located as a special use in
any Commercial District, any Industrial District, any Agricultural District and
on Publicly-owned property in any Residential District, subject to the
provisions of this ordinance and the special use procedures pursuant to Section
14-11-5 of the Spring Valley City Code.
         (b)   Noise Standards: Noise levels shall be regulated by the Illinois
Pollution Control Agency rules and regulations and applicant shall supply
manufacturer certification that the proposed small wind energy system is in
compliance with same.
         (c)   Waste Management:
Solid Waste: All solid waste, whether generated from supplies, equipment,
parts, packaging, or operation or maintenance of the small wind energy system,
including old parts and equipment, shall be removed from the site immediately
and disposed of in an appropriate manner.
Hazardous Waste: All hazardous waste generated by the operation and maintenance
of the small wind energy system, including but not limited to lubricating
materials, shall be removed from the site immediately and disposed of in a
manner consistent with all local, state and federal rules and regulations.
         (d)   Signage: No small wind energy system, building, or other
structure associated with a small wind energy system shall be used to advertise
or promote any product or service. No wording or graphic representation, other
than appropriate warning signs, shall be placed on a small wind energy system
so as to be visible from any public road.
         (e)   Aesthetics: The following items are recommended standards to
mitigate visual impact:
            (1)   Coatings And Coloring: Small wind energy systems shall be of
a non-reflective, unobtrusive color that blends into the surrounding landscape
to the greatest extent possible. Black is acceptable for mitigation of icing.
            (2)   Tower Height: For agricultural zoned property between one (1)
acre and three (3) acres in size, the tower height shall be limited to fifty
feet (50'). For property sizes of three (3) acres or more, the tower height
shall be limited to eighty-five feet (85'). The tower height is defined as the
distance above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the turbine
itself.
            (3)   Total Height: Total height is hereby defined as the distance
above grade to the tip of the blade in its highest, twelve o'clock (12:00)
position. The maximum total height allowed for a small wind energy system shall
be no more than one hundred forty-five feet (145').
            (4)   Rotor Size: The rotor diameter allowed for a small wind
energy system shall be a maximum of sixty feet (60') in diameter. In all cases,
there shall be a minimum of twenty-five foot (25') of ground clearance, which
is defined as the distance above grade to the tip of the rotor blade in its
lowest, six o'clock (6:00) position.
            (5)   Lighting: Projects shall utilize minimal lighting. Small wind
energy systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any
necessary approvals for installations close to airports. Required lighting must
comply with FAA minimum requirements and, whenever possible, be the lowest
intensity allowed using red lights at night. If more than one lighting
alternative is available, the alternative that causes the least visual
disturbance must be used. No tower lighting other than normal security lighting
shall be permitted except as may be required by the FAA.
            (6)   Power Lines: All electrical wires and power lines associated
with a small wind energy system shall be buried underground unless a Variation
is granted by the Spring Valley City Council.
         (f)   Lot Size: No small wind energy system shall be allowed on a lot
of less than one acre in size unless a Variation is granted by the Spring
Valley City Council.
         (g)   Utility Notification: Applicant is responsible for applying for
an interconnect agreement with their utility company notifying them of the
customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-
grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. Said interconnect agreement
is subject to verification at any time by the Zoning Administrator.
         (h)   Interference: When applying for a building permit, the owner of
a small wind energy system shall submit information from the manufacturer that
certifies that the proposed system will not interfere with microwave
transmissions, residential television or radio reception.
         (i)   Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
install, maintain, modify or operate a small wind energy system that is not is
not in compliance with this chapter or the building permit issued for a small
wind energy system pursuant to this chapter.
         (j)   Building Permits: All small wind energy systems require a
building permit to be issued prior to the initiation of construction. Building
permit applications for small wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a
line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National
Electrical Code. Building permit applications shall also be accompanied by
standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and
footings. This information is frequently supplied by the manufacturer. The
property owner is responsible for ensuring that the foundation is installed
according to the manufacturer's specifications and is in compliance with the
Uniform Building Code.
         (k)   Decommissioning Plan: Cost of decommissioning a small wind
energy system shall be borne by the property owner of the land upon which said
small wind energy system was constructed.
         (l)   Abandonment: If a small wind energy system is inoperable for six
(6) consecutive months, the owner shall be notified that they must, within six
(6) months of receiving the notice, restore their system to operating
condition. If the owner(s) fails to restore their system to operating condition
within the six (6) month time frame, then the owner shall be required, at his
expense, to remove the wind turbine from the tower for safety reasons. The
tower would then be subject to the Public Nuisance provisions of the Spring
Valley City Code. A tower without an operating turbine shall be considered a
nuisance unless it is repurposed for a permitted use.
   (L)   Wind Power Facilities:
The provisions of this subsection (s) apply to wind power facilities. Wind
power facilities shall only be allowed as a special use in all Industrial
Districts and Agricultural Districts. All wind power facility turbines shall be
in compliance with all applicable county, state and federal regulatory
standards (including applicable building codes and electrical codes), FAA
requirements, EPA regulations (hazardous waste, construction, storm water,
etc.). All electrical components of the wind turbine generators (WTG)s shall
conform to applicable state and national codes, and relevant national and
international standards (e.g. ANSI and International Electrical Commission).
Facility equipment shall conform to applicable industry standards, including
those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Applicants shall
submit certificates of design compliance that equipment manufacturers have
obtained from Underwriters Laboratories (UL), Det Norske Veritas (DNV),
Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energie (GL) or another similar internationally
recognized organization that provides certification for wind turbines.
All applications for special use filed under this subsection s shall contain,
as part of the application, the following information, whether on the
application itself or as attachments thereto:
      1.   Description Of Project: This shall include a legal description for
the location of the tower and/or substation, the location of property lines of
adjoining property owners (in the case of leased property, the location of
property lines of property owners adjoining the landlord's property), the
number and capacity of turbines, height and diameter of turbine rotors, turbine
color, and rotor direction. All turbines shall be new equipment; no used,
experimental or prototype equipment shall be approved by the Zoning
Administrator or the Zoning Board of Appeals. All turbines to be installed
shall be equipped with a redundant braking system. This includes both
aerodynamic over-speed controls (including variable pitch, tip, and other
similar systems) and mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be operated in
a fail-safe mode, whereby they are engaged in case of load loss on the
generator. Stall regulation shall not be considered a sufficient braking system
for over-speed protection.
      2.   Site Plan: The site plan shall detail the location of the project
area boundaries (i.e., the property lines if the site is owned by the developer
or the leased property lines if the site is leased), the turbines, roads,
transformers, power lines, communication lines, interconnection points with
transmission lines, and other ancillary facilities or structures, and must
detail compliance with the following:
         (a)   Setback Requirements:
            Wind Turbine Generators and Meteorological Towers
 
Object                           Setback
                                 1,400 feet or 3.2 times the height of tower &
Residence                        blade with blade at 12:00 o'clock position,
                                 whichever is greater.
Property Line                    1.10 times height of tower & blade with blade
                                 at 12:00 o'clock position
Public Roads (from right-of-way) 1.10 times height of tower & blade with blade
                                 at 12:00 o'clock position
Other Structures                 1.10 times height of tower & blade with blade
                                 at 12:00 o'clock position
Platted Rural Subdivision        2,640 feet
 
Unless otherwise noted, distance shall be measured from the foundation at the
base of the wind turbine generator or tower to the foundation of the residence.
A Variation of the setback requirements from a wind turbine generator to a home
may be granted for a Participating Landowner. However, the home must maintain a
minimum setback distance of 1.25 times the height of tower and blade with blade
at twelve o'clock (12:00) position.
A Variation of the setback requirement may be granted for little-used public
roads.
A Variation of the setback requirement may also be granted for the property
line of an adjoining property owner participating in the particular wind power
facility being developed and who agrees to the Variation in writing.
A Participating Landowner is defined as a landowner or landowners who have
entered into an agreement in writing with a wind farm developer based on
financial remuneration in exchange for the landowner's or landowners' use,
license, lease or easement of real property rights.
Ancillary structures.
Setback requirements for Ancillary structures (other than meteorological
towers) shall be as follows:
 
Object                              Setback
                                    Minimum 50 feet from the right-of-way of
Substation                          any road and a minimum of 30 feet from side
                                    and rear property lines.
                                    All components of transmission line support
                                    structures, including overhead crossarms,
                                    must be a minimum of 10 feet from the
                                    existing and/or future right-of-way of any
Transmission line support structure road. In all other cases, they must be a
                                    minimum of 10 feet from participating
                                    landowner property lines or a minimum of
                                    1.1 times the height of the support
                                    structure from non-participating landowner
                                    property lines.
 
The location of all transmission line support structures and all proposed
access points that will be used during the construction, installation and
erection of transmission line support structures, their foundations and
overhead transmission lines, shall be identified and approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works for the City of Spring Valley and/or the Spring
Valley City Engineer prior to the granting of a building permit to accommodate
road and/or drainage improvements within the existing and/or future right-of-
way.
A Variation of the setback requirement for a transmission line support
structure may be granted for the property line of an adjoining property owner
participating in the particular wind power facility being developed and who
agrees to the Variation in writing.
In no case shall any component of a transmission line support structure
overhang a property line and/or a right-of-way line.
The setback requirement for transmission line support structures is not subject
to any blowout effect of transmission lines caused by climactic conditions.
The setback requirement for transmission line support structures does not
preclude the actual transmission line from crossing over public roadways, if
approved by the proper roadway authority.
A transmission line as used in this subsection (L)2(a) is defined as a power
transmission line from an electrical substation with a capacity of at least
sixty nine (69) kilovolts and excludes intra-project power collection lines as
defined under 3.41-4 s.) 7) 5., which are required to be buried underground.
         (b)   Conformance With Approved Application And Plans:
The Petitioner, Owner and/or Operator of the wind power facility shall
construct said wind power facility in substantial accordance with submitted
Special Use Permit applications and all accompanying documents.
The Petitioner, Owner and/or Operator of the wind power facility shall be bound
by any and all proposals and representations made under oath at the public
hearing(s) before the Plan Commission, which shall be considered as
supplementary conditions of the Special Use Permit granted by the Spring Valley
City Council, even if not directly specified herein.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the agricultural,
commercial or industrial use of the balance of the subject property not
occupied by the wind power facility. Said agricultural use will be considered
as being the principal use of the subject property notwithstanding adoption of
a conditional use ordinance and the construction and operation of one or more
WTGs on a given lot or parcel of land, at locations approved by the City
Council pursuant to Special Use approval on a Site Plan Map.
      3.   Noise Standards:
The Petitioner, Owner and/or Operator of the wind power facility, at their
expense, shall have a third party, qualified professional (after submission of
resume and relevant work experience), approved by the Zoning Administrator,
conduct an appropriate analysis of the noise impact to nearby properties. The
sound pressure level generated by a WTG shall comply with all Illinois
Pollution Control Board (IPCB) noise regulations. A modeling analysis of the
proposed site shall be included in the application predicting the sound
pressure in accordance with the best available practices. The program
generating the modeling must take into account not only topography, but also
prevailing winds, temperature, air density, ground cover, and other effects
which contribute to the distance that sound can travel. The modeling must be
submitted to the City of Spring Valley as part of the Special Use application.
To demonstrate compliance with the IPCB regulatory limits, the modeling must
perform its analysis from the noise emitting property to the property line of
the neighboring property. A "0" background ambient noise level shall be used
for all modeling.
After a WTG is completed and operational, the Petitioner, Owner and/or Operator
of the wind power facility, at their expense, shall have a third party,
qualified professional (after submission of resume and relevant work
experience), approved by the Zoning Administrator complete a sound pressure
analysis of the existing conditions. The analysis shall be completed and
returned to Zoning Administrator within sixty (60) days. The owner of the wind
power facility must immediately cease any violation of the IPCB regulations
unless said violation is excused and waived in writing by the affected
landowners and occupants. All analyses and studies are subject to approval of
the Zoning Administrator and are a matter of public record.
Once the wind farm has been constructed, the owner of the wind power facility
shall provide evidence to the Zoning Administrator that the wind farm, as
constructed, meets all the noise levels, rules and regulations established by
the IPCB.
      4.   Television Interference:
The Petitioner, Owner and/or Operator of the wind power facility, at their
expense, shall have a third party, qualified professional (after submission of
resume and relevant work experience), approved by the Zoning Administrator,
conduct an appropriate analysis of the television reception documenting the
television stations that are received within one and one-half (1 ½) miles of
the footprint of the proposed wind power facility. The results of said study
shall be public record and will serve as a baseline reading for television
reception conditions prior to the construction of the wind farm facility and
shall be submitted as part of the Special Use application.
Once the wind farm construction is complete and a television reception
complaint is received by the Zoning Administrator, who will have thirty (30)
days to verify the complaint, the Petitioner, Owner and/or Operator of the wind
power facility will be given fifteen (15) days to respond, in writing
(validation date). Said response shall be addressed and forwarded to both the
Zoning Administrator and the complainant. Such response shall include but not
be limited to the following: an acknowledgment that the complaint is considered
by the Owner/Operator to be valid. If considered valid by the Owner/Operator:
an explanation, including a time line, as to what the Owner/Operator intends to
do about the complaint. The Petitioner, Owner and/or Operator of the wind power
facility will be given an additional fifteen (15) days from the validation date
to resolve said TV reception issue. If considered invalid by the Owner/
Operator, an explanation, including supporting documentation and expert
opinions, as to why the Owner/Operator believes the complaint is not valid.
Television reception complaints must be filed within six (6) months from the
date each wind turbine generator goes online.
      5.   Waste Management:
Solid Waste: All solid waste, whether generated from supplies, equipment,
parts, packaging, or operation or maintenance of the facility, including old
parts and equipment, shall be removed from the site immediately and disposed of
in accordance with all federal, state and local laws.
Hazardous Waste: All hazardous waste related to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the wind power facility, including but not limited to
lubricating materials, shall be handled, stored, transported and disposed of in
accordance with all federal, state and local laws.
      6.   Signage: Signage regulations are to be consistent with ANSI and AWEA
standards. A reasonably visible warning sign concerning voltage shall be placed
at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations.
      7.   Aesthetics: The following items are recommended standards to
mitigate visual impact:
         (a)   Coatings And Coloring: Non-reflective, unobtrusive color. Black
blades are acceptable for mitigation of icing.
         (b)   Signage, including anything in the tower or nacelle, shall
comply with other county ordinances pertaining to signage.
         (c)   Turbine Consistency: To the extent feasible, the project shall
consist of turbines of similar design and size, including tower height.
Further, all turbines shall rotate in the same direction. Turbines shall also
be consistent in color and direction with nearby facilities.
         (d)   Lighting: Projects shall utilize minimal lighting. No tower
lighting other than normal security lighting shall be permitted except as may
be required by the FAA.
         (e)   Intra-Project Power And Communication Lines: All power lines
used to collect power from individual turbines and all communication lines
shall be buried underground until same reach the property line or a substation
adjacent to the property line.
      8.   Public Services.
         (a)   Roads:
            (1)   Construction Phase Road Use Agreements: Prior to the granting
of a Special Use Permit, the Wind Power Facility developer/operator (the
"Operator") shall enter into a Construction Phase Road Use Agreement covering
the construction phase of the Project with the City of Spring Valley, if
construction of the Project will require use of City roads and roadway
appurtenances. The Operator may be required to make pre-construction
improvements and shall be required to repair and improve the roads and roadway
appurtenances following construction of the Project. The Operator shall also be
required to provide financial security in a form acceptable to the City of
Spring Valley before pre-construction road improvements are made (if required)
or before construction of the Project may begin. The term of any Construction
Phase Road Use Agreement shall not exceed three years. If the Operator does not
start construction of the Project within one year of the date of execution of
the Construction Phase Road Use Agreement, then the agreement shall be subject
to an annual review on the first and second years of the date of its execution
and the City of Spring Valley may require amendments to the agreement based on
existing conditions. The Operator's failure to amend the agreement as requested
by the City of Spring Valley shall be grounds for revocation of the Special Use
Permits issued for the Project.
            (2)   Operational Phase Road Use Agreements: Prior to the issuance
of a Certificate of Occupancy, the Operator shall enter into an Operational
Phase Road Use Agreement with the City of Spring Valley covering the Operator's
use of, maintenance of and improvements to public roads and roadway
appurtenances during the ongoing operations of the Project. An Operational
Phase Road Use Agreement shall be in place while the Project remains in
operation and the term of any Operational Phase Road Use Agreement shall not
exceed three years. The Operator shall also be required to provide financial
security in a form acceptable to the City of Spring Valley during the
operational phase of the Project.
            (3)   Decommissioning Phase Road Use Agreements: Prior to the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the Operator shall enter into a
Decommissioning Phase Road Use Agreement with the City of Spring Valley
covering the Operator's use of public roads and roadway appurtenances to
dismantle the wind farm facility and repairs and improvements required after
the dismantling of the facility is complete. The Operator, not the City of
Spring Valley, shall bear the financial risks associated with damage caused to
City of Spring Valley roads and roadway appurtenances when the Project is
dismantled or reconstructed or re-configured with new turbines. The City of
Spring Valley shall select an expert to assist the City to determine the amount
of financial security, whether in the form of a bond or other surety, to be
funded to assure sufficient financial resources exist to repair and improve
public roads and roadway appurtenances at the time the wind farm facility is
decommissioned. The cost of such expert shall be paid for by the Operator. The
bond or other surety, when determined, shall be held by an independent third
party on behalf of the City of Spring Valley. The bond or other surety must be
provided by an AA or AAA rated entity.
The adequacy of the financial security being held shall be re-evaluated on the
following schedule:
   A.   Years five (5) and ten (10) of operation;
   B.   Years thirteen (13), sixteen (16), nineteen (19), twenty two (22),
twenty five (25) of operation; and
   C.   After the twenty fifth year of operation, annual re-evaluation.
Start of Project operation shall begin upon the issuance of the first
Certificate of Occupancy for the turbines which comprise the Project.
            (4)   During the construction, operational and decommissioning
phases of the Project, the Operator shall be responsible for all professional
advisor and consultant fees and costs incurred by the City of Spring Valley.
Upon the filing of the first application seeking a Special Use Permit for the
Project, the Operator shall deposit five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with the
City of Spring Valley City Clerk's Office. The deposited funds shall be used by
the City of Spring Valley for the payment of expenses and costs of consultants
and professional advisors and shall be deducted automatically from the
deposited funds as necessary. Replenishment of the deposited funds shall be
mandatory upon request of the City of Spring Valley. If an applicant or
Operator fails to comply a request to replenish funds within ten (10) business
days, the City of Spring Valley, may refuse to:
   A.   Proceed with any negotiations or request;
   B.   Make inspections as otherwise required; or
   C.   Issue any applicable certificate or permit.
            (5)   All repairs and improvements to public roads and roadway
appurtenances shall be subject to the prior approval of the City of Spring
Valley before being made and shall also be subject to inspection and acceptance
by the City of Spring Valley after such repairs and improvements are completed.
The City of Spring Valley's Roads Agreement, and any further agreements
contemplated therein, regarding the maintenance and repair of city highways,
must be approved and adopted by the Spring Valley City Council prior to the
Spring Valley City Council's approval of any Special Use applications related
to the construction of the proposed wind power facility.
      9.   Fire:
The following permit standards shall be followed to reduce risk of fire: 1.
Adherence to applicable electrical codes and standards. 2. Removal of fuel
sources, like vegetation, from immediate vicinity of electrical gear and
connections. 3. Utilization of twistable cables on turbines.
The owner of the wind power facility shall submit to the Zoning Administrator,
the jurisdictional fire district and jurisdictional ambulance service, a copy
of the wind power facility's site plan, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)
and Standard Operating Guidelines (SOGs) for the wind power facility so that
the local fire protection district and rescue units that have jurisdiction over
each tower site may evaluate and coordinate their emergency response plans with
the owner and/or operator of the wind power facility. In addition, the owner of
the wind power facility shall provide training for, and the necessary equipment
to, local emergency response authorities and their personnel so that they can
properly respond to a potential emergency at the wind project. Special
equipment to be provided includes, but is not limited to, permanently installed
rescue equipment such as winches, pulleys, harnesses, etc.
Nothing in this section shall alleviate the need to comply with all other
applicable fire, life safety and/or emergency response laws and regulations.
      10.   Sewer And Water: All facilities shall comply with existing septic
and well regulations as required by the Bureau County Health Department and the
State of Illinois Department of Public Health.
      11.   Shadow Flicker:
The Petitioner, Owner and/or Operator of the wind power facility, at their
expense, shall have a third party, qualified professional (after submission of
resume and relevant work experience), approved by the Zoning Administrator,
conduct an initial shadow flicker modeling and analysis of the shadow flicker
impact to nearby properties. The results of said modeling and analysis shall be
public record and shall be submitted as part of the Special Use application.
After a WTG is completed and operational, the Petitioner, Owner and/or Operator
of the wind power facility, at their expense, shall have a different third
party, qualified professional (after submission of resume and relevant work
experience), approved by the Zoning Administrator, complete a post construction
shadow flicker analysis of the existing conditions. The post construction
analysis shall be completed and returned to Spring Valley City Clerk's Office
within sixty (60) days after a WTG is completed and operational. The owner of
the wind power facility shall be considered to be in violation of Title 14,
Land Development Code, of the Spring Valley City Code if the post construction
shadow flicker analysis is in excess of the initial shadow flicker study,
unless said excess shadow flicker is excused and waived in writing by the
affected property owner(s). All analyses and studies are subject to approval of
the Zoning Administrator and are a matter of public record.
      12.   Topographic Map: The topographic map shall include the project site
and the surrounding area.
      13.   Engineer's Certificate: The engineer's certificate shall be
completed by a structural engineer registered in the State of Illinois and
shall certify that the tower and foundation design is compatible with and
appropriate for each turbine design proposed to be installed and that the
specific soils at the site can support the apparatus, given local soil and
climate conditions. All commercially installed wind turbines must utilize self-
supporting, tubular towers. Smaller co-generators of forty (40) kilowatts or
less, however, may use lattice construction towers, but must meet all other
standards contained in this subsection s. Said engineer's certificate shall be
public record and shall be submitted as part of the Special Use application.
      14.   Certificate of Contracts: Certificate shall detail power purchase
contracts and power transmission contracts, or documentation that the project
will be a merchant facility. Documentation shall be provided to the Zoning
Administrator prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      15.   Decommissioning Plan:
The decommissioning plan shall ensure that the facility is properly
decommissioned upon end of project life or facility abandonment.
Decommissioning shall include: removal of all structures and debris to a depth
of four feet (4'), restoration of the soil, and restoration of vegetation
(consistent and compatible with surrounding vegetation) within six (6) months
of the end of project life or facility abandonment.
The Decommissioning Plan shall include provisions describing the triggering
events for decommissioning the WTG, which shall include the following language:
"Any wind turbine generator or meteorological tower that is not operated in a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, unless
due to documented maintenance or electrical grid issues and written notice
provided to the City of Spring Valley's legal contact. The owner of such wind
turbine generator or meteorological tower shall remove same within six (6)
months of receipt of notice from the City of Spring Valley."
The decommissioning plan shall state how the facility will be decommissioned,
the structural engineer's estimated cost of decommissioning, the financial
resources to be used to accomplish decommissioning, and the escrow agent with
which the resources shall be deposited. The Decommissioning Plan shall contain
a replenishment obligation and shall be reviewed every five (5) years for the
life of the project for the purpose of adjusting or recalculating
decommissioning costs, if necessary.
The decommissioning plan shall also recite an agreement between the applicant
and the county that:
         (a)   The financial resources for decommissioning shall be deposited
in an escrow account with an escrow agent acceptable to the Zoning
Administrator.
         (b)   A written escrow agreement will be prepared, establishing upon
what conditions the funds will be disbursed.
         (c)   The City of Spring Valley shall have access to the escrow
account funds for the expressed purpose of completing decommissioning if
decommissioning is not completed by the applicant within six (6) months of the
end of project life or facility abandonment.
         (d)   The City of Spring Valley is granted the right of entry onto the
site, pursuant to reasonable notice, to effect or complete decommissioning.
         (e)   The City of Spring Valley is granted the right to seek
injunctive relief to effect or complete decommissioning, as well as the city's
right to seek reimbursement from applicant or applicant's successor for
decommissioning costs in excess of the amount deposited in escrow and to file a
lien against any real estate owned by applicant or applicant's successor, or in
which they have an interest, for the amount of the excess, and to take all
steps allowed by law to enforce said lien.
The decommissioning cost shall be determined by the City of Spring Valley,
considering the engineer's estimate, and the time and manner of payment shall
be determined on a case by case basis, considering the amount, the developer's
financial resources, the anticipated rate of return on investment, and similar
factors. The Engineer used to estimate said decommissioning costs, shall be a
structural engineer, licensed in the State of Illinois, and shall be approved
by the City of Spring Valley Engineer or their designee.
The Decommissioning and Site Restoration Plan, and any further agreements
contemplated therein, must be approved and adopted by the Spring Valley City
Council prior to the Spring Valley City Council's approval of any Special Use
applications related to the construction of the proposed wind power facility.
      16.   Site Assessment: The Petitioner, Owner and/or Operator of the wind
power facility, at their expense, shall provide soil boring reports to the
Spring Valley City Engineer with respect to each WTG location, as part of its
building permit application. The Owner of the wind power facility shall follow
the guidelines for Conservation Practices Impact Mitigation submitted by the
Bureau County Soil and Water Conservation District. Also the grading plans for
the proposed substations must be approved by the Bureau County Soil and Water
Conservation District prior to the issuance of any building permit for the
construction of said substations.
      17.   Avian And Wildlife Impact Study:
The Petitioner, Owner and/or Operator of the wind power facility, at their
expense, shall have a third party, qualified professional (after submission of
resume and relevant work experience), approved by the Zoning Administrator,
conduct an avian and wildlife impact study and submit said study to the Zoning
Administrator as part of the Special Use application.
Prior to the substantial completion of the physical aerial erection of the wind
turbines, the owner of the wind power facility shall develop to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources ("IDNR") and the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service ("USFWS") (to the extent the IDNR and
the USFWS choose to participate in the process), a professional monitoring
program of reasonable duration and scope, consistent with common practice in
the wind power industry, to assess migratory bird mortalities resulting from
the operation of the wind power facility. The monitoring program shall be
undertaken at owner's expense and shall be performed at the direction of a
qualified independent professional to be mutually agreed upon by the aforesaid
parties in good faith. Such monitoring program shall commence upon the
substantial completion of the physical aerial erection of the wind turbine
generators, unless otherwise mutually agreed to by the owner of the wind power
facility, IDNR and USFWS (to the extent the IDNR and the USFWS choose to
participate in the process). If the results of the monitoring program
demonstrate the need, the owner of the wind power facility shall work with IDNR
and USFWS (to the extent IDNR and USFWS each, respectively, choose to
participate) to develop an appropriate response, including the potential
further study and implementation of practicable mitigation measures that may
either directly or indirectly minimize migratory bird mortality or increase
bird populations.
The owner of the proposed wind power facility shall follow the guidelines
suggested by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources ("IDNR") and United
States Fish and Wildlife Services ("USFWS") Endangered Species Consultation
program.
      18.   Communications Analysis: The Petitioner, Owner and/or Operator of
the wind power facility, at their expense, shall have a third party, qualified
professional (after submission of resume and relevant work experience),
approved by the Zoning Administrator, conduct a communications analysis that
indicates that the E 9-1-1 communications, emergency communications or official
City communications reception shall not be negatively impacted or influenced by
the proposed wind power facility. Said communication analysis shall be public
record and shall be submitted as part of the Special Use application.
      19.   All Special Use permits issued under this subsection s shall be
conditioned on the following:
         (a)   Each applicant, or successor in interest, shall have applicant's
facility inspected annually by qualified wind power professionals, approved by
the Zoning Administrator, and shall submit a certificate from said
professionals reciting the annual maintenance done on the facility and stating
that the facility is in good working condition and is not a hazard to the
public. Failure to submit such annual certificate shall be grounds for
revocation of the Special Use permit by the Zoning Administrator.
         (b)   Obtaining necessary access easements and necessary utility
easements, copies of which shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator.
         (c)   No appurtenances shall be connected to any wind tower except in
accordance with the Spring Valley Land Development Code.
      20.   Additional Terms And Conditions:
         (a)   Technical submissions as defined in the Professional Engineering
Practice Act of 1989 (225 ILCS 325/4(w)) and contained in the application filed
for Special Use shall bear the seal of an Illinois Professional Engineer for
the relevant discipline.
         (b)   The City of Spring Valley may retain a qualified, independent
code inspector both to make appropriate inspections of the facility during and
after construction and to consult with the City of Spring Valley to confirm
that the construction, substantial repair, replacement, repowering and/or
decommissioning of the wind power facility is performed in compliance with
applicable electrical and building codes. The cost and fees so incurred by the
City of Spring Valley in retaining said inspector shall be reimbursed by the
owner of the wind power facility. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued
for a wind power facility until the turbine has been inspected by said code
inspector and the Zoning Administrator has been provided surveys prepared by a
licensed surveyor to show that all setback requirements have been met. No wind
turbine generator shall become operational until a Certificate of Occupancy is
issued by the Zoning Administrator.
         (c)   The owner of the wind power facility shall ensure that locked
metal gates or a locked chain are installed at the access road entrances of all
the wind turbine generator locations. An exception may be made when the
landowner has filed a written statement with the Zoning Administrator which
states that the owner does not want a locked metal gate installed and has
provided a signed liability waiver to the City of Spring Valley.
         (d)   The Special Use permit granted to the applicant shall bind and
inure to the benefit of the applicant, its successors and assigns. If any
provision in this section is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any
other provision of this section that can be given effect without the invalid
provision and, to this end, the provisions in this section are severable.
         (e)   A violation of the terms and conditions herein shall constitute
a violation of the Conditional Use granted herein and shall be grounds for
revocation of the Conditional Use by the Zoning Administrator.
         (f)   The owner of the wind power facility shall supply written proof
of an approved entrance, from the appropriate governing Spring Valley
Superintendent of Streets, City Engineer or the Illinois Department of
Transportation, to the Zoning Administrator prior to the issuance of any
building permits for the proposed wind power facility.
         (g)   The Spring Valley Engineer shall determine which WTG's would be
required to have necessary ice sensors installed.
         (h)   No wind turbine generator shall be installed in any location
where its proximity with existing fixed broadcast, retransmission, or reception
antenna for radio, television, or wireless phone or other personal
communication systems would produce electromagnetic interference with signal
transmission or reception. The wind turbine generator shall not be installed in
a location along the major axis of existing microwave communications link where
its operation is likely to produce electromagnetic interference in the link's
operation.
      21.   Complaint Resolution: The owner of the wind power facility shall,
at owner's expense and in coordination with the City of Spring Valley, develop
a system for logging and investigating complaints related to the wind power
facility. The owner of the wind power facility shall resolve such complaints on
a case-by-case basis and shall provide written confirmation to the Spring
Valley City Clerk's Office. Unresolved complaints shall be addressed as set
forth in Section
14-13-2,
14-13-3 and
14-13-4 of Title 14, Spring Valley Land Development Code. All costs and fees
incurred by the City of Spring Valley in attempting to or resolving complaints
shall be reimbursed by the owner of the wind power facility. The owner of the
wind power facility shall also designate and maintain either a local telephone
number or a toll-free telephone number as its public information/inquiry/and
complaint "hotline."
      22.   Liability Insurance: The Owner or Operator of the wind power
facility shall maintain a current general liability policy covering bodily
injury and property damage with limits of at least two million dollars per
occurrence and five million dollars in the aggregate. The Owner or Operator of
the wind power facility shall file the original certificate of insurance with
the Zoning Administrator prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy
and annually thereafter.
   (M)   Adult-Use Cannabis:
      1.   Purpose and Applicability: It is the intent and purpose of this
section to provide regulations regarding the cultivation, processing and
dispensing of adult-use cannabis occurring within the corporate limits of the
City of Spring Valley. Such facilities shall comply with all regulations
provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027) ("Act"), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder, and
the regulations provided below. In the event that the Act is amended, the more
restrictive of the state or local regulations shall apply.
      2.   Special Use: Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishment facilities,
as defined herein, shall require approval as a special use in the respective
districts in which they are allowed and shall be processed in accordance with
section
14-11-4 and section
14-11-5 of the Spring Valley Land Development Code as provided herein.
      3.   Adult-Use Cannabis Facility Components:
         (a)   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses
located within the vicinity of the subject property.
         (b)   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located,
including co-tenancy (if in a multi-tenant building), total square footage,
security installations/security plan and building code compliance.
         (c)   Hours of operation and anticipated number or customers/
employees.
         (d)   Anticipated parking demand based on section
14-5-1 et seq. and available private parking supply.
         (e)   Anticipated traffic generation in the context of adjacent
roadway capacity and access to such roadways.
         (f)   Site design, including access points and internal site
circulation.
         (g)   Proposed signage plan.
         (h)   Compliance with all requirements provided in Section 4 (Adult-
Use Cannabis Craft Growers); Section 5 (Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center);
Section 6 (Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization); Section 7 (Adult-Use
Cannabis Infuser Organization); Section 8 (Adult-Use Cannabis Processing
Organization); or Section 9 (Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization), as
applicable.
         (i)   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance
with section
14-11-4 (Special Uses) and section
14-11-5 (Special Use Procedure) of this Title.
      4.   Adult-Use Cannabis Graft Grower: In those zoning districts in which
an adult-use cannabis craft grower may be located, the proposed facility must
comply with the following:
         (a)   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this section.
         (b)   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for
residential purposes.
         (c)   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis
other than as authorized by the Act.
         (d)   For purposes of determining required parking, adult-use cannabis
craft grower shall be classified as an Industrial Use pursuant to the
provisions of section
14-5-2 of the Spring Valley Illinois Land Development Code.
         (e)   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the City affirming
compliance with all provisions of the Spring Valley Land Development Code as
provided herein and all other requirements under this Act.
      5.   Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center: In those zoning districts in
which an adult-use cannabis cultivation center may be located, the proposed
facility must comply with the following:
         (a)   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this section.
         (b)   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for
residential purposes.
         (c)   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis
other than as authorized by the Act.
         (d)   For purposes of determining required parking, adult-use cannabis
cultivation centers shall be classified as an Industrial Use pursuant to the
provisions of section
14-5-2 of the Spring valley Illinois Land Development Code.
         (e)   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the City affirming
compliance with all provisions of the Spring Valley Land Development Code as
provided herein and all other requirements under this Act.
      6.   Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organizations: In those zoning
districts in which an adult-use cannabis dispensing organization may be
located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
         (a)   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this section.
         (b)   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned
or used for residential purposes.
         (c)   At least seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area of any
tenant space occupied by a dispensing organization shall be devoted to the
activities of the dispensing organization as authorized by the Act, and no
dispensing organization shall also sell food for consumption on the premises
other than as authorized in subsection 6(e) below in the same tenant space.
         (d)   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis
other than as authorized by the Act.
         (e)   Facility may be issued a permit to host on-site consumption of
cannabis if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the
dispensing organization and smoke from the facility does not migrate into an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. The security plan for the facility
required by subsection 10 (Additional Requirements) shall also reflect adequate
provisions to respond to disruptive conduct and over-consumption. The on-site
consumption permit shall be reviewed annually and may be suspended or revoked
following notice and hearing by the City of Spring Valley.
         (f)   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities
shall be classified as commercial uses under section
14-5-2 of the Spring Valley Illinois Land Development Code.
         (g)   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the City of Spring
Valley affirming compliance with all provisions of the Spring Valley Illinois
Land Development Code as provided herein and all other requirements under this
Act.
      7.   Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization: In those zoning districts
in which an adult-use cannabis infuser organization may be located, the
proposed facility must be comply with the following:
         (a)   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500) of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this Section.
         (b)   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned
or used for residential purposes.
         (c)   At least seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area of any
tenant space occupied by an infusing organization shall be devoted to the
activities of the infusing organization as authorized by the Act. Facility may
not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by
the Act.
         (d)   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities
shall be classified as a Commercial Use pursuant to section
14-5-2 of the Spring Valley Illinois Land Development Code.
         (e)   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the City affirming
compliance with all provisions of the Spring Valley Land Development Code as
provided herein and all other requirements under this Act.
      8.   Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization: In those zoning
districts in which an adult-use cannabis processing organization may be
located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
         (a)   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this section.
         (b)   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned
or used for residential purposes.
         (c)   At least seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area of any
tenant space occupied by a processing organization shall be devoted to the
activities of the processing organization as authorized by the Act. Facility
may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized
by the Act.
         (d)   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities
shall be classified as Industrial Use pursuant to section
14-5-2 of the Spring Valley Illinois Land Development Code.
         (e)   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the City affirming
compliance with all provisions of the Spring Valley Land Development Code as
provided herein and all other requirements under this Act.
      9.   Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization: In those zoning
districts in which an adult-use cannabis transporting organization may be
located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
         (a)   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this section.
         (b)   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned
or used for residential purposes.
         (c)   The transporting organization shall be the sole use of the
tenant space in which it is located. Facility may not conduct any sales or
distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
         (d)   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities
shall be classified as industrial use pursuant to section
14-5-2 of the Spring Valley Illinois Land Development Code.
         (e)   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the City affirming
compliance with all provisions of the Spring Valley Land Development Code as
provided herein and all other requirements under this Act.
      10.   Additional Requirements: Petitioner shall install building
enhancements, such as security cameras, lighting or other improvements, as set
forth in the conditional use permit, to ensure the safety of employees and
customers of the adult-use cannabis business establishments, as well as its
environs. Said improvements shall be determined based on the specific
characteristics of the floor plan for an adult-use cannabis business
establishment and the site on which it is located, consistent with the
requirements of the Act.
      11.   Co-Location of Cannabis Business Establishments: The City may
approve the co-location of an adult-use cannabis dispensing organization with
an adult-use cannabis craft grower center or an adult-use cannabis infuser
organization, or both, subject to the provisions of the Act and the special use
criteria of section
14-11-4 and section
14-11-5 of the Spring Valley Illinois Land Development Code. In a co-location,
the floor space requirements of section
14-3-2(L)6.(c) and section
14-3-2(L)7.(c) shall not apply, but the co-located establishments shall be the
sole use of the tenant space.
(Ord. 1524, 2-18-2013; amd. Ord. 1729, 7-30-2018; Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 115.
14-3-3: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
   (A)   General:
      1.   Unless otherwise expressly stated in this title, accessory uses and
structures are permitted in conjunction with allowed principal uses.
      2.   Accessory uses and structures are permitted only after the principal
structure is present or under construction.
      3.   Accessory uses and structures must be located on the same lot as the
principal building or use; be subordinate to the principal use or structure in
terms of area, extent and purpose; and contribute to the comfort, convenience
or necessity of the principal use or structure. The zoning administrator is
authorized to determine whether a use or structure meets the definition of
accessory use or structure.
      4.   No accessory use or structure may occupy more than sixty percent
(60%) of any required rear and side setbacks. Garages may not cover more than
thirty percent (30%) of the combined area of rear and side yards.
      5.   Accessory structures must be set back at least five feet (5') from
all property lines.
      6.   No accessory structure located in a required rear setback may exceed
fifteen feet (15') in height.
      7.   Accessory structures must comply with all dimensional requirements
of this chapter and chapter 4 of this title.
   (B)   Drive-Through Facilities: Drive-through facilities are permitted as an
accessory use in the districts indicated in the use table of section
14-3-1 of this chapter, subject to the following standards:
      1.   Vehicle Stacking Areas: Each drive-through facility must provide a
minimum of three (3) vehicle stacking spaces, a minimum of twenty feet (20') in
length per vehicle, in advance of the order box or service window, where a
separate order box is not present. Vehicle stacking areas may not interfere
with parking areas or the on site circulation of vehicles. For those drive-
through facilities having two (2) order boxes or service windows, the vehicle
stacking spaces requirement of this subparagraph shall be met if there is room
for one (1) vehicle for each order box location and an additional two (2)
vehicles behind both order box locations, provided that the other requirements
of this subsection are met.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2460.gif]
 
      2.   Adjacent To Residential Districts:
         (a)   Drive-through facilities, including stacking areas, must be
separated from residentially zoned property by at least forty feet (40').
         (b)   Speaker systems used in conjunction with drive-through
facilities must be designed so that they are not audible at the property line
abutting residentially zoned property.
   (C)   Home Occupations:
      1.   General: The following regulations are intended to ensure that
businesses conducted as subordinate to residential uses are not detrimental to
the surrounding neighborhood, and that the residential character of the
dwelling is maintained.
      2.   Requirements:
         (a)   The home occupation must be secondary and subordinate to the use
of the dwelling unit for residential purposes, and the residential character of
the dwelling must be maintained.
         (b)   No alteration is permitted that would change the residential
character of the dwelling.
         (c)   The activities conducted by the home occupation may not be
visible from outside the dwelling.
         (d)   No signs are permitted, except as allowed by chapter 7 of this
title.
         (e)   No commodities may be sold or services rendered that require
receipt and delivery of merchandise, goods or equipment other than by a
passenger motor vehicle, first class mail, or delivery services that commonly
serve residential neighborhoods.
         (f)   No more than one person other than one additional member of the
immediate family of the owner and residing on the premises may be employed by
the home occupation use.
         (g)   The home operation and all realtered activities must be
conducted within the dwelling unit. No accessory buildings may be used in whole
or in part.
         (h)   No home occupation may produce any noise, heat, vibration, dust,
air pollution, electromagnetic interference, odors, or other hazards that are
detrimental to the safety and comfort of neighboring residences.
         (i)   The following uses are prohibited as home occupations:
Animal services, including kennels and veterinary services;
Any repair of motor vehicles;
Any use where commercial vehicles must be stored on the premises;
Construction or landscaping businesses where equipment must be stored on the
premises;
Funeral and interment services such as cremating or funeral homes;
Restaurants;
Warehousing.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-3-4: TEMPORARY USES:
   (A)   Temporary Use Permits:
      1.   Permit Required: No temporary use may be established unless a
temporary use permit has been issued by the zoning administrator, demonstrating
the compliance with all of the temporary use requirements in this title.
      2.   Application: Applications for temporary use permits must be
submitted to the zoning administrator at least thirty (30) days before the date
of the event or start of the temporary use, unless this time frame is reduced
by the zoning administrator. The application must be accompanied by:
         (a)   Signed, written permission from the owner of or the agency
having jurisdiction over the subject property; and
         (b)   Any other information required by the zoning administrator to
ensure compliance with the requirements of this title and to otherwise ensure
that the proposed use will not have a significant adverse impact on the
surrounding area.
      3.   Approval And Revocation Of Permit: All temporary use permits are
subject to any conditions required by the zoning administrator, are revocable,
and compliance with all other provisions of this chapter is required.
   (B)   Outdoor Seasonal Sales: Outdoor seasonal sales of products such as
pumpkins, Christmas trees, or produce are permitted subject to the following
requirements:
      1.   Outdoor seasonal sales may not operate more than a total of forty
five (45) days per calendar year. The owner or operator is required to keep a
record of days of operation, and make the record available upon request of the
zoning administrator.
      2.   The use may not involve the construction of a permanent structure.
      3.   Signs may be provided, subject to the regulations of the zoning
district in which the use is located.
      4.   All parking and sales activities must be located outside of the
public right of way.
   (C)   Outdoor Events: Outdoor events may be conducted in any zoning district
permitting public assembly uses, or on any lot occupied by a public or civic
use, subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Outdoor events are limited to seven (7) days per parcel per calendar
year. The owner or operator is required to keep a record of days of operation,
and make the record available upon request of the zoning administrator.
      2.   The use may not involve the construction of a permanent structure.
      3.   Signs may be provided, subject to the regulations of the zoning
district in which the use is located.
      4.   All event related activities must be located outside of the public
right of way.
   (D)   Temporary Offices And Construction Equipment Storage: Real estate
sales offices, contractors' offices and shelters for construction equipment and
building materials are permitted during construction projects, provided that
they are located on the same lot as the building under construction, sleeping
or cooking facilities are not provided, and the offices or shelters are removed
within fourteen (14) days of the completion of the construction project. (Ord.
1379, 6-9-2008)
CHAPTER 4
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
SECTION:
14-4-1: Residential Districts
14-4-2: Nonresidential Districts
14-4-3: Measurements And Exceptions
14-4-1: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
  RE R1A R1 R2 R3
               RE           R1A        R1        R2            R3
Minimum lot    43,560 sq.   12,000 sq. 7,500 sq. 6,000 sq. ft. 6,000 sq. ft.
area, total    ft. (1 acre) ft.        ft.
Minimum lot
area per                                                    
dwelling unit:
  Single-
 family       43,560 sq.   12,000 sq. 9,000 sq. 6,000 sq. ft. 6,000 sq. ft.
  dwelling,    ft.          ft.        ft.
  detached
  Single-
 family       n/a          n/a        n/a       n/a           2,500 sq. ft.
  dwelling,
  attached
 Two-family   n/a          6,000 sq.  4,500 sq. 3,750 sq. ft. 3,750 sq. ft.
  dwelling                  ft.        ft.
 Multi-family n/a          n/a        n/a       n/a           1,500 sq. ft.
  dwelling
Minimum lot    150'         90'        75'       60'           45' 1
width
Minimum                                                     
setbacks:
  Front (see
  also
 subsection   50'          35'        30'       25'           25'
  14-4-3(E) of
  this
  chapter)
 Rear         50'          30'        30'       25'           25'
  Interior
  side
  (percent of
 lot width,   20%/10'      20%/7.5'   20%/7.5'  20%/7.5'      20%/7.5' 2
  both sides
  combined/any
  single side,
  in feet)
                                                               12' plus 1'
 Corner side  35'          20'        20'       15'           per 2' of
                                                               height above
                                                               35'
Maximum
height,        35'          35'        35'       35'           55'
principal
buildings3
Maximum
height,        15'          15'        15'       15'           15'
accessory
buildings
Maximum
building       25%          25%        30%       35%           50%
coverage
 
Notes:
    1.    Minimum lot width for individual townhouse (attached single-family)
lots is 20 feet.
    2.    No interior side setback required for attached single-family units;
see subsection
14-3-2(A) of this title for other rules governing attached single-family
dwellings.
    3.    Certain public and civic buildings are permitted to exceed maximum
height requirements pursuant to subsection
14-4-3(L)3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-4-2: NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Dimensional Standards:
 B1 B2 B3 B4 M1 M2 A
                 B1        B2        B3         B4         M1    M2    A
Minimum lot      -         -         6,000 sq.  10,000 sq. -     -     20 acres
area, total                          ft.        ft.
Minimum lot area 1,250 sq. 1,250 sq. 1,250 sq.
per dwelling     ft.       ft.       ft.        -          -     -     -
unit
Minimum lot      -         -         50'        -          -     -     -
width
Minimum          -         -         -          -          -     -     -
setbacks:
                                     Same as R2
                                     (see also
    Front    0' 1,2    0' 2      subsection 0' 2       35' 3 25' 3 35'
                                     14-4-3(E)
                                     of this
                                     chapter)
    Rear     0'        0'2       Same as R2 0'2        30' 3 0' 3  50'
    Interior 0'        0' 2      Same as R2 0' 2       20' 3 0' 3  20'
side
    Corner si0'        0' 2      Same as R2 0' 2       20' 3 25' 3 35'
Maximum height,
principal and    45'       50'       35'        40'        45'   45'   70'
accessory
buildings4
Maximum building -         50%       50%        75%        50%   60%   25%
coverage
 
Notes:
1.    All buildings in the B1 district must comply with the building location
standards of subsection
14-2-2(E)1 of this title.
2.    When a B zoned lot abuts a residentially zoned lot, special rules apply.
See subsection (B) of this section.
3.    When an M zoned lot abuts or is across the street from a residentially
zoned lot, special rules apply. See subsection (C) of this section.
4.    Certain public and civic buildings are permitted to exceed maximum height
requirements. See subsection
14-4-3(L)3 of this chapter.
   (B)   B Zoned Lots Abutting R Zoned Lots:
      1.   Front Setback: Where a B1, B2 or B4 zoned lot shares a side property
line with an R zoned lot, the B1, B2 or B4 zoned lot must comply with the front
setback standards of the R zoned lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2462.gif]
 
      2.   Rear Setback: Where a B2 or B4 zoned lot shares a rear property line
with an R zoned lot, the B2 or B4 zoned lot must comply with the rear setback
standards of the R zoned lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2464.gif]
 
      3.   Interior Side Setback: Where a B2 or B4 zoned lot shares a side
property line with an R zoned lot, the B2 or B4 zoned lot must comply with the
side setback standards of the R zoned lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2466.gif]
 
      4.   Corner Side Setback: Where a B2 or B4 zoned lot abuts a
residentially zoned lot, the corner side setback of the lot zoned B2 or B4 must
comply with the front or corner side setback of the abutting residential
district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2468.gif]
 
   (C)   M Zoned Lots Abutting R Zoned Lots:
      1.   Front Setback: Where an M zoned lot shares a side property line with
or is across a street from a residentially zoned lot, the minimum front setback
of the M zoned lot is seventy feet (70').
      2.   Rear Setback: Where an M zoned lot shares a rear property line with
a residentially zoned lot, the minimum side setback on the M zoned lot is sixty
feet (60').
      3.   Interior Side Setback: Where an M zoned lot shares an interior side
property line with a residentially zoned lot, the minimum side setback of the M
zoned lot is thirty feet (30').
      4.   Corner Side Setback:
         (a)   Where an M1 zoned lot abuts a residentially zoned lot, the
minimum corner side setback of the M1 zoned lot is thirty feet (30').
         (b)   Where an M2 zoned lot abuts a residentially zoned lot, the
minimum corner side setback of the M2 zoned lot is seventy feet (70'). (Ord.
1379, 6-9-2008)
14-4-3: MEASUREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   Lot Area, Total:
      1.   Measurement: Lot area includes the total land area contained within
the property lines of a lot. No lot, yard, parking area, building area, or
other space may be reduced in area or dimension so as not to meet the
provisions of this code. No part of any lot, yard, parking area, or other space
required for a structure or use may be used for any other structure or use on
an adjoining lot.
      2.   Exceptions For Nonconforming Lots Of Record: There are reduced
minimum lot area requirements for certain nonconforming lots of record. See
section
14-12-6 of this title for rules regarding nonconforming lots of record.
      3.   Exceptions For Lots Not Serviced By Public Sewers: On lots with on
site sewage disposal systems, the minimum lot area may be required to be
increased so that the lot size is sufficient to permit the use of an on site
sewage disposal system designed in accordance with state of Illinois department
of public health requirements. The minimum lot area for an on site sewage
disposal system is established by the criteria included in chapter 9 of this
title.
   (B)   Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit:
      1.   Measurement: The lot area per dwelling unit refers to the minimum
amount of lot area that is required for each dwelling unit on the property. For
residential or mixed use development, dwelling unit density is controlled
through a minimum lot area per dwelling unit standard.
      2.   Rounding: When the number of dwelling units yielded by the density
calculation results in a fraction, the fraction must be rounded down to the
previous whole number. For example, if a minimum lot area per unit standard of
six thousand (6,000) square feet is applied to a fifteen thousand (15,000)
square foot lot, a maximum of two (2) dwelling units would be allowed on the
property.
   (C)   Lot Width:
      1.   Measurement: Lot width is measured between side property lines at
the required front setback.
      2.   Exceptions For Nonconforming Lots Of Record: There are reduced
minimum lot width requirements for certain nonconforming lots of record. See
section
14-12-6 of this title for rules governing nonconforming lots of record.
   (D)   Front Setback:
      1.   Measurement: The front setback is to be measured from the front
property line to the closest point of the structure on the subject lot, not
including those projections and features allowed to project into the front
setback pursuant to subsection (J) of this section. On a corner lot, the front
setback is to be measured from the property line that abuts a street and is
generally parallel to the front of the building. For the purposes of this
subsection, the front of the building is the facade with the primary building
entrance. Where the location of the primary building entrance is unclear or two
(2) or more entrances are present, the final determination will be made by the
zoning administrator.
      2.   Use: Required setbacks must be unobstructed and unoccupied from the
ground to the sky except as expressly allowed in subsection (J) of this
section.
      3.   Exception For Lots that Utilize Average Front Setback: As an
alternative to the front setback requirements of section
14-4-1 or
14-4-2 of this chapter, uses in all residential and B3 districts may determine
the required front setback based on the average front setback pursuant to
subsection (E) of this section.
   (E)   Average Front Setback:
      1.   Alternative: In all residential and B3 districts, as an alternative
to the front setback requirements of section
14-4-1 or
14-4-2 of this chapter, the front setback may be reduced to the average front
setback whenever buildings exist on one or more adjoining lots.
      2.   Measurement: The front setback, as measured on the subject lot and
adjoining lots, is to be measured from the front property line to the closest
point of the structure on the respective lot, not including those projections
and features allowed to project into the front setback pursuant to subsection
(J) of this section. On a corner lot, the front setback is to be measured from
the property line that abuts a street and is generally parallel with the front
of the building. For the purposes of this section, the front of the building is
the facade with the primary building entrance.
         (a)   When utilizing the average front setback, it must be at least as
deep as the average of the front setbacks on the two (2) lots on either side of
the subject lot, in accordance with the following rules:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2470.gif]
 
         (b)   Lots that are separated from the subject lot by a street or
railroad right of way cannot be used in computing the average. Lots that are
separated from the subject lot by an alley can be used in computing the
average.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2472.gif]
 
         (c)   When the subject lot is a corner lot that adjoins only one
developed lot, or an interior lot that adjoins one vacant lot and one developed
lot, the average front setback may be computed on the basis of the one
adjoining developed lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2474.gif]
 
         (d)   If the subject lot is a corner lot that only adjoins a vacant
lot or an interior lot that adjoins two (2) vacant lots, then the required
front setback must be the front setback required by section
14-4-1 or
14-4-2 of this chapter.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2476.gif]
 
      3.   Use: Required setbacks must be unobstructed and unoccupied from the
ground to the sky except as expressly allowed in subsection (J) of this
section.
   (F)   Rear Setback:
      1.   Measurement: The rear setback is to be measured from the rear
property line to the closest point of the structure on the subject lot, not
including those projections and features allowed to project into the rear
setback pursuant to subsection (J) of this section. On pie shaped or triangular
lots with side property lines that come to a point at the rear, the rear
setback is measured from a line segment that connects the side property lines
and is a minimum of ten feet (10') in length.
      2.   Use: Required setbacks must be unobstructed and unoccupied from the
ground to the sky except as expressly allowed in subsection (J) of this
section.
   (G)   Interior Side Setback:
      1.   Measurement: The interior side setback is to be measured from the
interior side property line to the closest point of the structure on the
subject lot, not including those projections and features allowed to project
into the interior side setback pursuant to subsection (J) of this section.
      2.   Use: Required interior setbacks must be unobstructed and unoccupied
from the ground to the sky except as expressly allowed in subsection (J) of
this section.
   (H)   Corner Side Setback:
      1.   Measurement: The corner side setback is to be measured from the side
property line that abuts a street to the closest point of the structure on the
subject lot, not including those projections and features allowed to project
into the corner side setback pursuant to subsection (J) of this section. The
corner side setback is measured from the side property line that abuts a
street, and is generally perpendicular to the front of the building. For the
purposes of this subsection, the front of the building is the facade with the
primary building entrance.
      2.   Use: Required corner setbacks must be unobstructed and unoccupied
from the ground to the sky except as expressly allowed in subsection (J) of
this section.
   (I)   Through Lot Setbacks: On through lots, the two (2) property lines
(opposing) that abut public right of way lines are considered front property
lines and front setback requirements apply. Through lots with three (3)
property lines that abut public right of way lines will have two (2) front
property lines and one corner side property line where front and corner side
setback requirements apply, respectively. Rear setback standards do not apply.
   (J)   Exceptions From Minimum Setback Requirements: Required setbacks must
be unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground to the sky except that certain
building features and structures are allowed to project into required setbacks
to the extent expressly indicated in the following table:
Obstruction/Projection Into Required Front And Corner Side Interior Side Rear
Setbacks
Obstruction/Projection Into Required   Front And Corner Side Interior Side Rear
Setbacks
Accessory buildings, detached garages,
and sheds with a setback of at least 5
feet from side and rear property lines No                    Yes           Yes
and subject to section
14-3-3 of this title
Air conditioning and other mechanical
units with a setback of at least 3     No                    Yes           Yes
feet from any property line
Arbors and trellises, birdbaths,
trees, plants, shrubbery, gardens,
ornamental and security lighting,      Yes                   Yes           Yes
outdoor furniture and similar
customary landscape and yard
improvements
Awnings and canopies projecting no
more than 6 feet and with a setback of Yes                   No            Yes
at least 3 feet from any property line
Balconies projecting no more than 6
feet and with a setback of at least 3  No                    Yes           Yes
feet from any property line
Bay windows and dormers projecting no
more than 4 feet and with a setback of Yes1                  Yes           Yes
at least 3 feet from any property line
Breezeways                             No                    Yes           Yes
Carports, attached to the principal
building, with a setback of at least 3 No                    Yes           Yes
feet from any side or rear property
line
Chimneys projecting no more than 6
feet and with a setback of at least 3  Yes                   Yes           Yes
feet from any property line
Driveways, with a setback of at least
1 foot from property lines to which
they run approximately parallel,       Yes                   Yes           Yes
except that common driveways serving 2
or more lots may abut the property
line
Eaves and gutters projecting less than
3 feet and with a setback of at least  Yes1                  Yes           Yes
3 feet from any property line
Fences and walls, subject to chapter 6 Yes                   Yes           Yes
of this title
Flagpoles                              Yes                   Yes           Yes
Gazebos, with a setback of at least 3  No                    No            Yes
feet from any property line
Laundry drying equipment               No                    No            Yes
Parking spaces, unenclosed             Yes                   Yes           Yes
Patios and terraces                    No                    No            Yes
Porches and decks no more than 3 feet
above grade, open on at least 3 sides, Yes                   No            Yes
and with a setback of at least 3 feet
from any property line
Recreation equipment including
playground equipment, playhouses, and  No                    No            Yes
sandboxes
Satellite dish antennas, not exceeding Yes                   Yes           Yes
1 meter in diameter
Satellite dish antennas, over 1 meter
but not exceeding 2.4 meters in        No                    No            Yes
diameter
Sills, belt courses, cornices,
buttresses and other architectural
features projecting no more than 3     Yes1                  Yes           Yes
feet, that have a setback of at least
3 feet from any property line
Steps, stairs, stoops, landings and
fire escapes (uncovered) projecting no Yes                   Yes           Yes
more than 4 feet and with a setback of
at least 3 feet from any property line
Swimming pools, with a setback of at   No                    Yes           Yes
least 5 feet from any property line
Utility poles and wires                Yes                   Yes           Yes
Wheelchair lifts and ramps that meet
federal, state and local accessibility Yes                   Yes           Yes
standards
 
   Note:
      1.    In the B1 downtown commercial district, these features are allowed
to project into the public right of way as far as they may project into
required front and corner side setbacks.
   (K)   Building Height: Building height is to be measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade adjoining the front building line to:
      1.   The average height level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip,
and gambrel roofs.
      2.   The highest point of the roof surface for a flat roof; and
      3.   The deck line of a mansard roof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2478.gif]
 
   (L)   Exceptions To Maximum Height Requirements: Certain structures and
features may exceed the maximum permitted height requirements stipulated
elsewhere in this chapter.
      1.   The following are exempt from the height requirements of this
chapter:
         (a)   Architectural projections such as spires, belfries, parapet
walls, cupolas, domes, flues and chimneys.
         (b)   Structures such as elevator penthouses, gas tanks, grain
elevators, radio and television reception towers and aerials (in nonresidential
districts only), roof mounted mechanical equipment, cooling towers, fire
towers, and smokestacks.
         (c)   Structures related to utility services such as water towers,
electric power and communication transmission lines, traffic signals and light
poles.
      2.   Radio transmission and reception antenna in residential districts
may exceed the maximum permitted height, provided the height does not exceed
three (3) times its distance from the nearest property line.
      3.   Public and civic uses, such as schools, religious institutions,
hospitals, libraries, places of public assembly, governmental offices and
stations, can be constructed to a height of seventy five feet (75'), provided
all required yards are increased not less than one foot (1') for each two feet
(2') the structure exceeds the maximum height requirement for the applicable
zoning district.
   (M)   Building Coverage:
      1.   Building coverage is to be measured as the percentage of lot area
that is covered with principal and accessory buildings and above grade
structures, including garages, sheds, gazebos, decks, porches, and swimming
pools (except for temporary inflatable swimming pools). Projecting roof eaves
on buildings are not counted in calculating building coverage. At grade
accessory structures such as driveways, patios, walkways, and other paved
surfaces on a lot are not included in the calculation of maximum building
coverage.
      2.   Garages may not cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the combined
area of rear and side yards. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
CHAPTER 5
PARKING, LOADING AND ACCESS
SECTION:
14-5-1: Applicability
14-5-2: Off Street Parking Requirements
14-5-3: Accessible Parking (For People With Disabilities)
14-5-4: Shared Parking
14-5-5: Off Street Loading Requirements
14-5-1: APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   New Development: The requirements of this chapter apply to all new
buildings constructed and all new uses established in all zoning districts.
   (B)   Expansion Of Nonresidential Development: The requirements of this
chapter apply to all expansion of existing buildings or uses in all zoning
districts. When additional parking and loading spaces are required for
expansions of a building or use, the additional spaces are required for the
expanded area only; parking requirements are not required to be recalculated
for the entire building or use.
   (C)   Expansion Of Residential Development: The requirements of this chapter
apply whenever additional dwelling units are added to an existing building or
use.
   (D)   Change Of Use: The requirements of this chapter apply to a change in
use of an existing building or lot when the number of parking or loading spaces
for the new use exceeds the number required for the existing use.
   (E)   Public Parking Areas: All public, city owned parking areas must comply
with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-5-2: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Spaces Required: Off street parking spaces are as specified in the
table below:
Use Spaces Required
Use                                      Spaces Required
Residential uses:                         
  Single-family dwellings (attached and
 detached), two-family dwellings and    2 per dwelling unit
  manufactured homes
 Multi-family dwellings and other       1.5 per dwelling unit
  household living uses
 Group living                           1 per 3 beds or residents plus 1 per 3
                                         employees
Public and civic uses:                    
 College or university                  1 per 6 students
 Cultural exhibits and libraries        1 per 400 square feet
 Daycare center                         1 per employee plus 1 per 10 children
                                         capacity
 Daycare home                           1 per employee plus 2 spaces for drop
                                         off/pick up
 Hospitals                              1 per 3 beds plus 1 per 3 employees
  Place of public assembly, religious    1 per 5 seats or 1 per 5 persons'
 assembly, parks and recreation, social capacity
  club or lodge
 School:                                 
                                         2 per classroom plus 1 per 4 seats in
     Elementary                     auditorium plus 10 stacking spaces for
                                         drop off/pick up
     Secondary                      1 per 5 students plus 10 stacking
                                         spaces for drop off/pick up
 Other public and civic uses            1 per 5 persons' capacity
Commercial uses:                          
 Banks and financial services           1 per 300 square feet
 Car wash                               1 per 2 employees plus 1 vehicle
                                         stacking space per 100 square feet
 Entertainment and spectator sports;    1 per 5 persons' capacity
  sports and recreation, participant
 Funeral home                           1 per 100 square feet
 Lodging                                1 per guestroom plus 1 per 100 square
                                         feet of retail sales or dining area
 Medical or dental clinic               1 per 300 square feet
 Miniwarehouse                          1 per 3 units
 Motor vehicle repair                   1 per employee plus 2 per service
                                         stall
 Motor vehicle sales, light/heavy       1 per 600 square feet
  equipment sales/rental
 Offices                                1 per 500 square feet
 Restaurants and taverns                1 per 200 square feet
 Retail sales                           1 per 300 square feet
 Other commercial uses                  1 per 300 square feet
Industrial uses:                          
  Manufacturing, production and
 industrial service; research           1 per 3 employees or 1 per 900 square
  laboratories; warehouses; other        feet, whichever is greater
  industrial uses
 Wholesale sales                        1 per 600 square feet
Agricultural uses:                        
 Farming                                None required
 
   (B)   Rules For Computing Requirements:
      1.   Multiple Uses: Lots containing more than one use must provide
parking equal to the total number of spaces required for all uses unless a
shared parking plan is approved according to section
14-5-4 of this chapter.
      2.   Fractions: When the calculation of required parking spaces results
in a fraction, any fraction of one-half (1/2) or more must be rounded to the
next whole number and any fraction less than one-half (1/2) must be rounded
down to the preceding whole number.
      3.   Area Measurements: All square footage based parking requirements are
based on gross floor area.
      4.   Occupancy Or Capacity Based Standards: All occupancy or capacity
based parking requirements are based on the largest number of individuals
working on a single shift, the maximum enrollment, or the maximum occupancy
based on the building code, whichever is applicable and whichever results in
the greater number of spaces. For uses with benches or similar seating, one
seat consists of twenty two (22) linear inches of bench length.
      5.   Uses Not Listed: In the case of structures or uses not mentioned in
this section the zoning administrator must determine which standard is most
appropriate. The zoning administrator may require the applicant to submit a
parking study or other evidence to help determine the most appropriate parking
standard for the proposed use.
   (C)   Parking Area Location And Access:
      1.   All required off street parking must be located on the same lot as
the principal use, or within six hundred feet (600') walking distance of the
principal use.
      2.   No parking spaces for business or manufacturing uses may be located
in a residential zoning district except parking spaces required for
nonresidential uses allowed in the district.
      3.   No parking space or driveway may be closer than three feet (3') to
any property line.
      4.   In RE, R1A and R1 districts, all parking spaces for nonresidential
uses must be located behind the front building line.
      5.   In R3 districts, at least one of the required parking spaces for
each dwelling unit must be enclosed in a garage that is set back at least five
feet (5') from all property lines.
   (D)   Parking Design And Construction Standards:
      1.   Dimensions: Off street parking areas must comply with the following
standards:
 
Dimensions                  Parking Angle
                            0° (Parallel)45° 60° 90°
Minimum space width         9'            8.5' 8.5' 9'
Minimum space length        22'           19'  19'  19'
Minimum one-way aisle width 18'           16'  16'  18'
Minimum two-way aisle width 20'           22'  22'  22'
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2480.gif]
 
      2.   Surfacing:
         (a)   All off street parking areas must be graded, paved, and properly
drained. All parking areas except those for single- family dwellings must have
the aisles and spaces clearly marked.
         (b)   When adjacent to a gravel alley, parking spaces for single-
family dwellings must be graded, properly drained, and may be either paved or
surfaced with gravel.
      3.   Parking Space Access: Each off street parking space must open
directly onto an aisle that complies with the aisle width standards in
subsection (D)1 of this section.
      4.   Landscaping And Lighting: All off street parking areas except those
for single-family and two-family dwellings must comply with the parking lot
landscaping and lighting requirements of chapter 6 of this title.
      5.   Wheel Stops: Any parking space located within five feet (5') of a
property line must have a masonry or steel wheel stop located at least five
feet (5') from the property line. This requirement does not apply to single-
family or two-family dwellings.
      6.   Driveways And Street Access:
         (a)   All off street parking areas must be designed with vehicular
access to a street or alley in a manner that will least interfere with traffic
movements.
         (b)   All driveways installed, altered, replaced, or extended after
the effective date specified in section
14-1-2 of this title must comply with the following requirements:
Use Type Maximum Driveway Opening Minimum Driveway Width
                                  One-Way Two-Way
Use Type                       Maximum Driveway Opening Minimum Driveway Width
                                                        One-Way Two-Way
Residential districts:                                         
 Single-family and two-family 24'                      10'     10'
 Multi-family                 24'                      12'     20'
Nonresidential uses in
residential districts and                                      
business districts:
 Serving 20 or fewer parking  24'                      12'     20'
  spaces
 Serving more than 20 parking 36'                      12'     24'
  spaces
Manufacturing districts        50'                      12'     24'
 
         (c)   The location, arrangement, and width of all driveways for multi-
family residential and all nonresidential uses must be approved by the chief of
the fire department. Driveway widths greater than the minimums may be required
for emergency vehicle access.
      7.   Access To Highways And Major Streets:
         (a)   No direct access to the existing or proposed rights of way of
expressways or controlled access arterial streets is permitted, unless
permission is granted by the highway agency that has jurisdiction and the city
council.
         (b)   Direct access may not be taken within fifty feet (50') of an
intersection of an arterial street right of way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2482.gif]
 
         (c)   Barriers such as curbing, fencing, ditches, landscaping, or
other topographic barriers must be constructed to prevent vehicular access to
the streets or highways specified in this subsection.
         (d)   Temporary access to the rights of way specified in this
subsection may be granted if recommended by the highway agencies having
jurisdiction and approved by the city council. The temporary access permit must
be temporary, revocable, subject to any conditions imposed by the city council,
and may be issued for a maximum time period of twelve (12) months. (Ord. 1379,
6-9-2008)
14-5-3: ACCESSIBLE PARKING (FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES):
   (A)   Applicability:
      1.   The accessible parking standards of this section apply to all new
parking lots and to changes, improvements and maintenance of existing parking
lots, including, but not limited to, sealcoating, resurfacing, remarking,
fencing, curbs, walks and landscaping.
      2.   The requirements of this section apply to all nonresidential uses,
multi-family dwellings containing ten (10) or more units, or any other
building, structure or site that is owned, leased, or financed by a
governmental unit.
      3.   In the event that this section and the Illinois accessibility code
conflict, the stricter regulations apply.
   (B)   Spaces Required:
      1.   Residential Uses: When accessible parking spaces are required, they
must be provided in the number specified in the table below:
Off Street Parking Spaces Provided Accessible Spaces Required
Off Street Parking Spaces Provided Accessible Spaces Required
1 to 50                            1
51 to 100                          2
101 to 150                         3
151 to 200                         4
201 to 250                         5
251 to 300                         6
More than 300                      2 percent of total parking spaces provided
 
      2.   Nonresidential Uses: Accessible parking spaces are required for
nonresidential uses as specified in the table below unless otherwise expressly
stated:
Off Street Parking Spaces Provided Accessible Spaces Required
Off Street Parking Spaces Provided Accessible Spaces Required
1 to 25                            1
26 to 50                           2
51 to 75                           3
76 to 100                          4
101 to 150                         5
151 to 200                         6
201 to 300                         7
301 to 400                         8
401 to 500                         9
501 to 1,000                       2 percent of total
More than 1,000                    20 plus 1 per 100 over 1,000
 
      3.   Medical Facilities:
         (a)   Outpatient Facilities: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the
total number of parking spaces provided for outpatient medical facilities must
be designated as accessible spaces.
         (b)   Rehabilitation And Physical Therapy Facilities: A minimum of
twenty percent (20%) of the total number of parking spaces provided for medical
facilities specializing in rehabilitation or physical therapy must be
designated as accessible spaces.
         (c)   Layout And Design:
            (1)   Location: Accessible parking spaces must be located on the
shortest accessible route of travel between the parking area and an accessible
building entrance. When more than one accessible entrance is served, accessible
spaces must be dispersed and located on the shortest accessible route to each
entrance. When parking facilities do not serve a particular building or use,
the spaces should be located on the shortest accessible route between the
parking area and an accessible pedestrian walkway.
            (2)   Minimum Space Size: Car and van parking spaces must be at
least eleven feet (11') wide.
            (3)   Access Areas: Access areas must be included to provide space
adjacent to vehicles for passenger loading and unloading. Access areas must:
               A. Be at least five feet (5') wide;
               B. Be located on the passenger side of the parking space, based
on the vehicle moving forward into the space, when serving diagonal parking
spaces;
               C. Extend the full length of the parking space; and
               D. Be marked to indicate that parking in the access area is
prohibited. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2484.gif]
 
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1578, 8-18-2014)
            (4)   Slope: Parking spaces and access aisles may not have a slope
greater than one to forty eight (1:48). Access aisles must be at the same level
as the parking space.
            (5)   Vertical Clearance: Accessible parking spaces must have a
vertical clearance of at least eight feet two inches (8'2").
            (6)   Signs And Identification: All accessible parking spaces
required by this chapter must be identified by signs complying with U.S.
department of transportation R7-8 standards, including the international symbol
of accessibility and the amount of the fine imposed for illegally parking in an
accessible space. The sign must be vertically mounted on a post or wall no more
than five feet (5') from the space and centered on the width of the space.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-5-4: SHARED PARKING:
The zoning administrator may approve shared parking facilities for developments
or uses with different operating hours or peak business periods, subject to the
following requirements:
   (A)   Location: The edge of the shared parking area must be within six
hundred feet (600') walking distance of the primary entrance of each use
served.
   (B)   Parking Study: Applicants wishing to use shared parking as a way to
satisfy the parking requirements of this chapter must submit a parking study to
the zoning administrator. The parking study must demonstrate the feasibility of
the shared parking arrangement; and include the size and use of the proposed
development, the anticipated parking demand for each use in the development,
and the peak periods of parking demand for each use.
   (C)   Shared Parking Covenant: A shared parking plan must be enforced by an
irrevocable written covenant among all owners of record. A copy of the covenant
must be submitted to the zoning administrator and recorded in county recorder's
office before any building permits are issued for any use to be served by the
shared parking area. A shared parking covenant may only be revoked if all off
street parking required by this chapter is provided. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-5-5: OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   No Use Of Public Right Of Way: At no time may goods be loaded or
unloaded from the right of way of a collector or arterial street. No part of
any vehicle may extend into the right of way of a collector or arterial street
while being loaded or unloaded.
   (B)   Loading Area Design And Construction Standards:
      1.   Location:
         (a)   Plans for location, design and layout of all loading spaces must
be indicated on required site plans.
      2.   Surfacing: All off street loading areas must be graded, paved, and
properly drained.
      3.   Screening: Loading spaces must be completely screened from view of
residential zoning districts by the existing building, a fence, or an evergreen
planting screen. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
CHAPTER 6
LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND LIGHTING
SECTION:
14-6-1: Landscape Plan
14-6-2: Turf
14-6-3: Street Trees
14-6-4: Parking Lot Landscaping
14-6-5: Transition Yards
14-6-6: Refuse Containers
14-6-7: Loading Areas
14-6-8: Outdoor Storage And Work Areas
14-6-9: Mechanical Equipment
14-6-10: Freestanding Signs
14-6-11: Plant Materials
14-6-12: Fences, Walls And Berms
14-6-13: Outdoor Lighting
14-6-14: Intersection Visibility
14-6-1: LANDSCAPE PLAN:
   (A)   When Required:
      1.   A landscape plan is required for all exterior construction and
development activity that requires site plan review.
      2.   A landscape plan is not required for existing uses that are not
proposing redevelopment or exterior improvements that require site plan review
in accordance with chapter 11 of this title. Landscape plans must comply with
the requirements of this section and must be reviewed and approved by the plan
commission.
   (B)   Landscape Plan Contents: A required landscape plan must include the
following information:
      1.   The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, property lines, easements, parking lots, driveways, roadways,
sidewalks/bike paths, fences/walls, ground signs, refuse disposal areas, light
poles, freestanding mechanical equipment, drainage and stormwater management
facilities.
      2.   The location, quantity, size, and name (both botanical and common
names) of all existing plant materials on the site, and any plant material in
the public right of way, indicating which plant material will be retained or
removed.
      3.   The location, quantity, size, and name (both botanical and common
names) of all proposed plant material including, but not limited to, shade
trees, ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubs, ground covers and turf area.
      4.   The existing and proposed grading of the site indicating contours at
one foot (1') intervals, including any proposed berming.
      5.   Elevations of all proposed walls, fences and retaining walls,
including elevations for proposed screening for refuse disposal areas.
      6.   Details for proposed lighting, including specifications as to the
height, type of lamp and shielding.
      7.   The location of all off street loading areas, including an
indication of whether loading docks will be enclosed and methods of proposed
screening.
      8.   Locations of hose connections and other water system sources or
devices, if any.
      9.   The location and placement of all proposed water lines and sprinkler
heads of proposed irrigation systems.
      10.   The location of existing and proposed utility easements and the
type of utilities anticipated for placement within proposed easements and
existing utility lines, both above and below ground.
      11.   Delineation of the required intersection visibility triangle, where
applicable.
      12.   Other elevations and details as determined necessary by the zoning
administrator.
   (C)   Changes To Approved Landscape Plans: Any change to an approved
landscape plan requires the approval of the plan commission, unless the zoning
administrator determines that proposed change is minor in nature. Examples of
minor changes to approved landscape plans are minor rearranging of plant
material on a site and substitution of plant materials that are of a similar
species and/or equivalent size as the approved materials.
   (D)   Design Standards: Landscape plans must be prepared, evaluated, and
approved, based on the following design criteria:
      1.   The scale and nature of landscaping materials must be appropriate to
the size of the structures on the site. For example, larger scale plants should
generally be used to complement larger buildings. Plant material should be
selected for its form, texture, color, pattern of growth and suitability to
local conditions.
      2.   Existing plant material should be incorporated into the landscape
treatment of a site. Effort should be made to preserve and protect existing
trees with trunk diameters of more than twelve inches (12"). These trees and
their root systems must be protected from construction equipment and activity
by the installation of fencing materials at the drip line of the trees.
      3.   Plant material should be placed intermittently against long expanses
of building walls, fences, and other barriers to create a softening effect.
      4.   Detention/retention basins and ponds should be landscaped with shade
and ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubs, turf, ground cover and/or other plant
materials. Nonstructural methods of detention planted with native plant
materials are preferred.
      5.   Plant material should be used to reduce energy consumption needs by
placing deciduous trees on the south and west sides of buildings for shade and
placing evergreens on the north and west sides of buildings to dissipate the
effect of winds. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-6-2: TURF:
All required setbacks in all zoning districts within the city must be
landscaped primarily with turf or other ground cover plantings. The pavement of
yards other than for parking or loading purposes is prohibited. Turf may be
established through installation of sod or seeding. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-6-3: STREET TREES:
   (A)   Street Tree Requirements:
      1.   Street trees requirements for proposed residential subdivisions are
specified in section
14-9-11 of this title.
      2.   Property lines along public street frontages on multi-family
residential and nonresidential sites must be planted with street trees at a
rate of one tree for every forty (40) linear feet. These trees must be located
between the building line(s) and front and corner side property lines. Driveway
widths may be excluded from the calculation of the required number of street
trees. Flexibility in locating trees is provided where it is not possible to
locate street trees forty feet (40') apart due to the location of driveways.
      3.   The trees must be located within ten feet (10') of the front and
corner lot lines, but are not permitted to be planted within the public right
of way. Additionally, no trees may be planted in the visibility triangle of
corner lots, if the trees restrict the visibility of traffic on the
intersecting streets.
      4.   A list of allowable street tree species is on file with the city of
Spring Valley. To reduce the risk of disease and/or insect infestation, no more
than fifty percent (50%) of the street trees in any individual development may
be of one species.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2486.gif]
 
   (B)   Other Landscape Materials In The Public Right Of Way: No plant
material or barrier, except as specified in this chapter, may be located in a
dedicated public right of way without the approval of the city's Superintendent
of Public Works. The remainder of the ground surface within the public right of
way between the street and sidewalk must be planted with turf, with the
exception that driveways, sidewalks, and bike paths are permitted in all public
rights of way.
   Materials prohibited within the public right of way, unless approved by the
street superintendent, include other ground covers, shrubs, brick pavers,
gravel, stone, asphalt and concrete; except those used for driveways,
sidewalks, and bike paths.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-6-4: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING:
   (A)   Applicability: The owner of any parking lot desiring to install
landscaping must install landscaping in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
   (B)   Interior Parking Lot Landscaping:
      1.   Number Of Landscape Islands: Landscape islands with at least one
shade tree must occur at a minimum of one island for every ten (10) parking
spaces in a row. Islands are required at each end of a row of parking spaces.
Flexibility in placement of landscape islands may be allowed for creative
parking lot design and preservation of existing trees and vegetation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2488.gif]
 
      2.   Landscape Island Size: Interior parking lot islands must be a
minimum of one hundred eighty (180) square feet in area and a minimum of eight
feet (8') in width, as measured from back of curb to back of curb within the
island.
      3.   Landscape Island Design: Interior parking lot landscaping must
consist of planting islands at least eight inches (8") above the surface of the
parking lot that are protected with concrete curbing.
      4.   Landscape Material: The primary plant materials used in parking lot
islands must be shade tree species. Ornamental trees, shrubs, and other plant
materials may be used to supplement the shade tree plantings, but cannot be the
sole source of parking lot landscaping. Mulch may be used around the base of
shade trees and other plant material, provided it is applied at a thickness of
at least two inches (2").
      5.   Visibility: To ensure proper visibility within the parking lot,
shrubs must be no greater than thirty inches (30") in height and the branches
of trees must have a minimum clearance of six feet (6') above the pavement
except in areas that do not affect driver visibility.
   (C)   Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping: Perimeter parking lot landscaping
provides for the enhancement and screening of parking lots by providing a
uniform scheme of landscaping and/or screening along all public streets and
adjacent to residential uses.
      1.   Parking Lots Abutting Public Streets: Where a parking lot abuts a
public right of way (whether a street or an alley), a minimum six foot (6')
wide continuous landscape strip must be provided along one hundred percent
(100%) of the right of way, exclusive of driveways. Screening installed within
this landscape strip must have a minimum height of three feet (3'). The
screening may consist of shrubs, ornamental trees, berming, low pedestrian
walls and/or fencing which through their arrangement create the desired screen.
In addition to the three foot (3') screen, one shade tree must be provided for
every forty (40) linear feet along that portion of parking lots that abut
public streets (alleys are excluded). These trees may be clustered or spaced
linearly.
      2.   Parking Lots Abutting Residential Property: Where a parking lot
abuts a property zoned or used for residential purposes, a solid wood fence,
wall, dense hedge, or comparable screen must be provided across one hundred
percent (100%) of the property line. Fences and walls must be six feet (6') in
height, and hedges and other screens must be a minimum height of six feet (6')
in height. In addition, one shade or evergreen tree must be provided for every
forty (40) linear feet along that portion of the parking lot that abuts
residential property. Additional shrubs, trees, and/or berming may be installed
to supplement the required screening. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-6-5: TRANSITION YARDS:
   (A)   A transition yard is landscaped open space, free of any building or
paved area. Transition yards are intended to lessen the impact of incompatible
land uses on adjacent properties.
   (B)   All transition yards must be planted with one shade tree per thirty
(30) linear feet and must have a continuous screen consisting of a berm, hedge,
fence or wall with a height as required by this section. The following lists
the transition yard width and screening height required:
Developing Lots Zoning Adjacent Lots Zoning
                       R Districts B1, B3 B2 B4, M1, M2
Developing Lots Adjacent Lots Zoning
Zoning          R Districts      B1, B3           B2               B4, M1, M2
A, RE, R1, R1A
and R2          None             None             None             None
(residential
uses)
A, RE, R1, R1A  Width: 10 feet
and R2          Screen height: 4 None             None             None
(nonresidential feet
uses)
                Width: 10 feet
R3              Screen height: 4 None             None             None
                feet
                Width: 6 feet
B1, B3          Screen height: 5 None             None             None
                feet
                Width: 15 feet
B2              Screen height: 6 None             None             None
                feet
                Width: 20 feet   Width: 10 feet   Width: 10 feet
B4, M1 and M2   Screen height: 6 Screen height: 4 Screen height: 4 None
                feet             feet             feet
 
   (C)   Existing vegetation may be used to meet all or some of the transition
yard requirements. The landscape design may include areas where trees and
shrubs are clustered or spaced linearly as long as the desired screen is
achieved. Evergreen trees may be substituted for shade trees and three (3)
ornamental trees may be substituted for one shade tree. All other areas within
transition yards must be maintained with turf or other ground cover.
   (D)   When both a transition yard and perimeter parking lot landscaping
would be required between a parking lot and a residential use, the stricter
standard applies. Sites are not required to provide both types of landscaping
and screening.
   (E)   It is recognized that providing full transition yards may not be
possible on small or irregularly shaped sites. When there is not adequate space
to meet transitional yard requirements without creating additional
nonconformities on the site with respect to setbacks, parking, etc., the plan
commission is authorized to approve alternative screening and/or a reduced
transitional yard area. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-6-6: REFUSE CONTAINERS:
   (A)   This section applies to all uses except single-family and two-family
dwellings. Single-family and two-family dwellings may utilize refuse containers
with a maximum five (5) 33-gallon capacity, not to exceed fifty (50) pounds in
weight when filled.
   (B)   When refuse containers and grease storage containers are not enclosed
within a principal or accessory building, they may only be placed in a rear or
interior side yard, and must be screened within an enclosure, subject to the
following requirements:
      1.   The enclosure must be constructed of an opaque wood fence or masonry
wall on three (3) sides with a minimum height equal to or greater than the
height of the refuse container. One side of the storage area must be furnished
with an opaque, lockable gate. No refuse material may be visible above the
enclosure.
      2.   The enclosure area must be kept free of debris. Refuse containers
must be emptied regularly and kept closed when not in use so that containers do
not attract vermin.
      3.   The provisions of this section apply to new construction after the
date of the adoption of this title. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-6-7: LOADING AREAS:
Loading areas in all zoning districts must be screened from the public right of
way and abutting properties that are zoned or used for residential purposes.
Appropriate methods of screening include walls, fences, berms, and landscape
plantings that are a minimum of six feet (6') in height. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-6-8: OUTDOOR STORAGE AND WORK AREAS:
Outdoor storage and work areas must be screened from the public right of way
and abutting properties that are zoned or used for residential purposes.
Appropriate methods of screening include walls, fences, berms and landscape
plantings.
Walls and fences must be six feet (6') in height; landscape screens must be a
minimum of six feet (6') in height. No stored materials may be visible above
the fence or landscape screen. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-6-9: MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT:
Mechanical equipment such as transformers and heating and air conditioning
(HVAC) units must be located and/or screened so that they are not visible from
any property line.
   (A)   Ground Mounted Equipment: Ground mounted equipment in all
nonresidential development must be screened with a dense hedge that is of
sufficient height to screen the mechanical unit on all sides visible from any
property line.
   (B)   Roof Mounted Equipment: Roof mounted mechanical equipment in all
nonresidential and multi-family residential development must be screened on all
sides visible from any property line. Screening may include parapet walls or
other opaque roof elements similar and compatible in color and texture to the
exterior building materials on which the unit is located. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-6-10: FREESTANDING SIGNS:
Landscape material must be installed around the base of the freestanding signs
consisting of shrubs, perennial/annual flowers, and/or ground cover. The
required landscaping area must be a minimum of three feet (3') wide on all
sides of the sign base. Where the area around the base of the sign is
insufficient in size for all of the required landscaping, the zoning
administrator may permit installation of a portion of the required landscaping
at an alternate location on the site. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-6-11: PLANT MATERIALS:
   (A)   Selection: All planting materials must be good quality and of species
capable of withstanding the climate of central Illinois and individual site
microclimates. Size and density of plant material, both at the time of planting
and at maturity, are additional criteria that must be considered when selecting
plant material. The use of drought tolerant and salt tolerant plant material is
preferred. Trees and shrubs may be balled and burlapped or container grown.
   (B)   Minimum Planting Sizes: Minimum planting sizes for all required
landscape materials are as follows:
 
Type             Size
Shade trees      2 inch caliper
Ornamental trees 6 feet height unless true dwarf species
Evergreen trees  6 feet height
Deciduous shrubs 2 feet height
Evergreen shrubs 2 feet height
 
   (C)   Installation:
      1.   Required landscaping and screening must be completely installed
prior to the issuance of a letter of occupancy.
      2.   All landscaping materials must be installed in accordance with the
current planting procedures established by the American Association Of
Nurserymen.
      3.   All plant material must be free from disease and installed in a
fashion that ensures the availability of sufficient soil and water to sustain
healthy growth.
      4.   Plant material must be installed in a manner that is not intrusive
to utilities or pavement.
      5.   Plant materials identified on approved landscaping plans must be
installed, whenever feasible, within the growing season following approval of
the applicable building permits for the subject site. Where it is not feasible
to install all required landscaping within that growing season due to weather
constraints, the zoning administrator has the authority to grant a letter of
occupancy for the building, provided that all required landscaping will be
installed the next growing season. If determined necessary by the zoning
administrator, a performance guarantee may be required to be posted by the
property owner to ensure installation of all required landscape materials
within the next growing season.
   (D)   Planting Methods: This subsection outlines general guidelines for the
installation of all landscape material.
      1.   Most small, deciduous trees may be moved bare rooted unless
otherwise indicated. Roots of bare rooted trees must be protected against
drying out.
      2.   All coniferous trees must be moved balled and burlapped. Balled
roots should be prevented from drying out at the surface of their ball, and
they should be protected from freezing.
      3.   Pits dug for the planting of bare root plants must be at least
twelve inches (12") larger in diameter than the diameter of the root system in
order to accommodate the roots without crowding. For balled trees, the pits
should be a minimum of twelve inches (12") larger than the diameter of the ball
of soil to allow proper backfill of soil.
      4.   Plants must be planted no deeper than previously grown with due
allowance for settling.
      5.   In planting containers, artificial drainage must be provided for the
root system of any species intolerant of wet sites, or species tolerant to wet
sites must be used.
      6.   Topsoil, compost, peat moss or an acceptable soil mixture may be
placed around the roots of bare root stock or in the backfill around balled
stock. When the planting is completed, the entire root system must be
thoroughly saturated with water and cord and burlap wrapping must be cut and/or
removed.
      7.   Trees and planting beds must be mulched around the base of plant
material with shredded bark, feather rocks, or similar organic materials to
hold moisture. Mulch cannot be used as a substitute for turf or required plant
materials.
      8.   Although pruning should be done to develop a balance with the root
system, excessive pruning at the time of transplanting should be avoided.
      9.   Tree trunks must be suitably wrapped and guyed, or supported in an
upright position, according to accepted arboricultural practices. The guys or
supports should be installed so that they will not girdle or cause serious
injury to the tree or endanger public safety.
   (E)   Maintenance:
      1.   While irrigation systems are not required for landscape areas, where
installed irrigation systems are installed they must be designed to conserve
the use of water.
      2.   All landscaping materials must be continually maintained in good
condition to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance, and be kept free
of refuse and debris. Fences, walls and berms must be maintained in good
condition and neat appearance. Plant material berms, walls and fences must be
protected from damage by motor vehicles through use of concrete curbing or
wheel stops.
      3.   All landscaping should be periodically trimmed so that it does not
obstruct a public right of way. Diseased and dead plant material must be
replaced in accordance with the approved landscape plan.
      4.   The owner and occupants of a property are jointly responsible for
the maintenance, repair, and replacement of all plant materials, fences, walls
and other landscape improvements. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-6-12: FENCES, WALLS AND BERMS:
Fences and walls must be designed in accordance with the following standards:
   (A)   Location: Fences and walls, including all posts, bases and other
structural parts must be located completely within the boundaries of the lot on
which it is located.
   (B)   Measurement: The height of the fence or wall structure shall be
measured from the ground level at the base of the structure to the highest
point on the structure. When the ground is of different levels on either side
of the fence or wall, the height of the structure for compliance with
subsection (C) of this section shall be measured from the lowest side but in no
case, when the difference in ground height from one side of the fence structure
to the other is two feet (2') or greater, shall the structure protruding above
the high side be less than forty two inches (42") in height. (Ord. 1450, 2-15-
2010)
   (C)   Maximum Height And Maximum Opacity:
 
Yard                  R And A Districts B Districts    M Districts
Front and corner side 4'/50% opaque     6'/100% opaque 6'/100% opaque
Side                  6'/100% opaque    6'/100% opaque 8'/100% opaque
Rear                  8'/100% opaque    6'/100% opaque 8'/100% opaque
 
   (D)   Design And Construction:
      1.   Permitted Materials In Residential And Agricultural Districts: The
following materials are permitted:
         (a)   Wood;
         (b)   Wrought iron;
         (c)   Vinyl (that is designed to look like wood or wrought iron);
         (d)   Brick;
         (e)   Stone;
         (f)   Chainlink, except in the front and corner side yard; and
         (g)   Other similar materials approved by the plan commission.
      2.   Permitted Materials In Business And Manufacturing Districts: The
following fence and wall materials are permitted:
         (a)   Wood;
         (b)   Wrought iron;
         (c)   Vinyl (that is designed to look like wood or wrought iron);
         (d)   Brick;
         (e)   Stone; and
         (f)   Chainlink.
      3.   Finished Side: All fences and walls must be constructed with the
finished surface facing the exterior of the property with support posts placed
to the inside, except in such cases where the posts or support columns are an
integral part of its aesthetic design.
      4.   Barbed Wire And Electric Fences: Barbed wire, razor wire,
concertina, and the electrification of fencing are prohibited. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-
2008)
   5.   Swimming Pools: Swimming pools must be enclosed with security fences in
accordance with the building code. Fences are required for above-ground pools
in accordance with the provisions of section
3-2-10 of the city code. Fences are still required for inground pools.
      6.   Maintenance: It is the responsibility of the owner and/or occupant
of the property where a fence or wall is erected to maintain the structure in
good repair and structurally sound condition at all times, with no loose,
rotting or rusting materials, and with all structural components attached in
accordance with common building practices. If a fence is not in compliance with
this section, the zoning administrator may order the fence to be repaired,
replaced or removed.
   (E)   Berm Design:
      1.   Perimeter parking lot and transitional yard landscaping may include
installation of earthen berms for screening purposes.
      2.   Berms should not be designed in an unnatural, symmetrical pattern,
but should be varied in both vertical and horizontal dimensions.
      3.   Berms may not exceed a maximum slope of three to one (3:1).
      4.   All berms must be planted with landscaping to prevent their erosion.
Plantings placed on top of berms must consist of species compatible with the
terrain of the berm. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
   (F)   Exception: Where provisions of this section will cause damage or
hardship, the building inspector may alter, with the approval of the city
council, the conditions of the permit before the permit is issued.
(Ord; 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1450, 2-15-2010; Ord. 1492, 8-15-2011; Ord.
1746, 4-22-2019)
14-6-13: OUTDOOR LIGHTING:
All exterior lighting must comply with the following standards:
   (A)   Height:
      1.   All exterior lighting fixtures must be designed, located and mounted
at a maximum height of fifteen feet (15') above grade for noncutoff lights, and
forty feet (40') above grade for cutoff lights.
      2.   Parks, schools, and outdoor recreation facilities may have lights
mounted at up to seventy feet (70'), provided that the light pole is located at
least twenty feet (20') from a residential property line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2490.gif]
 
   (B)   Glare Reduction:
      1.   Glare must be minimized by orienting lights away from the public
right of way and abutting properties or by planting vegetation to block other
properties from the glare.
      2.   All cutoff light fixtures must remain shielded and directed downward
at all times, and must not be redirected to illuminate a building, sign, or
other site features.
      3.   Gas station canopy lighting must be designed with recessed fixtures
that are shielded and directed downward to prevent glare on adjoining
properties and roadways. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-6-14: INTERSECTION VISIBILITY:
   (A)   No sign, fence, wall, shrub or other obstruction more than three feet
(3') in height may be located or allowed to grow within a visibility triangle.
   (B)   A visibility triangle includes the area created by the street right of
way lines extending thirty feet (30') from their intersection.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2492.gif]
 
   (C)   When an arterial street intersects with another arterial street or a
railway, the visibility triangle is increased to fifty feet (50') from the
intersection of the right of way lines.
   (D)   The city is authorized to trim, remove or order removal of materials
that violate this section. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
CHAPTER 7
SIGNS
SECTION:
14-7-1: Purpose And Applicability
14-7-2: General
14-7-3: Signs In The Public Right Of Way And On Public Property
14-7-4: Signs Allowed In Residential Districts
14-7-5: Signs Allowed In Nonresidential Districts
14-7-6: Temporary Signs
14-7-7: Sign Permits
14-7-8: Unsafe, Obsolete Or Nonconforming Signs
14-7-9: Maintenance
14-7-10: Downtown Sign Zone
14-7-11: Interstate 80 Sign Zone
14-7-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to achieve balance among the
following differing, and at times, competing goals:
      1.   To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication
for businesses, organizations and individuals in Spring Valley;
      2.   To provide a means of wayfinding in the community, thus reducing
traffic confusion and congestion;
      3.   To provide for adequate business identification, advertising, and
communication;
      4.   To prohibit signs of such excessive size and number that they
obscure one another to the detriment of the economic and social well being of
the city of Spring Valley;
      5.   To protect the safety and welfare of the public by minimizing
hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
      6.   To preserve property values by preventing unsightly and chaotic
development which has a blighting influence upon the community;
      7.   To differentiate among those signs that, because of their location,
may distract drivers on public streets and those that may provide information
to them while they remain in their cars but out of active traffic;
      8.   To minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public
and private property; and
      9.   To implement the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan,
including the following:
         (a)   Adopt more context appropriate signage regulations for
businesses; consider regulating signage by use and by zone;
         (b)   Promote convenient access and signage to parking in all
commercial areas; and
         (c)   Preserve the "small town" character of St. Paul Street.
   (B)   Signs Exempt From Regulation: The following signs are exempt from
regulation under this chapter:
      1.   Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable
federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance, or by order of a court
of competent jurisdiction;
      2.   Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door that is
not legible from a distance of more than three feet (3') beyond the property
line of the development site or parcel on which the sign is located, and
      3.   Traffic control signs on private property, such as "Stop", "Yield",
and similar signs, the faces of which meet standards set forth in the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and which contain no commercial
message of any sort.
   (C)   Signs Allowed In All Zoning Districts Without A Permit:
      1.   Signs Not Subject To Other Regulations: The following signs are
allowed without a sign permit and are not subject to any other regulations
under this chapter:
         (a)   Temporary signs required by a valid and applicable federal,
state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance; or posted by a public agency,
acting in accordance with an adopted law or ordinance. Such signs must be
removed when they no longer serve the purpose for which they were posted;
         (b)   Signs not requiring a building permit or electrical permit and
not legible from a distance of more than three feet (3') beyond the property
line of the development site or parcel on which the sign is located; and
         (c)   Memorial signs containing no commercial message and not larger
than four (4) square feet.
      2.   Signs Subject To Other Regulations: The following signs will be
allowed without a sign permit but are subject to more detailed regulations set
forth elsewhere in this chapter:
         (a)   Temporary free speech signs conforming with the regulations for
temporary signs in the district in which they are located;
         (b)   Temporary real estate signs conforming with the regulations for
temporary signs in the district in which they are located;
         (c)   Other temporary signs smaller than six (6) square feet in size
and less than four feet (4') of height, conforming with the regulations for
temporary signs in the district in which they are located.
         (d)   Flags and flagpoles conforming with subsections
14-7-4(C)6 and
14-7-5(B)10 of this chapter;
         (e)   Incidental signs conforming with the regulations for incidental
signs in the district in which they are located; and
         (f)   On site signs for traffic and parking control, provided that
such signs conform to the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and
contain no commercial messages.
   (D)   Prohibited Signs:
      1.   General: The following signs are expressly prohibited in all zoning
districts:
         (a)   Animated signs;
         (b)   Windblown signs including nonpermanent advertising signs affixed
to buildings, fences or other structures (except temporary banners, windblown
signs advertising special events for not for profit, religious, or municipal
organizations which must be removed within 48 hours after the end of the
event);
         (c)   Strings of lights (except for temporary holiday decorations);
         (d)   Portable signs (except sandwich board signs);
         (e)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle containing a commercial
message and regularly parked on the street side of any business will be
considered a portable sign and thus prohibited unless the vehicle is regularly
and customarily used in the business;
         (f)   Signs on benches;
         (g)   Signs on trees;
         (h)   Signs on utility poles, other than signs installed by the
utility and related to the utility facility;
         (i)   Signs blocking required means of egress from any building;
         (j)   Roof sign; and
         (k)   Signs within the public right of way or on public property,
except signs posted in accordance with section
14-7-3 of this chapter or projecting signs in accordance with subsection
14-7-5(B)2 of this chapter.
      2.   List Not Exclusive: The list of prohibited sign types set out in
this section is illustrative only. Any sign that is not exempt from this
chapter under subsection (B) of this section, not established as a lawful
nonconforming sign in accordance with section
14-12-7 of this title, or not expressly allowed under another section of this
chapter, is a prohibited sign.
   (E)   Applicability: No display sign or outdoor advertising device may be
placed, erected, altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended or relocated except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The repainting, changing of
parts, and preventative maintenance of signs are not considered alterations.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-7-2: GENERAL:
   (A)   Sign Measurement And Interpretation:
      1.   Measurement Of Copy Area Of Individual Signs: The copy area of a
sign face will be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle,
triangle or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the
writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material
or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed. The copy area of a sign face does not include any supporting framework,
bracing or decorative fence or wall when the fence or wall otherwise meets the
regulations of this chapter and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2494.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2496.gif]
 
      2.   Measurement Of Area Of Multifaced Signs: Where the sign faces of a
double faced sign are parallel and the distance between the faces is three feet
(3') or less, only one display face will be measured in computing sign area. If
the two (2) faces of a double faced sign are of unequal area, the area of the
sign will be the area of the larger sign. In all other cases, the areas of all
faces of a multifaced sign will be added together to compute the area of the
sign.
      3.   Sign Height Measurement: The height of a sign will be computed as
the distance from the highest point of the sign structure to the elevation of
the centerline of the adjacent public street or highway.
      4.   Determination Of Visibility Or Legibility:
         (a)   Where this chapter requires a determination of "visibility" or
"legibility", the standard will be based on the eyesight of an adult eligible
to receive an Illinois driver's license (wearing any corrective lenses required
by the license). Where the height of the person is material to the
determination, the person will be presumed to be more than five feet (5') and
less than six feet (6') tall.
         (b)   In determining visibility of a sign from a residential property,
it will be assumed that a two-story residence will occupy the property with
second story windows facing toward the sign.
   (B)   Wind Pressure: Any sign, other advertising structure, marquee, canopy
or awning as defined in this title must be designed and constructed to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot
of net surface area; and must be constructed to receive dead loads as required
in the building code and/or other ordinances of the city of Spring Valley.
   (C)   Substitution Of Messages: The sign regulations of this chapter are not
intended to favor commercial speech over constitutionally protected political
or noncommercial speech. A sign containing a noncommercial message may be
substituted for any sign containing a commercial message that is allowed by the
regulations of this chapter.
      1.   Any sign allowed under this title may contain, in lieu of any other
message or copy, any lawful noncommercial message that does not direct
attention to a business operated for profit, or to a product, commodity or
service for sale or lease, or to any other commercial interest or activity, so
long as the sign complies with the size, height, area and other requirements of
this chapter.
      2.   At any time, in lieu of any permitted temporary real estate sign, a
sign expressing views on candidates or issues of public interest may be
erected, regardless of whether the property is at that time for sale or lease.
The number, height and size of the sign will be the same as the real estate
sign that would otherwise be permitted. It is not the intent of this paragraph
to allow additional signage on the property; but rather to clarify that, in
accordance with the policy set forth in this section, a sign expressing
opinions may be substituted for any other sign allowed under this chapter.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-7-3: SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY AND ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   (A)   Signs Permitted: Only the following signs are permitted in the public
right of way and on public property:
      1.   Signs installed by any of the following and directly related to the
use of the right of way or of public property, including the control and
direction of traffic:
         (a)   The city of Spring Valley;
         (b)   Bureau County;
         (c)   State of Illinois;
         (d)   Any transit company authorized to provide service to or through
Spring Valley;
         (e)   Any public utility with a franchise or other agreement with the
city of Spring Valley; or
         (f)   Any other government entity or person expressly authorized by
Illinois law to install a sign in the right of way.
      2.   "Adopt-a-highway" signs acknowledging voluntary efforts to provide
landscaping, litter control, or other maintenance, when the signs are installed
pursuant to a written policy of the city of Spring Valley or the state of
Illinois.
   (B)   Other Signs: Any other sign installed or placed in the public right of
way will be deemed an unlawful sign and an abandoned sign and will be subject
to immediate removal and disposal by the city, without compensation to the
owner. The owner or other person placing the sign will, nevertheless, be
subject to the penalty provisions of chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-
2008)
14-7-4: SIGNS ALLOWED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Single-Family And Two-Family Districts: In the RE, R1A, R1 and R2
districts, the following classes of signs are permitted in accordance with
regulations of this subsection:
      1.   Dimensions And Number Of Signs: The numbers and dimensions of signs
in these districts will be controlled by the following table:
Sign Type Maximum Number Maximum Area Maximum Height Location Additional
                                                              Requirements
Sign Type        Maximum      Maximum Area Maximum Location      Additional
                 Number                    Height                Requirements
Permanent signs:                                              
                                                                 An address
 Address signs  1 per street 6 sq. ft.    4 ft.   Inside        sign is
  - freestanding frontage                          property line required on
                                                                 all premises
                                                                 An address
 Address signs  1 per        2 sq. ft.    n/a     On wall       sign is
  - wall         dwelling                                        required on
                                                                 all premises
  Residential                                      Inside        See subsection
 identification 1            24 sq. ft.   4 ft.   property line (C)1 of this
  - freestanding                                                 section
  Residential                                                    See subsection
 identification 1            1 sq. ft.    n/a     On wall       (C)1 of this
  - wall                                                         section
  Incidental                                       Inside        See subsection
 signs          n/a          2 sq. ft.    4 ft.   property line (C)2 of this
                                                                 section
Temporary signs:                                              
  For sale/rent  3 total; see                      8 ft. from    See subsection
 signs          additional   6 sq. ft.    4 ft.   property line (C)3 of this
                 requirements                                    section
 Free speech    n/a          n/a          n/a     Inside         
  signs                                            property line
Other signs:                                                  
  Institutional                                                  See subsection
 signs                                                      (C)5 of this
                                                                 section
 
   (B)   Multi-Family District: In the R3 district, the following classes of
signs are permitted in accordance with regulations of this subsection:
      1.   Dimensions And Numbers Of Signs: The numbers and dimensions of signs
in these districts will be controlled by the following table:
Sign Type Maximum Number Maximum Area Maximum Height Location Additional
                                                              Requirements
Sign Type        Maximum Number Maximum Area   Maximum Height Location       Additional
                                                                             Requirements
Permanent signs:                                                          
                                                                             An address
 Address signs  1 per street   6 sq. ft.      4 ft.          Inside         sign is
  - freestanding frontage                                     property line  required on
                                                                             all premises
                                                                             An address
 Address signs  1 per dwelling 6 sq. ft.      n/a            On wall        sign is
  - wall                                                                     required on
                                                                             all premises
  Residential                                                                See
 identification 1 per dwelling 24 sq. ft.     4 ft.          Inside         subsection
  - freestanding                                              property line  (C)1 of this
                                                                             section
  Residential                                                                See
 identification 1 per public   8 sq. ft.      n/a            On wall        subsection
  - wall         entrance                                                    (C)1 of this
                                                                             section
                                                                             See
 Incidental     n/a            2 sq. ft.      4 ft.          Inside         subsection
  signs                                                       property line  (C)2 of this
                                                                             section
                 As set forth   As set forth   As set forth   As set forth
                 in the         in the         in the         in the
                 Illinois       Illinois       Illinois       Illinois
                 Department of  Department of  Department of  Department of
 Traffic        Transportation Transportation Transportation Transportation  
  control        Manual on      Manual on      Manual on      Manual on
                 Uniform        Uniform        Uniform        Uniform
                 Traffic        Traffic        Traffic        Traffic
                 Control        Control        Control        Control
                 Devices        Devices        Devices        Devices
Temporary signs:                                                          
                 3 total; see                                                See
 For sale/rent  additional     6 sq. ft.      4 ft.          8 ft. from     subsection
  signs          requirements                                 property line  (C)3 of this
                                                                             section
 Free speech    n/a            n/a            n/a            Inside          
  signs                                                       property line
Other signs:                                                              
                                                                             See
 Institutional                                                          subsection
  signs                                                                      (C)5 of this
                                                                             section
 
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1578, 8-18-2014; Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
   (C)   Supplemental Rules:
      1.   Permanent Signs: Permanent signs in residential districts must bear
no commercial message other than one directly related to a business or
occupation conducted on the premises lawfully and in full compliance with this
title.
      2.   Incidental Signs: Incidental signs are generally intended to provide
warnings or information, such as "no parking", "no trespassing", "dangerous
dog", and similar information. Incidental signs may not bear any commercial
message.
      3.   Temporary Signs:
         (a)   Residents or owners of units in the RE, R1A, R1 and R2 districts
are entitled to a total of three (3) temporary signs per dwelling unit at any
one time, only one of which may bear a commercial message.
         (b)   Residents or owners of property in R3 district are entitled to a
total of three (3) temporary signs per dwelling unit or three (3) temporary
signs per driveway, whichever is less.
         (c)   The only commercial messages allowed on temporary signs in these
districts are the following:
            (1)   A message directly related to a permitted nonresidential use
on the premises, conducted lawfully and in full compliance with this title, not
including home occupations;
            (2)   A message pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises; or
            (3)   A message related to an occasional sale (such as a garage or
yard sale), held lawfully and in compliance with applicable ordinances of the
city.
         (d)   Temporary signs may be used to express the opinion of the owner
or occupant on any matter deemed by the person to be of public interest but may
not bear commercial messages.
         (e)   A temporary real estate sign must be removed within ten (10)
days after the transfer of title or change of occupancy of the property. A
temporary free speech sign that relates to an election or other event must be
removed within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the election or other
event. A temporary sign pertaining to an occasional sale must be removed within
one business day following the end of the sale.
      4.   Illumination:
         (a)   Single-Family Districts: A temporary or permanent sign in RE,
R1A, R1 or R2 districts must not be separately illuminated. This paragraph is
not intended to prohibit the installation of such a sign near a porch light or
yard light, which may incidentally illuminate the sign.
         (b)   Multi-Family Districts: A permanent sign in the R3 district may
be separately illuminated by direct, white light that does not flash or move,
and which will not result in glare or spillover exceeding 0.50 foot-candle at
the nearest property line. Temporary signs in these districts may not be
separately illuminated.
      5.   Institutional Signs: Any educational institution, religious
institution or other institutional use permitted in the residential zoning
districts will be permitted the following signs in place of the permanent signs
otherwise allowed in these districts:
         (a)   One freestanding sign not more than thirty two (32) square feet
in area and not more than six feet (6') in height; up to fifty percent (50%) of
the area may be changeable copy area;
         (b)   One wall sign for each public entrance to the institution; each
sign may be no more than four (4) square feet in area;
         (c)   Any institutional sign may be separately illuminated by direct,
white light that does not flash or move, and which will result in glare or
spillover not exceeding 0.50 foot-candle at the nearest property line.
      6.   Flags: The display of flags in residential districts will be subject
to the following limitations:
         (a)   A flag may not bear commercial messages;
         (b)   There may be no more than two (2) flags per pole;
         (c)   No flag may be larger than five feet by eight feet (5' x 8');
         (d)   A flagpole must have a setback of at least five feet (5') from
any property line;
         (e)   No rooftop flagpoles are permitted in any district;
         (f)   There may be no more than one flagpole on a building lot; and
         (g)   No flagpole may have a height of greater than twenty feet (20'),
measured by the same methods used to measure the height of signs. (Ord. 1379,
6-9-2008)
14-7-5: SIGNS ALLOWED IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
In all business districts, the following signs are permitted, subject to the
requirements set forth in this chapter and the further requirements for signs
located in the B1 Downtown Commercial District in section 14-7-10, Downtown
Sign Zone.
 
Sign Type              Maximum     Maximum     Maximum     Location    Illumination Additional
                       Area        Height      Dimensions                           Requirements
                       All signs   All signs   All signs   All signs   All signs    All signs
                       permitted   permitted   permitted   permitted   permitted in permitted in
Residential signs      in the      in the      in the      in the      the          the
                       residential residential residential residential residential  residential
                       districts   districts   districts   districts   districts    districts
                                   30 ft.; 4                                        See
                                   ft. above                           See          subsection
                                   roof/       15 ft. tall Inside      subsection   (A) of this
Advertising signs      375 sq. ft. parapet,    x 25 ft.    property    (A)4 of this section.
                                   whichever   wide        line        section      Permitted
                                   is higher                                        only in the
                                                                                    B2 district
Business signs:                                                                 
                       20% total                                       See          See
    Wall signs     wall area,  n/a         n/a         On building subsection   subsection
                       including                           wall        (B)9 of this (B) of this
                       windows                                         section      section
                                                                                    See
                       200 sq.                                         See          subsection
                       ft.; 24 sq. 25 ft.; 6               Inside      subsection   (B) of this
    Freestanding sift. in the  ft. in the  n/a         property    (B)9 of this section. Not
                       B3 district B3 district             line        section      permitted in
                                                                                    the B1
                                                                                    district
    Sandwich board                                     Inside
signs                  6 sq. ft.   3 ft.       n/a         property    Prohibited    
                                                           line
 
   (A)   Additional Regulations For Advertising Signs:
      1.   Location: An advertising sign is subject to the following locational
standards:
         (a)   It must be located entirely within the property line of the
zoning lot on which it is located;
         (b)   It must not be between any front building line and the street;
         (c)   It must not be located within two hundred feet (200') of another
advertising sign; and
         (d)   It must not be located within fifty feet (50') of a residential
zoning district if the sign will be visible from the residential district.
      2.   Signs Near Parks: No advertising sign may be erected within five
hundred feet (500') of any public park of more than five (5) acres in area if
the sign will be legible from any part of the park.
      3.   Illumination: Advertising signs may be separately illuminated by
direct, white light that does not flash or move, and which will not result in
glare or spillover at the nearest property line.
   (B)   Additional Regulations For Business Signs:
      1.   Freestanding Signs:
         (a)   Signs, clocks or other devices erected on standards, poles, or
separate supports must be placed so as to be entirely within the property lines
of the premises upon which they are located.
         (b)   Signs located in the B2 district within seven hundred fifty feet
(750') of an exit ramp of an interstate highway may be increased to a height to
three hundred twenty feet (320') above the elevation of the nearest point on
the freeway, but not more than seventy feet (70') in total height.
      2.   Projecting Signs: Projecting signs are allowed only in the B1
district subject to the following standards:
         (a)   Projecting signs may project no more than 4.5 feet from the
building wall and no more than eighteen inches (18") above the roof or parapet;
         (b)   Projecting signs must be no closer than two feet (2')
horizontally from the curb or edge of the sidewalk, and no closer than nine
feet (9') vertically to the walkway below; and
         (c)   All projecting signs must be installed or erected in such a
manner that minimizes visibility of support structures such as angle irons or
braces.
      3.   Marquee Signs:
         (a)   Any sign located on a marquee or canopy must be affixed flat to
the surface of the marquee or canopy;
         (b)   Marquee signs may not extend vertically or horizontally beyond
the limits of the marquee or canopy, except that individual, freestanding
letters may project to a height not exceeding twelve inches (12") above same;
         (c)   They must be supported only by attachment to a building and may
not extend more than six feet (6') beyond the building. No posts may be used
for support;
         (d)   Vertical clearance above the sidewalk must be at least nine feet
(9'); and
         (e)   Marquees or canopies thicker than eighteen inches (18") must be
beveled horizontally at a forty five degree (45°) angle to permit an
unobstructed view of adjacent property.
      4.   Awning Signs: Awning signs are subject to the following
restrictions:
         (a)   No awning sign may cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the
surface of the awning;
         (b)   Lettering height on awning signs may not be greater than sixteen
inches (16");
         (c)   Letters that are eight inches (8") or less in height will not be
considered part of the total sign area permitted for the property but will be
subject to the other provisions of this subsection;
         (d)   Any sign located on an awning must be affixed flat to the
surface of the awning;
         (e)   The awning may not be internally illuminated or backlit;
         (f)   The awning must be supported only by attachment to a building
and may not extend more than six feet (6') beyond the building. No posts may be
used for support; and
         (g)   Vertical clearance above the sidewalk must be at least nine feet
(9'), except that retractable awnings may have a clearance of not less than
eight feet (8').
      5.   Sandwich Board Signs:
         (a)   Sandwich board signs may only be displayed in the B1 and B2
districts during business hours, may not block required means of egress from
any building.
         (b)   Sandwich board signs may not be illuminated.
      6.   Shopping Center Signs:
         (a)   For an integrated planned business development in single
ownership and management, or under unified control, one additional sign may be
erected, not exceeding four hundred (400) square feet in area.
         (b)   This sign may advertise only the name, location, and special
events of the integrated shopping center and the names of the tenants therein.
         (c)   The sign must be placed so as to be entirely within the property
lines of the premises upon which it is located.
         (d)   When the sign is mounted on a pole, the bottom edge of the sign
must be at least nine feet (9') above the grade of the adjacent street. The
overall height of the sign may not exceed twenty five feet (25') above grade of
the adjacent street or above the adjoining ground level if the ground level is
above the street level.
      7.   Wall Signs: Wall signs are permitted in all business districts,
subject to the following standards:
         (a)   Wall signs are not permitted on the side of any building facing
and located within one hundred feet (100') of a residential zoning district;
         (b)   Projecting and marquee signs will be considered wall signs for
purposes of computing the permitted sign area;
         (c)   A wall sign, other than a projecting sign (where permitted) may
not extend more than sixteen inches (16") from the surface of the wall; and
         (d)   A wall sign may not project more than twelve inches (12") above
the top of a structural wall of the building. Wall signs may not be installed
on fences or on architectural projections serving no purpose other than as
signboards.
         (e)   No sign may be placed on any wall, fence or standard facing the
side of any adjoining lot located in a residential district.
      8.   Changeable Copy: Up to twenty five percent (25%) of the permitted
sign face area of any freestanding sign in the B2, B3 and B4 districts may be
used for changeable copy, subject to the illumination limitations set out in
the next subsection.
      9.   Illumination:
         (a)   Limits When Adjoining Residential Property: Illumination on
business signs must be shielded so that the glare or spillover is no more than
one foot-candle at the property line adjoining any residential zoning district.
         (b)   Illumination In The B3 District: Signs in the B3 district may
not be internally illuminated.
         (c)   Flashing Lights: Flashing lights, intermittent type
illumination, rotating beams, beacons or illumination resembling an emergency
light are prohibited.
         (d)   Changing Signs: Electronic changes of copy are permitted on
signs in the B2 and B4 districts.
      10.   Flags: The display of flags in nonresidential districts will be
subject to the following limitations:
         (a)   A flag may not bear commercial messages;
         (b)   There may be no more than two (2) flags per pole;
         (c)   No flag may be larger than five feet by eight feet (5' x 8');
         (d)   A flagpole must have a setback of at least five feet (5') from
any property line;
         (e)   No rooftop flagpoles are permitted in any district;
         (f)   There may be no more than three (3) flagpoles per principal
building on any development site;
         (g)   No flagpole may have a height of greater than thirty feet (30'),
measured by the same methods used to measure the height of signs; and
         (h)   Each flagpole must be within thirty feet (30') of the principal
entrance to the building to which it is oriented.
   (C)   Regulation Of Electronic Message Display Panel Advertising Signs:
      1.   Characteristics: An electronic message display panel advertising
sign includes the following characteristics: A separate portion of a sign
capable of displaying fixed or changing text, characters, figures or images
using, light emitting diodes (LED), liquid crystal display (LCD), fiber optics,
light bulbs, or other illumination devises that can be electronically changed
by remote or automatic means.
      2.   Definitions: The following terms for these panels shall be defined
as follows:
    BACKGROUND ANIMATION: The appearance of movement on a sign that creates a
special effect or scene set in the background of a sign, but where the
informational message portion displays static content in the foreground of the
sign.
   CHARACTER: A letter, number, punctuation mark or decimal point.
   DISSOLVE: Where static messages are changed by means of varying light
intensity or pattern, or where the first message gradually appears to dissipate
and lose legibility simultaneous to the gradual appearance and legibility of
the subsequent message.
   FADE: Where static messages are changed by means of varying light intensity,
or where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not
being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the
point of legibility.
   FLASHING: A pattern of changing light illumination where the sign
illumination alternates suddenly between fully illuminated and fully
nonilluminated for the purpose of drawing attention to the sign.
   FOOT-CANDLE: One foot-candle is the equivalent light that a single wax
candle would produce if it were viewed from one foot (1') away.
   FOREGROUND ANIMATION: The use of movement or some element thereof, to depict
action or create a special effect or scene in the foreground of the sign.
   SCROLLING: Where the message is changed by the apparent vertical movement of
the letters or graphic elements of the message.
   STATIC: Graphics having no motion or movement of any type.
   TEXT: Graphics consisting of letters, words, numbers, punctuation or decimal
points only, that do not include any animation or video.
   TRAVEL: Where the message is changed by the apparent horizontal movement of
the letters or graphic elements of the message.
   VIDEO: Moving images that are a sequence of images of continuous motion, and
breaking it up into discrete frames for subsequent display.
      3.   Special Regulations For Electronic Message Display Panel Advertising
Signs:
         (a)   Number Of Display Panels: There shall only be one permitted sign
per lot that may contain an electronic message display panel. Location shall be
a minimum distance of fifty feet (50') from a residential district.
         (b)   Static Images Only: Sign content/messages shall not consist of
video, and shall not move, blink, animate, flash, or behave in any other way
which constitutes or implies motion. Images shall remain static except during
transition.
         (c)   Length Of Display (Dwell Time): Electronic message display panel
advertising signs are permitted to change their message no more than once every
five (5) seconds. The use of background animation is permitted so long as
flashing is prohibited.
         (d)   Transitions: There shall be no foreground animation, traveling,
or scrolling between displayed messages.
         (e)   Automatic Dimming: Electronic message display panel advertising
signs shall be equipped with light sensing devices which automatically dim the
intensity of the light emitted by the sign during ambient low light and
nighttime (dusk to dawn) conditions. No sign shall exceed an illumination level
of 0.3 foot-candle above ambient light as measured using a foot-candle meter at
a distance of the square root of the product of the area of the EMC display
panel and 100 (v[Xx100] = measuring distance with "X" being the area of the
display panel).
         (f)   Maintenance: Electronic message display panel advertising signs
shall be properly maintained. Bulbs, LEDs, pixels and the like shall be in
working, properly illuminating condition at all times. Malfunctioning
electronic message display signs shall be turned off within twenty four (24)
hours of the malfunction.
         (g)   Existing Electronic Message Display Panel Advertising Signs: All
electronic message display panel advertising signs lawfully in existence prior
to the effective date hereof shall conform to the requirements in subsections
(C)3(b) through (C)3(e) of this section within one year of the date of passage
hereof. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1587A, 11-24-2014; Ord. 1879, 8-7-2023)
14-7-6: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
Temporary cloth signs and temporary banners will be permitted for up to a total
of thirty (30) days in any calendar year, which may be divided into as many as
three (3) separate periods, upon the issuance of a temporary sign permit. The
following additional limitations apply:
   (A)   The total area of temporary promotional signs on one zoning lot at one
time may not exceed two hundred (200) square feet; and
   (B)   Detached temporary signs will be subject to the height and location
limits applicable to a freestanding or ground sign on the property. (Ord. 1379,
6-9-2008)
14-7-7: SIGN PERMITS:
Signs regulated by this chapter but not exempted by the provisions of
subsection
14-7-1(C) of this chapter may be erected only after issuance of a permit by the
zoning administrator. A permit will be issued only according to the following
requirements and procedures:
   (A)   Application: An application for construction, creation or installation
of a new sign or for modification of an existing sign must be accompanied by
detailed drawing to show the dimensions, design, structure, and location of
each particular sign. One application and permit may include multiple signs on
the same lot.
   (B)   Procedures: The following procedures will govern the application for
and issuance of all sign permits under this chapter:
      1.   All applications for sign permits must be submitted to the zoning
administrator on an application form provided by the zoning administrator or
according to application specifications published by the zoning administrator.
      2.   Each application for a sign permit must be accompanied by the
applicable fees, as established by the city council from time to time by
resolution.
      3.   Within five (5) business days of receiving an application for a sign
permit, the zoning administrator must review it for completeness. If the zoning
administrator finds that it is complete, the application will then be
processed. If the zoning administrator finds that it is incomplete, the zoning
administrator will, within the same five (5) day period, send to the applicant
a notice of the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with
references to the applicable sections of this title.
      4.   Within seven (7) days of the submission of a complete application
for a sign permit, the zoning administrator will either:
         (a)   Issue the sign permit, if the proposed sign conforms in every
respect with the requirements of this title and other provisions of the city
ordinances; or
         (b)   Deny the sign permit if the proposed sign fails in any way to
conform to the requirements of this title or other provisions of the city
ordinances. In case of a denial, the zoning administrator must specify in the
denial the section of this title or other applicable ordinance with which the
sign is inconsistent.
   (C)   Lapse Of Sign Permit On Vacated Or Unoccupied Property: A sign permit
will lapse automatically if the business license for the premises lapses, is
revoked, or is not renewed. A sign permit will also lapse if the business
activity on the premises is discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty
(180) days or more and is not renewed within thirty (30) days of a notice to
the last permittee, sent to the premises, that the sign permit will lapse if
the activity is not renewed.
   (D)   Permits For Temporary Signs: Temporary signs on private property are
allowed only in accordance with the provisions of section
14-7-6 of this chapter:
      1.   A temporary sign permit will allow the use of temporary signage for
a specified period subject to all of the requirements for temporary signs in
this chapter; and
      2.   A temporary sign will become an illegal sign if not removed upon the
expiration of the period covered by the permit. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-7-8: UNSAFE, OBSOLETE OR NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   (A)   Unsafe Signs:
      1.   If the zoning administrator finds that any sign is unsafe or
insecure, or is a menace to the public, he must give written notice to the
person to whom the building permit has been issued.
      2.   If the owner fails to remove or alter the sign to bring it into
compliance with this title within ten (10) days after the notice, the zoning
administrator may remove or alter the sign to comply at the expense of the sign
permit issuee or owner of the property upon which it is located.
      3.   The zoning administrator may cause any sign that is an immediate
peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice.
      4.   The zoning administrator is responsible for the inspection of the
condition of signs and to investigate complaints issued regarding signs.
   (B)   Obsolete Signs:
      1.   Any obsolete sign that does not advertise a bona fide business
conducted or a product sold, must be taken down and removed by the owner,
agent, or person using the structure upon which the sign is located.
      2.   Removal must occur within ten (10) days after written notification
from the zoning administrator. Upon failure to comply with the notice within
the time specified in the notice, the zoning administrator may cause removal of
the sign. Any expenses related to removal must be paid by the property owner
where the sign is located.
      3.   At the time of termination of a business or commercial or industrial
enterprise, all signs pertaining to the use must be removed from public view.
   (C)   Nonconforming Signs: All signs not in conformance with this chapter
must be removed, altered, or converted to conform to the provisions of this
chapter not more than five (5) years after the effective date specified in
section
14-1-2 of this title, except for windblown signs as defined in section
14-14-2 of this title which must be removed, altered, or converted to conform
to the provisions of this chapter not more than ninety (90) days after the
effective date as specified in section
14-1-2 of this title. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-7-9: MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   All signs must be adequately maintained to keep them in a state of
good appearance and repair. Painted signs will be considered in need of
refinishing if:
      1.   Twenty percent (20%) or more of the surface is missing or shows
evidence of peeling, checking, cracking, or blistering of the paint.
      2.   Twenty percent (20%) or more of the surface shows evidence of
mildew.
      3.   The colors used have faded appreciably and the surface sheen is
gone.
   (B)   All sign framing and support structures must be adequately maintained
to keep them in a state of good appearance and repair.
   (C)   Illuminated signs will be considered in need of repair if twenty
percent (20%) or more of the light bulbs are not fully illuminated, or if
twenty percent (20%) or more of the surface area of an internally illuminated
sign is not illuminated. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-7-10: DOWNTOWN SIGN ZONE:
   (A)   Downtown Sign Zone Boundaries:
      1.   The Downtown Sign Zone is composed of all B1, Downtown Commercial
District, zoned properties.
   (B)   Intent:
      1.   The Downtown Sign Zone is intended to preserve the character of the
downtown area, while promoting the economic vitality of downtown businesses.
   (C)   Standards:
      1.   Number Of Signs:
         (a)   Each storefront shall be limited to two (2) signs, one primary
sign and one secondary sign. The primary sign shall be located on the building
façade, above any storefront display windows and below the sill of any second
story windows. Secondary signs may be projecting signs or painted on a door or
window, not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the door or glass area.
      2.   Projection Signs:
         (a)   Projecting signs may project no more than four and one-half feet
(4.5') from the building wall and no more than eighteen inches (18") above the
roof or parapet. Projecting signs must be no closer than two feet (2')
horizontally from the curb or edge of the sidewalk, and no closer than nine
feet (9') vertically to the walkway below. All projecting signs must be
installed or erected in such a manner that minimizes the visibility of its
support structures, such as angle irons or braces.
      3.   Ground Signs:
         (a)   Sandwich board signs may be displayed in the Downtown Sign Zone,
provided that they may not block the means of egress from any building and are
not illuminated. Such signs may only advertise the business(es) located on the
premises and may only be left out during business hours.
      4.   Awnings And Canopies:
         (a)   Existing awnings and canopies should be retained and repaired,
if possible. New awnings and canopies should be complimentary in placement,
proportion, and color to the building's original fixtures. Vinyl, plastic, or
metal awnings and canopies are discouraged. Lettering on awnings may be
appropriate for primary or secondary signage, and lettering may be painted or
sewn onto the valance.
      5.   Style And Materials:
         (a)   Consideration of neighboring buildings, as well as the whole
block, should be given when choosing colors and materials. Matching original
historic signage should be attempted when possible. Wooden signs with raised
lettering, metal signs, painted signs, and neon and gold leaf signs are all
appropriate in the Downtown Sign Zone. Nationally distributed or mass produced
signs should be avoided.
   (D)   Prohibitions:
      1.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, or any
ordinance passed by the City to the contrary, flashing signs, LED, LEC or
similar signs, including electronically controlled message centers, are
prohibited in the Downtown Sign Zone. (Ord. 1879, 8-7-2023)
14-7-11: INTERSTATE 80 SIGN ZONE:
A special sign zone two thousand five hundred (2,500) lineal feet from the
centerline of the median of Interstate Route 80 is hereby established. Within
the Interstate 80 Sign Zone sign limitations are as follows:
   (A)   Billboards shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet.
   (B)   Projecting signs shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet.
   (C)   Freestanding signs shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet
per face, or six hundred (600) square feet in total area.
   (D)   The maximum height of all freestanding signs shall be forty feet
(40').
   (E)   The minimum distance between one freestanding sign and another
freestanding sign shall be five hundred feet (500').
   (F)   No advertising sign, the informative contents of which are to be
visible from a park or expressway, may be erected within five hundred feet
(500') of any public park of more than five (5) acres in area.
   (G)   No portion of any sign shall be located closer than ten feet (10')
from the property line.
   (H)   All other provisions of this Chapter that do not conflict with the
above-mentioned provisions shall apply to the Interstate 80 Sign Zone. (Ord.
1879, 8-7-2023)
CHAPTER 8
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
14-8-1: Purpose
14-8-2: Definitions
14-8-3: Base Flood Elevation
14-8-4: Duties Of The Zoning Administrator
14-8-5: Development Permit
14-8-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
14-8-7: Protecting Buildings
14-8-8: Subdivision Requirements
14-8-9: Public Health And Other Standards
14-8-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
14-8-11: Variances
14-8-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
14-8-13: Penalty
14-8-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
14-8-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by
the Illinois municipal code 1  in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 1490, 8-1-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
14-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
14-8-3 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
   (A)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
   (B)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
   (C)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
   (D)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
   (E)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
   (F)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
   (G)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
(1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Spring Valley,
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Spring Valley, or that may be
annexed into the city of Spring Valley, that are subject to inundation by the
base flood. The floodplains of the city of Spring Valley are generally
identified as such on panel numbers 0430 and 0450 of the countywide flood
insurance rate map of Bureau County prepared by the most recent Federal
Emergency Management Agency flood map. Floodplain also includes those areas of
known flooding as identified by the community.
   The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Bureau County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Spring Valley or that
may be annexed into the city of Spring Valley are generally identified as such
on the flood insurance rate map prepared for Bureau County by the most recent
Federal Emergency Management Agency flood map.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Illinois River and Spring Creek
shall be as delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Bureau
County prepared by FEMA and dated August 2, 2011. The floodways for each of the
remaining floodplains of the city of Spring Valley shall be according to the
best data available from the federal, state, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   (A)   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
   (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   (C)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
   (D)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM: Illinois department of natural resources/office
of water resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary area of
six hundred forty (640) acres or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of
any stream serving a tributary area of six thousand four hundred (6,400) acres
or more in a rural area. Construction on these streams requires a permit from
the department (Ill. adm. code title 17, part 3700.30). The department may
grant approval for specific types of activities by issuance of a statewide
permit which meets the standards defined in section
14-8-6 of this chapter.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
14-8-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced or
after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   (A)   Built on a single chassis;
   (B)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter,
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes "repetitive loss" (see definition).
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter, during the life of the building in which the cumulative percentage of
improvements:
   (A)   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
   (B)   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
The term does not include:
   (A)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   (B)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or the Illinois register of historic places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided.
(Ord. 1490, 8-1-2011; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-8-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Illinois River and
Spring Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
countywide "Flood Insurance Study Of Bureau County" prepared by the most recent
Federal Emergency Management Agency flood map. The base flood elevation for
each floodplain delineated as an "AH zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation
(or depth) delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Bureau
County.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Bureau
County shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Putnam and LaSalle Counties that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city of Spring Valley or that may be annexed into the city
of Spring Valley, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
"Flood Insurance Study Of Putnam Or LaSalle Counties" prepared by the most
recent Federal Emergency Management Agency flood map.
(Ord. 1490, 8-1-2011; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-8-4: DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the general administration of
this chapter and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains
under the jurisdiction of the city of Spring Valley meet the requirements of
this chapter. Specifically, the Zoning Administrator shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with section
14-8-5 of this chapter;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
14-8-6 of this chapter;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
14-8-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built"
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
14-8-8 of this chapter;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
14-8-9 of this chapter;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
14-8-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
14-8-13 of this chapter as are necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map.
(Ord. 1490, 8-1-2011; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-8-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the building inspector. The building inspector shall
not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
14-8-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
(Ord. 1490, 8-1-2011)
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the building
inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation.
Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to be higher
than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled after the
date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is not in the floodplain and
therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not shown on the
current flood insurance rate map is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
The building inspector shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification. (Ord. 1577, 8-18-2014)
The building inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit not
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The building
inspector shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local
permits have been obtained. (Ord. 1490, 8-1-2011)
14-8-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the Illinois department of natural resources/office of water
resources statewide permit number 2;
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 3;
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 4;
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 5;
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities such as underground utility lines,
light poles, signposts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet and
raising buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any
other activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6;
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7;
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8;
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 9;
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10;
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11;
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12;
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 13;
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in subsection (A) of this
section may be permitted only if:
      1.   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 1490, 8-1-2011)
14-8-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   (A)   In addition to the state permit and damage prevention requirements of
section
14-8-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section within twenty four (24) months of the date the damage
occurred.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in section
14-8-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         (e)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters.
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation, and
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            (3)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            (4)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.
         (d)   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the
interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed
four feet (4') at any point.
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event.
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection (B) of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile
home tiedown act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection (D) of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect.
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and
      10.   Must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred seventy six (576) square feet (24 feet x 24 feet).
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 1490, 8-1-2011)
14-8-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The city of Spring Valley council shall take into account hazards, to the
extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land management
use and development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of sections
14-8-6 and
14-8-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain; where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable, and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 1490, 8-1-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
14-8-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
14-8-6 and
14-8-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
14-8-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as "development" shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 1490, 8-1-
2011)
14-8-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, the city of Spring Valley shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 1490, 8-1-2011)
14-8-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the city of Spring Valley
zoning board of appeals for a variance. The zoning board of appeals shall
review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its
recommendation to the Spring Valley city council. The city council may attach
such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the
intent of this chapter.
   (A)   Conditions: No variance shall be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (B)   Notification: The Spring Valley zoning board of appeals shall notify
an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of the building
protection standards of section
14-8-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Historic Structures:
      1.   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
14-8-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
the term "historic structure" in section
14-8-2 of this chapter, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
14-8-6 and
14-8-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
         (a)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
         (b)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure
being removed as a certified historic structure.
   (D)   Agriculture: Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall
be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's
unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as
well as those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter.
In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to
public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any
variance issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at grade and
wet floodproofed.
      1.   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farmhouses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
      2.   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
      3.   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall
framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood
elevation, must be built with flood resistant materials in accordance with
section
14-8-7 of this chapter.
      4.   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with
section
14-8-7 of this chapter. All of the building's structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
      5.   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with section
14-8-7 of this chapter.
      6.   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters in accordance with subsection
14-8-7(B) of this chapter.
      7.   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of section
14-8-6 of this chapter. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures
within any designated floodway.
      8.   Wet floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the floodplain administrator and a registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for
construction. (Ord. 1490, 8-1-2011)
14-8-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the city of Spring Valley or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 1490, 8-1-2011)
14-8-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the building inspector may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The
city shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The city of Spring Valley shall make application to the circuit
court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such
other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this
chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      4.   The city of Spring Valley shall record a notice of violation on the
title of the property.
   (B)   The city attorney shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
The city attorney is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of
the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing, indicate the
reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve
the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the zoning board of appeals. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the zoning board of appeal
shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Spring Valley from taking
such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord.
1490, 8-1-2011)
14-8-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city of
Spring Valley to fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance
program. However, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or
ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this chapter
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinance easements, covenants or
deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 1490, 8-1-2011)
CHAPTER 9
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
14-9-1: Improvements Required
14-9-2: Construction Of Subdivision Improvements
14-9-3: Performance Guarantees
14-9-4: Homeowners' Association Responsibilities
14-9-5: Monuments
14-9-6: Easements And Dedications
14-9-7: Blocks
14-9-8: Lots
14-9-9: Streets
14-9-10: Sidewalks
14-9-11: Landscaping
14-9-12: Water Supply Systems
14-9-13: Sewage Disposal Facilities
14-9-14: Stormwater Management Facilities
14-9-1: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
   (A)   Subdividers are responsible for the construction, installation and
maintenance of the following improvements in accordance with the standards of
this title in addition to any federal, state or local standards:
      1.   All roads within the subdivision and improvements to existing roads
required for safe and adequate access to the subdivision as may be required by
this title;
      2.   Water supply and wastewater systems;
      3.   Stormwater management facilities;
      4.   Electrical improvements;
      5.   Any other improvements required by this chapter or required at the
time of preliminary plat approval.
   (B)   The requirements of this chapter also apply to nonsubdivision
development when such improvements are required to serve the development, or as
otherwise specifically stated in this title. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-9-2: CONSTRUCTION OF SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   Compliance With Requirements: Before a final plat will be approved,
the city engineer must certify that the improvements described in the
subdivider's plans and specifications, together with agreements, meet the
minimum requirements of all provisions of this title and that they comply with
the following:
      1.   Where not specified by this chapter, all construction work must
comply with the provisions of the most recent version of the "Standard
Specification For Road And Bridge Construction" adopted by the Illinois
department of transportation, commonly referred to as the "standard
specifications".
      2.   Where not specified by this chapter, design standards must comply
with the provisions of the most recent version of the "Highway Standards"
manual as published by the Illinois department of transportation, commonly
referred to as the "Highway Standards".
   (B)   Deviation From Plans And Specifications: No substantial deviation from
the plans and specifications as approved by the city engineer will be allowed
without the written permission of the city council. Field changes will be
allowed by the city engineer. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-9-3: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES:
   (A)   Forms And Conditions Of Performance Guarantees: Performance guarantees
must be made payable to the city in the form of a surety bond, letter of
credit, certificate of deposit, or another surety instrument acceptable to the
city council. The guarantee must be conditioned upon the performance of all
work necessary to complete the specified improvements. Should the developer
fail to properly install all improvements within the term of the guarantee, the
city may draw on the funds to complete the improvements. Until official
acceptance of the improvements by the city, the owner is responsible for all
maintenance of the required improvements.
      1.   Amount: The amount of the guarantee must be a minimum of one hundred
percent (100%) of the estimate of the probable cost of the improvements,
estimated by the owner and approved by the city council.
      2.   Term: Guarantees must be posted for a minimum eighteen (18) month
period. Upon request by the property owner, the city council, for good cause
and with the approval of the provider of the guarantee, may extend the term for
up to one additional year. However, as a condition of extension of the
guarantee the city council is authorized to request an updated cost estimate
and increased guarantee for the remainder of the outstanding improvements, if
it determines that the original guarantee may no longer be sufficient to cover
the current cost of the outstanding improvements.
      3.   Release Of Guarantee: The performance guarantee will be released
when:
         (a)   All improvements are completed according to approved plans and
the requirements of this title, and are certified by all appropriate agencies;
         (b)   Four (4) sets of approved as built plans for all improvements
have been submitted to the city, including one mylar copy;
         (c)   Final waiver of liens for all materials and labor necessary for
the installation of improvements is submitted; and
         (d)   Final acceptance has been made by the city council. (Ord. 1379,
6-9-2008)
14-9-4: HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION RESPONSIBILITIES:
Where required to be established, a homeowners' association as defined by this
title is responsible for enforcement of private covenants and restrictions
within a subdivision, condominium, or other specified development. The
association must be established and approved as a condition of plat or
development approval and is responsible for the cost and maintenance of all
private streets, common open space, landscape areas (which may include those
within cul-de-sac islands, around identification signs and within required
transition yards), stormwater facilities, and other private facilities within a
development that are not dedicated to the public. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-9-5: MONUMENTS:
   (A)   Two (2) permanent monuments must be placed at exterior corners of each
subdivision. Permanent monuments must be concrete, six inches (6") in diameter
with an iron bar or pipe at least five-eighths inch (5/8") in diameter and
thirty inches (30") long at the center of the monument.
   (B)   All lot corners, exterior corners, points of curvature, and points of
tangency not marked by permanent monuments must be marked by iron pipes or bars
at least one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and thirty inches (30") in length.
   (C)   A minimum of one permanent elevated bench mark must be established for
each subdivision. This monument must be constructed according to the
requirements for permanent monuments as described in this section. (Ord. 1379,
6-9-2008)
14-9-6: EASEMENTS AND DEDICATIONS:
   (A)   Access Easements (Private Streets): Private streets are not permitted,
except that the plan commission may approve private streets that serve three
(3) or fewer lots. Private streets, if approved, must be constructed according
to the standards for roads in this title, and means must be established for
private maintenance. Private streets must be labeled on the final plat as
follows: "This subdivision contains private streets that will not be maintained
by the city or any other public agency. Property owners within the subdivision
are responsible for all maintenance". A sign identifying the street as a
private street must be placed at the street's entrance, according to city
specifications. The maintenance of private streets will be the responsibility
of the abutting property owners or established homeowners' association.
   (B)   Utility Easements: Utility easements must be provided for any overhead
or underground utility service and must be at least twelve feet (12') wide.
Easements must be located across lots or along rear or side property lines and
must be designed to provide continuity of alignment from block to block and to
adjoining unsubdivided areas.
   (C)   Watercourse And Drainage Easements: Where a subdivision is traversed
by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, a stormwater easement or
drainage right of way conforming substantially to the lines of the watercourse
must be provided.
   (D)   Land Dedications:
      1.   Whenever the plan commission determines that a park, recreation
area, school site, library or other public space should be located in whole or
in part in the proposed subdivision, the plan commission will request the
dedication of those sites or will require their reservation for a period of one
year following the date of the final approval of the subdivision plat. If a
governmental agency passes a resolution expressing its intent to acquire the
reserved land within the reservation year, the reservation period will be
extended for one additional year.
      2.   Land to be dedicated to the public must be labeled on the final plat
as follows: "Dedicated to the (public agency) for (intended use of dedicated
land)".
      3.   All lands offered to the city for use as streets, alleys, schools,
parks, libraries and other public uses must be referred to the plan commission
for review and recommendation before being accepted by the council or by any
other governing authority of the city. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-9-7: BLOCKS:
   (A)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks must be determined with due
consideration given to:
      1.   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the type of use
contemplated;
      2.   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;
      3.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic; and
      4.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   (B)   Blocks must be at least four hundred feet (400') long but no longer
than one thousand eight hundred feet (1,800'). Crosswalk easements are required
for blocks more than eight hundred feet (800') long. Crosswalk easements must
be at least twelve feet (12') wide and located where deemed necessary by the
plan commission. The plan commission may also require additional crosswalks to
provide safe and convenient access to schools, parks, shopping areas or other
destinations. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-9-8: LOTS:
   (A)   The lot size, dimensions, shape and orientation must be appropriate
for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
   (B)   Lot dimensions and areas must conform to the requirements of chapter 4
of this title.
   (C)   All side property lines must be substantially at right angles to the
street right of way, or radial to curved street right of way.
   (D)   All residential lots must front directly on a public street or a
permanent access easement to a public street that is at least twenty feet (20')
wide, as permitted by subsection
14-9-6(A) of this chapter.
   (E)   Double frontage and reversed frontage lots are to be prohibited in
residential districts except where necessary to provide separation of
residential development from traffic arteries.
   (F)   Lots abutting a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream must have
additional width or depth as required to provide an adequate building site and
afford the minimum usable area required in chapter 4 of this title for front,
rear and side setbacks.
   (G)   Excessive depth in relation to width should be avoided. The depth of a
lot should not exceed three (3) times its average width. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-9-9: STREETS:
   (A)   General:
      1.   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets must be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such
streets.
      2.   In the case of tentative plats for parts of tracts, where it appears
necessary to the plan commission for the satisfactory overall development of an
area, an owner may be required to prepare at least a street plan of his entire
tract based upon proper topographic surveys before approval of any portion of
such plan.
      3.   Whenever an area is subdivided into lots of forty thousand (40,000)
square feet or more that may at a later date be resubdivided, consideration
must be given to the street and lot arrangement of the original subdivision so
that additional minor streets can be located to permit a logical arrangement of
smaller lots.
      4.   In the layout of all subdivisions, due regard must be given to the
preservation of historical sites and natural features such as large trees,
watercourses and scenic views.
   (B)   Street Layout: The arrangement of streets in a subdivision must
either:
      1.   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
principal streets in surrounding area; or
      2.   Meet a particular situation where topographical, drainage or other
conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable.
   (C)   Frontage Roads:
      1.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major
highway or interstate highway, the plan commission may require:
         (a)   Frontage roads;
         (b)   Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
reservation along the rear property line;
         (c)   Deep lots with rear service alleys;
         (d)   Other treatments as necessary for protection of residential
properties and to separate through and local traffic.
      2.   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way
or limited access highway right of way, the plan commission may require a
street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right of way, at a
distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, for park
purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in
the appropriate districts. Such distances must be determined also with due
regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
   (D)   Half Streets Prohibited: No building permit will be issued for the
construction of a building on a lot that abuts a public right of way dedicated
to one-half (1/2) or less of its proposed width.
   (E)   Street Dimensions: All streets must conform to the following
requirements:
 Arterial Collector And Local                                     Industrial
 Streets  Multi-Family  Residential Frontage Roads Business Parks Parks
          Streets       Streets
                         Collector  Local
              Arterial   And Multi- Residential  Frontage Business   Industrial
              Streets    Family     Streets      Roads    Parks      Parks
                         Streets
                                    66' (curb/
Right of way  80' - 100' 70'        gutter); 66' 50'      80' - 100' 80' - 100'
width                               (no curb/
                                    gutter)
Pavement                            33' (curb/
width (back   48' - 72'  36'        gutter); 24' 28'      48'        40'
of curb to                          (no curb/
back of curb)                       gutter)
Minimum
radius of
horizontal    600'       400'       100'         200'     500'       400'
curves (road
centerline
dimension)
Vertical
curve sight
distance
(measured at  400'       300'       200'         200'     400'       400'
4.5' above
the center of
the roadway)
Minimum
tangents
between
reverse       200'       200'       100'         100'     200'       200'
curves (road
centerline
dimension)
Maximum       3%         3%         6%           6%       3%         3%
gradient
Minimum       0.4%       0.4%       0.4%         0.4%     0.4%       0.4%
gradient
Minimum curb
tangents at   30'        25'        25'          25'      30'        30'
street
intersections
 
   (F)   Intersections:
      1.   Streets must intersect as nearly to right angles as possible, with
no intersection less than sixty degrees (60°).
      2.   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty
five feet (125') are prohibited.
   (G)   Cul-De-Sac Streets:
      1.   Permanent dead end streets may not be longer than eight hundred feet
(800') and must be provided with a cul-de-sac turnaround with a pavement radius
of at least forty five feet (45') and a right of way radius of at least sixty
five feet (65'). Other types of turnarounds are prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2498.gif]
 
      2.   Where a cul-de-sac island is provided, the island must be landscaped
and the pavement width must be twenty seven feet (27'). Landscape islands
within cul-de-sac islands must be maintained by the adjoining property owners
or established homeowners' association.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2500.gif]
 
   (H)   Stub Streets:
      1.   Where an existing street terminates at the boundary line of a
proposed subdivision, the street must be continued in the proposed subdivision
unless natural conditions on the adjacent property preclude continuation of the
street.
      2.   When a proposed street terminates at the subdivision boundary, right
of way lines and pavement must extend to the subdivision boundary if the
adjacent property is undeveloped. The following notation must be placed on the
final plat: "Future access connection for adjacent development".
   (I)   Alleys:
      1.   Alleys are prohibited in residential areas except where approved by
the plan commission.
      2.   Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial districts. The
plan commission must refer any variations to the city council for waiving this
requirement if provisions are made for service access such as off street
loading, unloading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed.
      3.   Where provided, alleys must have a minimum right of way width of
twenty feet (20').
      4.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment must be avoided
where possible, but where necessary, corners must be cut off sufficiently to
permit safe vehicular movement.
      5.   Dead end alleys must be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable,
must be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as
determined by the plan commission.
   (J)   Surfacing: The following types of street surfacing are minimum
requirements:
      1.   Local Residential Streets:
         (a)   Three inch (3") bituminous surface on an eight inch (8")
compacted aggregate base; or
         (b)   Six inch (6") concrete surface on a four inch (4") compacted
aggregate base.
      2.   Arterial And Collector Streets: Four inch (4") thick bituminous
surface on a twelve inch (12") compacted aggregate base.
   (K)   Curbs And Gutters:
      1.   Concrete curbs (type B-6.12 as specified in the most recent edition
of the highway standards of the Illinois department of transportation) must be
installed on all new streets, except in detached single-family subdivisions
where a mountable curb of similar dimensions may be approved by the city
engineer, the planning commission, and the city council.
      2.   Where curb and gutter are not required, streets must be constructed
with:
         (a)   Three inch (3") thick bituminous surface on eight inch (8")
compacted aggregate base for street construction;
         (b)   Shoulders consisting of the same material as the required
aggregate base course, extending two feet (2') beyond each edge of the
bituminous surface;
         (c)   Ditches a minimum of two feet (2') deep with slopes no steeper
than four to one (4:1); and
         (d)   Minimum twelve inch (12") diameter pipe culverts for driveways
and minimum fifteen inch (15") diameter pipe culverts for crossroad culverts.
   (L)   Street Names: Street names may not be similar to or duplicate the
names of existing streets. New streets that are extensions of existing streets
must bear the name of the existing street. All street names are subject to the
approval of the plan commission.
   (M)   Street Signs And Markers: The subdivider must purchase and install
street name signs that conform to the standards of the city at one corner of
each street intersection.
   (N)   Streetlights: Streetlights must be installed at all intersections and
at the end of all cul-de-sac and stub streets. Installation of lighting must
meet all current city specifications. Payment must be made by the developer to
the city for the installation of lighting standards, poles, brackets,
luminaries, lamps and wiring meeting all current city specifications. (Ord.
1379, 6-9-2008)
14-9-10: SIDEWALKS:
   (A)   Applicability:
      1.   For properties being subdivided, sidewalks are required on both
sides of the street in the following instances:
         (a)   Streets in residential subdivisions consisting of lots with an
average lot area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or less;
         (b)   In subdivisions near or containing schools or along arterial or
collector streets where heavier traffic volumes may present safety problems for
pedestrians, as required by the city council;
         (c)   In all multi-family or attached single-family subdivisions; and
         (d)   In all mixed use or nonresidential subdivisions.
      2.   For properties being subdivided, sidewalks are required on one side
of the street in residential subdivisions consisting of lots with an average
lot area greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. This requirement
may be waived if a system of paved trails or pedestrian walkways is provided.
      3.   For properties being subdivided, the planning commission can
recommend to the Spring Valley city council that the Spring Valley city council
approve a subdivision without sidewalks and, if the Spring Valley city council
concurs with the recommendation of the planning commission, the provisions of
this section dealing with sidewalks can be eliminated or modified.
   (B)   Dimensions And Locations:
      1.   Sidewalks must be constructed a minimum of one foot (1') from the
property line.
      2.   Sidewalks on collector and arterial streets and streets fronting on
multi-family, commercial or industrial development must be at least five feet
(5') wide.
      3.   Sidewalks for single-family development must be at least four feet
(4') wide.
      4.   Sidewalks must be constructed of concrete and must be at least four
inches (4") thick. Sidewalk thickness must be at least six inches (6") at
driveways.
      5.   Sidewalks must connect to existing adjacent sidewalk networks where
practicable.
      6.   Sidewalks must be constructed in accordance with the most recent
requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act and the most recent
standards promulgated by Illinois Department of Transportation for sidewalk
construction.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-9-11: LANDSCAPING:
   (A)   All improved areas within the dedicated street area or other public
use areas and all yards must be graded and seeded.
   (B)   One tree must be planted along street frontages between the building
line and the front and corner property lines of each lot. Once planted, the
maintenance of these trees is the responsibility of the property owner.
Required street trees must be installed on an individual lot prior to issuance
of a letter of occupancy for that lot in accordance with section
14-11-20 of this title. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-9-12: WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS:
   (A)   General:
      1.   No subdivision may be approved without water supply systems that
comply with this section, or the posting of surety bonds guaranteeing such
improvements.
      2.   All water supply systems must be designed and constructed according
to all applicable rules, regulations and standards contained in ordinances of
the city of Spring Valley, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and
the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois". All water supply systems must be designed at a minimum of one inch
(1") in diameter or larger to provide adequate water pressure and flow for the
intended use, including fire protection, and must be approved by the city
engineer.
   (B)   Public Water Systems: The facilities on the site must be designed and
installed to connect to the public water system with approval by the city
engineer, in accordance with the requirements of this section.
   (C)   Water System Design And Construction:
      1.   Water mains, fire hydrants and services must be provided to serve
all lots and to provide for reasonable expansion of the system.
      2.   Water mains must be designed using the criteria of the state of
Illinois department of health and the Illinois environmental protection agency
in regard to the Ten State Standards. All water mains must be constructed of
ductile iron or approved PVC of at least two hundred (200) pounds' pressure.
When possible, water mains must be interconnected so as to avoid "dead ends".
All valves must be enclosed in valve boxes.
      3.   Fire hydrants must be located within two hundred feet (200') of all
dwellings and must be of manufacture approved by the city with auxiliary valves
and boxes. Hydrants must be spaced no more than four hundred feet (400') apart.
      4.   Water services must be type "k" copper at least one inch (1") in
diameter. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-9-13: SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES:
   (A)   General:
      1.   No subdivision may be approved without sewage disposal facilities
that comply with this section, or the posting of surety bonds guaranteeing such
improvements.
      2.   All sewage disposal facilities must be designed and constructed
according to all applicable rules, regulations and standards contained in
ordinances of the city of Spring Valley, the Illinois environmental protection
agency, the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois", and all other applicable agencies. Plans, specifications, and
construction must be approved by the Illinois environmental protection agency,
and the city engineer. Before recommending approval of a subdivision, the plan
commission must consider the availability of sewage disposal facilities to the
proposed subdivision. Regardless of the location or lot size, a subdivision
will be disapproved if the city engineer finds that the drainage, soil
conditions, disposal facilities or other conditions may create a hazard to
public health.
   (B)   Public Sewer Systems: The facilities on the site must be designed and
installed to connect to the public sewer system with the approval of the city
engineer according to the requirements of this section, unless an individual
sewage collection and disposal system is permitted under subsection (C) of this
section.
   (C)   Individual Sewage Collection And Disposal Systems: The city requires
that lots be serviced by public sewage collection and disposal systems. The
city council will not consider approval of a preliminary plat or building
permit for lots that are not proposed to be serviced by public sewage and
disposal facilities unless no public sewer is available within two hundred feet
(200') to the nearest point of the closest lot of the proposed subdivision and
written approval for construction of such facilities have been provided by
Bureau County health department. Any request for individual sewage collection
and disposal systems must be approved by the Bureau County health department
and Illinois private sewage disposal code which control their design. Where
septic systems and individual wells are approved by the city and county, data
regarding their location and construction specifications must be included on
the final plat as required by this title.
   (D)   Sewer System Design And Construction:
      1.   Sanitary sewers and services of approved design and capacity with a
minimum earth cover of three feet (3') must be provided to serve all lots and
to provide for reasonable expansions of the system.
      2.   Sanitary sewers must be designed using the criteria of the state of
Illinois department of health and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
      3.   Sanitary sewer manholes must be located at points that will minimize
the possibility of submergence in storms. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-9-14: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES:
   (A)   Applicability: The regulations of this section apply to all
development, as described herein.
   (B)   Cost Of Construction: A properly designed storm sewer system must be
provided at the expense of the owner or developer of a subdivision or other
tract of land as required by this section.
   (C)   Permits:
      1.   Storm Sewer Permits:
         (a)   No connection to or extension of any storm sewer in the city may
be made until a permit has been issued.
         (b)   Storm sewer application permits must be accompanied by three (3)
sets of plans and specifications for review prepared by a registered
professional engineer of Illinois.
         (c)   When the plans and specifications are approved and a permit has
been issued, the applicant must furnish the city with an additional three (3)
sets of plans and specifications.
         (d)   The city must be given an advance notice of forty eight (48)
hours before any construction begins.
      2.   Excavation Permits:
         (a)   A permit is required for any excavation for constructing,
repairing or replacing a storm sewer in any location.
         (b)   A cash deposit for ground restoration in the amount set by the
city council must be paid prior to issuance of an excavation permit. The ground
must be restored to the city's standards. If the ground is not restored to the
city's specifications, restoration may be completed at the city's expense with
costs deducted from a required deposit amount, with the balance of the deposit
returned after all restoration has been completed.
   (D)   Certificate Of Insurance:
      1.   Any person, firm or corporation performing work under this section
must take out and maintain during the construction of the project liability and
property damage insurance that will protect him, the city and the city's
representatives from claims from liability and property damages that may arise
from construction of the work.
      2.   The city must be furnished certificates of insurance issued by the
companies carrying the risk, and the certificates must be in form and substance
satisfactory to and approved by the city.
   (E)   Design And Construction Standards: The design and construction of the
storm sewer system and stormwater storage facilities within the jurisdiction of
the city must conform to the most restrictive of the requirements contained in
the latest edition of the following regulations, standards and specifications,
which will be on file in the city clerk's office:
      1.   "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois".
      2.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", Illinois
department of transportation.
      3.   "Design Manual", state of Illinois, department of public works and
buildings, division of highways, bureau of design.
      4.   "Highway Standards", state of Illinois, department of public works
and building division of highways, bureau of design.
      5.   "Manual Of Policies And Procedures", location and environment,
Illinois department of transportation.
      6.   Standards adopted by the metropolitan sanitary district of Greater
Chicago.
   (F)   Rainwater Drains: No rainwater drain may discharge onto any sidewalk
or public way, and no drain may discharge onto any public street or alley at a
height greater than eighteen inches (18") above grade.
   (G)   Storm Sewers For Impervious Areas:
      1.   Storm sewers and catch basins must be provided for all impervious
surface areas larger than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet when
a public storm sewer is no more than one hundred feet (100') from the property
line measured along a public right of way or sewer system easement.
      2.   One catch basin must be provided for the first thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet of impervious area and one additional catch basin must be
provided for every additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious
area or fraction thereof.
      3.   All other impervious areas must be designed to drain to a public
street or an existing open watercourse. No drainage may be allowed to pass onto
adjoining property or over public sidewalks unless at the point where a
driveway intersects the sidewalk.
   (H)   Subdivisions: No plat may be approved for a subdivision that is
subject to periodic flooding or which contains poor drainage facilities and
which would make adequate drainage of the lots and streets impossible. However,
if the subdivider agrees to make improvements that will, in the opinion of the
city engineer, make the area safe for residential occupancy and provide
adequate lot and street drainage, the preliminary plat of the subdivision may
be approved.
   (I)   Connection Of Sanitary Wastes To Storm Sewers Or Watercourses: No
sanitary sewage may discharge into any portion of the city storm drainage
system or any watercourse.
   (J)   Storm Sewer Capacity:
      1.   Storm sewer capacities must be designed for a minimum 10-year storm
frequency. Storm sewer capacities will be determined using the rational formula
(Q = CiA, where Q = peak runoff rate in cubic feet/second, C = runoff
coefficient, i = average intensity of rainfall in inches/hour, A = drainage
area in acres).
      2.   When stormwater storage is required, provision must be made to
transport stormwater runoff from a 100-year storm frequency from the fully
developed area of the site to the stormwater storage area. The additional
stormwater runoff resulting from the design for a 100-year storm frequency may
be transported to the stormwater storage area over streets, parking areas,
parks, playgrounds or other open spaces, including utility easements.
      3.   The storm sewer system must have adequate capacity to adequately
drain all tributary drainage areas through the property, and there will be no
compensation to the owner or developer by the city for the increased pipe sizes
and construction costs, if any.
      4.   In any subdivision, lot, or parcel of land where it is determined by
the city engineer that the storm sewer would be larger than ninety six inches
(96"), based on a 20-year storm frequency, then a ditch or drainage channel
meeting the following standards may be used if the council so approves.
         (a)   With grades to four percent (4%), ditch may have earth bottoms
and sod banks.
         (b)   With grades greater than four percent (4%), ditches must be
paved.
         (c)   All ditches must have side slopes of not less than three to one
(3:1).
         (d)   Easements for all ditches must be dedicated to the city and
there must be provided in addition to the necessary width required for the
ditch, a strip of land on each side of the ditch of a width of fifteen feet
(15'), such distance to be measured perpendicular to trees, poles, structures
and other obstructions. The slope of these side areas to the ditch may not
exceed five percent (5%). There may be no trees, bushes, or obstructions of any
kind placed in this area.
         (e)   Culverts or bridges must be provided at all street crossings and
must be sized to eliminate flooding or ponding of water and must have a minimum
cover of twelve inches (12"). Culverts or bridges must be reinforced concrete
or precast reinforced concrete pipes with necessary headwalls. Culverts or
bridges must extend a minimum of five feet (5') past each right of way line of
the street and must extend far enough to provide a minimum slope of three to
one (3:1) from the right of way line down to the invert of the pipe.
         (f)   All ditches, bridges and culverts must be located and designed
in accordance with current applicable standards as amended from time to time
and requirements of the city engineer.
         (g)   All culverts or bridges must be provided with suitable railings
and/or guardrails as required and approved by the city.
   (K)   Manholes And Catch Basins: Manholes must be provided at all changes in
direction and at intermediate points not exceeding three hundred fifty feet
(350') apart. Catch basins with curb inlets must be provided as required by the
"Design Manual", state of Illinois, department of public works and buildings.
   (L)   Stormwater Storage Facilities:
      1.   Where Required:
         (a)   Nonresidential Development: A properly designed stormwater
storage facility must be provided by the developer of all nonresidential
developments that contain an area greater than one acre or, if less than one
acre, where fifty percent (50%) or more of the area is covered with impervious
improvements, unless an approved facility exists for the property. This
requirement does not apply to replacement of improvements on property in cases
where the impervious coverage of the development is not increased.
         (b)   Residential Development: Stormwater storage must be provided for
all residential developments larger than two (2) acres. This requirement does
not apply to replacement of improvements on property in cases where the
impervious coverage of the development is not increased.
      2.   Basis Of Design:
         (a)   The necessary volume of stormwater storage will be calculated on
the basis of a 100-year storm frequency using the criteria established by the
metropolitan sanitary district of Greater Chicago. The volume required will be
that necessary to handle the runoff for a 100-year storm for any and all
durations, from the fully developed drainage area of the site tributary to the
reservoir less that volume discharged during the same duration as the allowable
release rate.
         (b)   No stormwater storage will be required for off site upstream
areas.
         (c)   Flows from off site tributary areas resulting from a 10-year
storm frequency will be drained through the storm sewer system provided for the
site. Off site flow in excess of the 10-year storm frequency must be bypassed
through the site as overland flow and must be calculated using the 100-year
storm frequency.
   (M)   Allowable Release Rate: The allowable release rate of stormwater
runoff from the developed drainage area of the site must not exceed the
existing capacity of the downstream storm sewer system or drainage channel, but
in no case may the discharge be more than the runoff of the existing site using
a "C" factor of 0.2 and a 5-year rainfall frequency in the rational formula. No
outlet pipe may be of a diameter of less than eight inches (8") and of a
diameter so as not to restrict the designed allowable release rate from any
stormwater storage facility. Outlet control facilities other than pipes must be
constructed of reinforced concrete. Outlet pipes from storage areas must be
approved by the city. This limitation applies only to improvements constructed
pursuant to building permits applied for after the effective date specified in
section
14-1-2 of this title.
   (N)   Bypass:
      1.   The drainage system that is provided for the site must have adequate
capacity to safely bypass through the development the flow resulting from a
100-year storm frequency from all upstream areas assuming the land is in a
fully developed state under present zoning or proposed zoning outlined in the
comprehensive plan. The flow must be calculated using a runoff coefficient of
not less than 0.50. An allowance must be made for any upstream stormwater
storage that has actually been provided.
      2.   The required bypass area for stormwater in excess of the volume
handled by the storm sewer system may consist of streets, parking areas, parks,
playgrounds or other open spaces, including utility easements. There may be no
habitable structures located within this bypass area that is used as a
floodway, and this bypass area may not be reshaped or restricted in any way to
reduce its effective capacity.
      3.   The design of the bypass area must take into consideration the
control of the stormwater velocity to prevent erosion. The side slopes on any
drainage swale may not be steeper than three to one (3:1).
   (O)   Stormwater Storage Areas: The required volume of stormwater storage
may be provided in paved parking areas and in reservoirs with either a wet or
dry bottom. Alternate types of stormwater storage areas must be approved by the
city engineer.
      1.   Parking Areas: The stormwater storage areas must be designed so that
the accumulation of water at any point in the parking lot during peak rainfall
does not exceed eight inches (8"). The parking lot must be sloped to drain at a
minimum of one percent (1%). The finished floor elevation of all buildings must
be set so that no damage would occur if a storm in excess of the 100-year storm
frequency occurs or if the drainage outlet becomes plugged.
      2.   Dry Bottom Reservoirs:
         (a)   A dry bottom type of reservoir may be designed to serve a
secondary purpose for recreation, open space or other types of uses that will
not be adversely affected by periodic flooding.
         (b)   A paved ditch with a slope of not less than 0.50 percent will be
required from the inlet pipe or structure to the outlet pipe or structure to
prevent erosion of the bottom of the reservoir when the capacity of the inlet
pipe exceeds five (5) cfs or when the inlet pipe has a constant flow, even
during dry weather. In certain cases, dry bottom reservoirs must have a pipe
underdrain system as required by the city engineer. The paved ditch must meet
the requirements for paved ditches contained in the "Highway Standards", state
of Illinois, department of public works and buildings, division of highways,
bureau of design.
         (c)   The grassed bottom of the reservoir must slope to drain to the
outlet or paved ditch at a minimum of one percent (1%) slope. The side slopes
on the earth berm around the reservoir must not be steeper than four to one (4:
1) and the earth berm at the top may not be less than ten feet (10') wide.
         (d)   The inlet and outlet pipes or structures from the reservoir must
be self-operating and require very limited maintenance. An emergency overflow
spillway must be provided from the reservoir in the event a storm in excess of
the 100-year storm frequency occurs. The inlet and outlet pipes or structures
must be provided with safety bars with maximum openings of six inches (6") to
provide for the safety of children.
      3.   Wet Bottom Reservoirs:
         (a)   Wet bottom storage reservoirs must be constructed to conform to
the current applicable requirements. The minimum depth from the normal water
level to the bottom of the side slope must be four feet (4'). A minimum of
twenty five percent (25%) of the pond area must be constructed to a minimum
depth of ten feet (10') to provide for fish.
         (b)   Proper measures must be provided by the developer to prevent the
water from becoming stagnant.
         (c)   Where the soil in the bottom of the reservoir is too permeable
to hold water, the bottom must be sealed by an accepted method approved by the
city engineer.
         (d)   The inlet and outlet pipes or structures from the reservoir must
be self-operating and require very limited maintenance. An emergency overflow
spillway must be provided from the reservoir in the event a storm in excess of
the 100-year storm frequency occurs. The inlet and outlet pipes or structures
must be provided with safety bars with maximum openings of six inches (6") to
provide for the safety of children.
   (P)   Requirements During Construction: Construction operations must be
conducted in such a manner as to minimize erosion potential on the site.
Silting of off site downstream areas must be controlled through the appropriate
use of sedimentation basins, including retention/detention facilities designed
for that purpose, provided that such facilities will be restored to their prior
design configuration upon completion of construction operations. The developer
must indicate the methods and timing of construction to be used for the control
of siltation during construction operations at the time that final engineering
plans are submitted for approval.
   (Q)   Approval: All work required to be done under this section must be
periodically inspected by and approval obtained from the city superintendent in
charge, or city engineer as the work progresses. When the work is completed,
final approval must be obtained from the city superintendent in charge or city
engineer. Before final approval can be obtained, the superintendent in charge
or city engineer must inspect all work and see that it has been completed in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
   (R)   Stormwater Management Facility Maintenance:
      1.   Routine Maintenance: The homeowners' association whose property or
common area includes all or a portion of an open drainage swale, channel,
detention basin or other stormwater management facilities will be held
responsible for the mowing of grass, removal of debris or obstructions to the
flow of water in or through such facilities, removal of silt, and maintenance
and repair due to erosion.
      2.   Nonroutine Maintenance:
         (a)   Nonroutine maintenance, including maintenance activities that
are expensive but infrequent, such as pond dredging or major repairs to
stormwater structures, must be performed on an as needed basis based on
information gathered during regular inspections.
         (b)   A legally binding covenant specifying the parties responsible
for proper maintenance of all stormwater management facilities must be provided
by the developer and approved by the city prior to final plat approval, or for
properties not subject to the plat approval process, prior to the issuance of
site plan approval or building permits, whichever comes first.
         (c)   The maintenance agreement must include a description of
maintenance and repair procedures to be completed, including identification of
components that need to be maintained and standards for maintenance.
      3.   Inspections:
         (a)   The persons or organizations responsible for maintenance must
inspect stormwater management facilities on a regular basis, as outlined in the
maintenance agreement.
         (b)   Authorized representatives of the city of Spring Valley may
enter at reasonable times upon any time to conduct on site inspections or
routine maintenance. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
CHAPTER 10
DECISION MAKING BODIES
SECTION:
14-10-1: Plan Commission And Board Of Zoning Appeals
14-10-2: Zoning Administrator
14-10-3: City Council
14-10-1: PLAN COMMISSION AND BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
   (A)   Establishment: The planning commission of the city of Spring Valley
shall consist of members appointed by the mayor of the city of Spring Valley
and approved by the Spring Valley city council. The Spring Valley board of
zoning appeals shall consist of members appointed by the mayor and approved by
the Spring Valley city council. The planning commission and board of zoning
appeals previously appointed by the Spring Valley city council prior to the
adoption of this title shall be deemed to be reappointed and shall be directed
to act under the terms of this title.
   (B)   Membership:
      1.   The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed
by the mayor and confirmed by the city council.
      2.   The board of zoning appeals shall consist of seven (7) members
appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, two (2) members of
which must also be members of the planning commission.
      3.   Planning commission members and board of zoning appeal members shall
serve staggered three (3) year terms.
      4.   The chairman of the planning commission and the chairman of the
board of zoning appeals shall be designated by the mayor.
      5.   Vacancies will be filled for an unexpired term in the same manner as
appointments for a full term.
   (C)   Meetings And Rules:
      1.   The commission/board must organize and adopt rules of procedure for
its own government according to the provisions of this title.
      2.   Meetings will be held at the call of the chairman and at other times
that the commission/board determines, and must be open to the public.
      3.   Minutes of the proceedings and a record of all actions must be kept
by the acting secretary of either the board of zoning appeals or the planning
commission, showing the vote of each member upon each question, the reasons for
the commission's determination, and its finding of facts. These records will be
filed in the office of the city clerk and are a public record. The city
attorney shall act as acting secretary for all meetings of the planning
commission and board of zoning appeals.
      4.   Decisions on all matters before the planning commission and board of
zoning appeals require a majority vote of a quorum of commission/board members.
   (D)   Plan Commission Powers And Duties: The plan commission has the
following powers and duties:
      1.   To hear and make recommendations regarding applications for text
amendments, zoning map amendments, multi-family design review, special uses,
preliminary plats, final plats and planned developments, according to the
requirements of this title;
      2.   To request assistance from other city officers, departments,
commissions and boards;
      3.   The chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses; and
      4.   Along with the city council, to develop and update the comprehensive
plan to provide planning policies to guide future land use and zoning decisions
and to provide the basis for approval of all development under this title.
   (E)   Board Of Zoning Appeals Powers And Duties: The board of zoning appeals
has the following powers and duties:
      1.   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the zoning administrator, subject to a party appealing
the decision of the board of zoning appeals to the Spring Valley city council
and a final decision on any appeal of the Spring Valley city council;
      2.   To hear and make recommendations to the Spring Valley city council
regarding variations from the requirements of this land development code,
subject to the standards set out in this title.
      3.   To request assistance from other city officers, departments,
commissions and boards; and
      4.   The chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-10-2: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   (A)   Designation: The zoning administrator is designated by the city
council.
   (B)   Powers And Duties: The zoning administrator has the following powers
and duties:
      1.   To have the initial responsibility and authority for the
interpretation and enforcement of this title and all other applicable
ordinances, regulations and codes;
      2.   To enter and inspect any premises, as needed, in the performance of
these duties;
      3.   To attend all meetings of the planning commission and board of
zoning appeals, if requested, for the purpose of providing technical assistance
when requested by the commission/board;
      4.   To review and issue building permits, sign permits, letters of
occupancy;
      5.   To hear and decide applications for interpretations of the use
classifications, land development regulations of this title, and zoning
district boundaries; and
      6.   To serve as a member of and call meetings of the Plan Commission as
needed.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-10-3: CITY COUNCIL:
The city council has the following powers and duties, in addition to those
established by other chapters of this code:
   (A)   Along with the plan commission, the city council must develop and
update the comprehensive plan to provide planning policies to guide future land
use and zoning decisions and to provide the basis for approval of all
development under this title;
   (B)   To designate the zoning administrator;
   (C)   To confirm members of the plan commission and board of zoning appeals;
   (D)   To publish a revised zoning map according to subsection
14-1-8(B) of this title;
   (E)   To give final approval for freestanding wireless communication
facilities;
   (F)   To approve and accept subdivision improvements;
   (G)   To give final approval for preliminary and final plats;
   (H)   To propose and give final approval of text amendments to this chapter
according to section
14-11-2 of this title;
   (I)   To propose and give final approval of amendments of the zoning map
according to section
14-11-3 of this title;
   (J)   To give final approval for special uses and planned developments;
   (K)   To propose and give final approval to any requests for variation from
the requirements of this land development code;
   (L)   To give final approval on applications for multi-family design review;
   (M)   To hear and grant variations from the floodplain protection standards;
and
   (N)   To give final approval for any other actions as required in this
title. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
CHAPTER 11
REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
14-11-1: General
14-11-2: Text Amendments
14-11-3: Zoning Map Amendments
14-11-4: Special Uses
14-11-5: Special Use Procedure
14-11-6: Planned Development Procedure
14-11-7: Site Plan Review
14-11-8: Multi-Family Design Review
14-11-9: Variations
14-11-10: Written Interpretations
14-11-11: Appeals
14-11-12: Subdivision Review And Platting, Generally
14-11-13: Preliminary Plat
14-11-14: Construction Plans
14-11-15: Final Plat
14-11-16: Certificates For Recording Of Final Plat
14-11-17: Variations From Subdivision Requirements
14-11-18: Mobile Home Park Permit
14-11-19: Building Permits
14-11-20: Letter Of Occupancy
14-11-1: GENERAL:
   (A)   Summary Of Procedures: The following table provides a summary of the
review and approval procedures of this chapter. In the event of conflict
between this summary table and the detailed procedures contained elsewhere in
this chapter, the detailed procedures govern.
      1.   Procedures Table:
 
Hearing      = Public hearing required
Final action = Granting of permit, approval, or denial
 
 Zoning Administrator Plan Commission Board Of Zoning Appeals City Council
                 Zoning           Plan Commission Board Of Zoning City Council
                 Administrator                    Appeals
Building permit  Final action                                    
Final plat                       Hearing/                       Final action
                                  recommendation
Letter of        Final action                                    
occupancy
Map amendment                    Hearing/                       Final action
                                  recommendation
Multi-family                     Hearing/                       Final action
design review                     recommendation
Planned                          Hearing/                       Final action
developments                      recommendation
Preliminary plat                 Hearing/                       Final action
                                  recommendation
Special uses                     Hearing/                       Final action
                                  recommendation
Text amendment                   Hearing/                       Final action
                                  recommendation
Variations                                      Hearing/        Final action
                                                  recommendation
Written                                           Hearing/
interpretations  Initial decision                recommendation  Final action
appeals
 
   (B)   Authority To File: Unless otherwise specifically stated in this
chapter, applications may be filed by the owner of the subject property.
   (C)   Application Contents:
      1.   All applications required under this chapter must be submitted in a
form and in such numbers as required by the official responsible for accepting
the application. Application forms are available in the office of the official
responsible for accepting the application.
      2.   Officials responsible for accepting applications must maintain a
list specifying the materials and information to be submitted with each
application filed. The list must be made available to all applicants and to any
other person who requests a copy.
   (D)   Application Completeness:
      1.   An application will be considered complete and ready for processing
only if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes all required
information and is accompanied by the required fee. The official responsible
for accepting the application has authority to determine whether the
application is complete.
      2.   If an application is deemed incomplete, written notice explaining
the deficiencies must be provided to the applicant.
      3.   No further processing of incomplete applications will occur until
the deficiencies are corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by the
applicant within ninety (90) days, the application will be considered
withdrawn.
      4.   An applicant shall be solely responsible for all information
provided to the city and the city assumes no responsibility to verify or
confirm information in an application.
   (E)   Application Filing Fees: Applications must be accompanied by the fee
amount that has been established by the city council. Fees are not required
with applications initiated by the plan commission or city council. Application
fees are nonrefundable.
   (F)   Public Notice:
      1.   Written Notice: When provisions of this chapter require that
"written notice" be provided, such notice must be given as follows:
         (a)   The city clerk, based upon information provided to the city
clerk by the applicant or his agent, must provide written notice to the owners
within one hundred feet (100') of the property lines of the subject property.
         (b)   Written notice must be mailed at least seven (7) days before the
public hearing.
         (c)   All required written notices must be sent by USPS mail.
         (d)   Written notices must contain:
            (1)   The date, time and location of any upcoming public hearings
on the matter;
            (2)   The address of the subject property;
            (3)   A description of the nature and purpose of the application;
            (4)   The name and address of the applicant; and
            (5)   Contact information for additional information on the
application.
         (e)   The city clerk shall mail appropriate notices to the parties
entitled to receive notice based upon the information provided to the city
clerk by the applicant or his agent.
      2.   Published Notice:
         (a)   When provisions of this chapter require that "published notice"
be provided, the city clerk shall be responsible for publishing notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city.
         (b)   The notice must be published at least once, at least fifteen
(15) days but not more than thirty (30) days before the hearing.
         (c)   Published notices must contain:
            (1)   The date, time and location of any upcoming public hearings
on the matter;
            (2)   The address of the subject property;
            (3)   A description of the nature and purpose of the application;
            (4)   The name and address of the applicant; and
            (5)   Contact information for additional information on the
application.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-11-2: TEXT AMENDMENTS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2502.gif]
 
   (A)   Authority To File: Amendments to the text of this title may be
proposed by the city council or plan commission.
   (B)   Public Hearing: The plan commission must hold a public hearing on each
text amendment. Published notice must be provided according to the requirements
of subsection
14-11-1(F)2 of this chapter.
   (C)   Plan Commission Recommendation: The plan commission must review all
proposed text amendments in a public hearing. Following the close of the public
hearing, the plan commission must recommend that the city council approve the
proposed amendment, approve the proposed amendment with modifications or
disapprove the proposed amendment. The plan commission is also authorized to
forward the amendment to city council with no recommendation. The plan
commission's recommendation will be made by simple majority vote of the quorum
present.
   (D)   City Council Action: After due consideration of the plan commission's
recommendation, the city council must take action on the proposed text
amendment. The city council may approve or reject the planning commission's
recommendation by simple majority vote. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-11-3: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2504.gif]
 
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1578, 8-18-2014)
   (A)   Authority To File: Zoning map amendments (rezonings) may be proposed
by the city council, plan commission, or the owner of the property proposed to
be changed.
   (B)   Filing:
      1.   Applications for zoning map amendments must be filed with the city
clerk.
      2.   Applications for all zoning map amendments must be accompanied by
payment of a fee to the city of Spring Valley for the map amendment as per fees
established by the Spring Valley city council.
   (C)   Contents Of Application: The following information must be included
with all applications for zoning map amendments:
      1.   A description of the lot or lots to be rezoned;
      2.   Reasons in support of the proposed zoning map amendment,
specifically addressing the review and approval criteria of subsections (G)1
through (G)6 of this section;
      3.   A lot plan drawn on a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1"
= 100'), showing:
         (a)   The area proposed to be rezoned;
         (b)   The subject area's location and dimensions; and
         (c)   The location, zoning and existing use of all properties within
one hundred feet (100');
      4.   Names and mailing addresses of owners of the subject property and
all properties within one hundred feet (100') of the area to be rezoned; and
      5.   Any additional information required by the plan commission or city
council.
   (D)   Public Hearing: The plan commission must hold a public hearing on each
zoning map amendment application. Written notice and published notice must be
provided according to the requirements of subsections
14-11-1(F)1 and (F)2 of this chapter.
   (E)   Plan Commission Recommendation:
      1.   The plan commission must review all proposed zoning map amendments
in a public hearing. The plan commission must recommend that the city council
approve the proposed zoning map amendment, approve the proposed amendment with
modifications as recommended by the planning commission or disapprove the
proposed amendment.
      2.   The plan commission may recommend rezoning to an alternative zoning
district (i.e., different from that requested by the applicant), provided that
the alternative district is no more intensive than the district requested by
the applicant.
   (F)   City Council Action: After due consideration of the plan commission's
recommendation, the city council must take action on the proposed zoning map
amendment. The city council may approve or disapprove the plan commission's
recommendation by simple majority vote. If a written protest against the
proposed zoning map amendment is filed in accordance with the provisions of
section 11-13-14 of the Illinois municipal code 1  the amendment shall not be
passed except by favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the aldermen of the city
of Spring Valley then holding office.
   (G)   Review And Approval Criteria: In making their recommendations and
decisions, the plan commission and city council must consider the following:
      1.   The existing uses of properties near the subject property;
      2.   The existing zoning classifications of properties near the subject
property;
      3.   Whether the subject property is suitable for the uses permitted
under the existing and proposed zoning districts;
      4.   The trend of development near the subject property, including
changes that have taken place in the area since the subject property was placed
in its current zoning district;
      5.   Whether the proposed zoning map amendment is consistent with the
comprehensive plan; and
      6.   Whether the proposed zoning map amendment is in the public interest
and is not solely in the interests of the applicant. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-13-14.
14-11-4: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses require individual review by the plan commission and city council
to ensure conformance with the intent of the comprehensive plan and to assess
whether the proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses. The review and
approval procedures are described in sections
14-11-5 and
14-11-6 of this chapter. Special uses fit into two (2) basic categories:
   (A)   Single Uses: Single uses or single aspects of permitted uses
specifically identified in this chapter as requiring individual review under
the special use procedure of section
14-11-5 of this chapter.
   (B)   Planned Developments: Complex projects designed to take maximum
advantage of unique site characteristics and use original design concepts are
submitted for review under the planned development procedure of section
14-11-6 of this chapter.
      1.   Purpose: The planned development regulations are intended to:
         (a)   Encourage better development within the city by providing more
flexibility in the application of the provisions of this title;
         (b)   Allow smaller lots when permanent common open space is provided;
         (c)   Allow more than one principal structure on a lot;
         (d)   Allow development where lots do not abut a dedicated and
improved street;
         (e)   Permit diversity in the location of structures; and
         (f)   Shorten the total time involved in the rezoning of property and
subdivision of land.
      2.   Types Of Planned Developments: The following are specific types and
purposes of planned developments:
         (a)   Residential Planned Developments: Residential planned
developments are intended to offer recreational opportunities close to home;
enhance the appearance of neighborhoods by the conservation of streams and
local spots of natural beauty; add to the sense of spaciousness through the
preservation of natural green spaces; counteract the effects of urban monotony
and congestion in the streets; encourage cooperative relationships between
neighbors and participation by all age groups in the use and care of local open
space tracts in new residential subdivisions; and promote harmonious
architecture between adjacent dwellings or in sympathy with the natural
characteristics of the site.
         (b)   Shopping Center Planned Developments: Shopping center planned
developments are intended to promote the cooperative development of shopping
centers each with adequate off street parking; control access points on
arterial and collector streets; separate pedestrian and automobile traffic; aid
in stabilizing property values; develop shopping centers of size and location
compatible with the market potential; buffer adjacent residential areas with
landscaped green spaces; and encourage harmonious architecture between homes
and commercial structures.
         (c)   Manufacturing Planned Development: Manufacturing planned
developments are intended to promote the establishment of planned industrial
areas; permit groups of industrial buildings with integrated design and a
coordinated physical plan; encourage recreational facilities within industrial
areas; and buffer adjacent residential areas with landscaped green areas. (Ord.
1379, 6-9-2008)
14-11-5: SPECIAL USE PROCEDURE:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2506.gif]
 
   (A)   Filing: Applications for special use permits must be filed with the
zoning administrator.
   (B)   Public Hearing: The plan commission must hold a public hearing on the
special use permit application. Written notice and published notice must be
provided according to the requirements of subsections
14-11-1(F)1 and (F)2 of this chapter.
   (C)   Plan Commission Recommendation: The plan commission must recommend
approval, approval with modifications or disapproval of the application. The
plan commission is also authorized to forward the application to city council
with no recommendation.
   (D)   City Council Action: After due consideration of the plan commission's
recommendation, the city council must take action on the proposed special use.
If the city council approves the special use or approves the special use with
modifications, the city council must issue written authorization to the zoning
administrator to issue a building permit. This authorization must remain on
permanent file with the application. The city council may attach special
conditions to the approval to ensure conformance with the intent of the
comprehensive plan.
   (E)   Review And Approval Criteria: In making their recommendations and
decisions, the plan commission and city council must consider whether the
following are true of the proposed use:
      1.   Complies with the applicable standards of this title;
      2.   Is compatible with the character of the surrounding area in terms of
site planning, scale and design;
      3.   Is compatible with the character of the surrounding area in terms of
operating characteristics such as hours of operation, outdoor lighting, noise
and traffic generation; and
      4.   Is in the interest of public convenience and will not have a
significant adverse impact on the general welfare of the neighborhood or area.
   (F)   Conditions Of Approval: When the anticipated impacts of a special use
are determined to have the potential for adverse impacts on surrounding
property, the special use must be denied or conditions must be placed on the
approval to ensure that any adverse impacts will be mitigated. The plan
commission may impose such conditions upon the site planning, design, location
and operation of a special use.
   (G)   Lapse Of Approval:
         1.   Approval granted by the City Council of a special use application
is valid for twelve (12) months from the date of approval unless a building
permit is obtained or the use is commenced. If a building permit is not
obtained or the use is not commenced within that time, the approval will lapse
and become null and void.
         2.   The city council may, at its discretion and upon adequate showing
of good cause, extend the period of validity of special use approval for a
period not to exceed twelve (12) months. The plan commission must receive a
written request from the applicant prior to the expiration of the special use
approval stating the reasons for the proposed extension.
         3.   If a special use is discontinued for a period of six (6) months
or longer, the special use will be considered abandoned and become null and
void. Any reinstatement of the special use will require special use approval
according to the procedures of this section.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-11-6: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURE:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2508.gif]
 
   (A)   Preapplication Conference: Prior to the filing of a preliminary plan,
the developer may submit to the plan commission or city council a generalized
conceptual plan for the proposed development as a means of soliciting informal
input.
   (B)   Preliminary Plan Filing: Ten (10) copies of the preliminary plan must
be submitted to the zoning administrator at least ten (10) days prior to the
meeting of the plan commission at which it is to be considered.
   (C)   Preliminary Plan Contents: The preliminary plan must include:
      1.   A preliminary subdivision plat and legal description, meeting the
requirements of this title with any requested or granted variances so noted;
      2.   A site plan indicating the arrangement and tentative location of
buildings, uses permitted, land to be preserved as permanent common open space,
parking and loading spaces, and other special features of the development plan;
      3.   A draft of the proposed protective covenants whereby the owner
proposes to regulate land use and otherwise protect the proposed development;
      4.   A draft of the proposed incorporation agreement and bylaws including
coverage by liability insurance and maintenance of recreational and other
common facilities with the city as a participant for:
         (a)   A homeowners' association in a residential planned development;
         (b)   A merchants' association in a shopping center planned
development; or
         (c)   An industrial association in a manufacturing planned
development; and
      5.   Data on the market potential necessary to support the location of
site and the size of business uses in a shopping center planned development.
   (D)   Public Hearing: The plan commission must hold a public hearing on the
planned development application. Written notice and published notice must be
provided according to the requirements of subsections
14-11-1(F)1 and (F)2 of this chapter.
   (E)   Plan Commission Recommendation: The plan commission must review the
preliminary plan at a public hearing. Following the close of the public
hearing, the plan commission must recommend that the city council approve the
proposed planned development, approve the planned development with
modifications, or disapprove the planned development. The plan commission is
also authorized to forward the planned development to the city council with no
recommendation. The plan commission's recommendation will be made by simple
majority vote of the quorum present.
   (F)   City Council Action: After due consideration of the plan commission's
recommendation and within thirty (30) days of receipt of the preliminary plan
and report of the plan commission, the city council must take action on the
proposed preliminary plan.
   (G)   Final Plan Filing:
      1.   The final plan must conform substantially to the preliminary plan as
approved.
      2.   If desired by the developer, the final plan may constitute only a
portion of the approved preliminary plan that he proposes to record and develop
at the time, provided that the portion conforms to all requirements of this
title.
   (H)   Final Plan Contents: The final plan must include:
      1.   The final subdivision plat;
      2.   The location and dimensions of the building lots, common permanent
open space, existing permanent buildings, easements, rights of way, legal
description and uses permitted in specific parts of the planned development;
      3.   Protective covenants; and
      4.   An engineer's seal certifying that the plans are drawn in compliance
with city ordinances.
   (I)   Final Plan Approval:
      1.   After the final plan is filed, the plan commission must forward its
findings and recommendations to the city council within forty five (45) days.
      2.   The city council must take action on the final plan within forty
five (45) days of receipt of the final plan and report of the plan commission
and notify the plan commission and developer of its decision.
   (J)   Review And Approval Criteria: The plan commission in making its
findings and recommendations, and the city council in its authorization of a
planned development, must establish that the proposed planned development:
      1.   Is consistent with the comprehensive plan; and
      2.   Complies with the purpose, and all applicable regulations and
conditions of this title.
   (K)   Permanent Common Open Space:
      1.   No plan for a planned development may be approved unless the plan
provides for permanent common open space.
      2.   For the purposes of this section, permanent common open space
includes all areas other than dedicated public streets, parking areas, areas
occupied by principal and accessory structures or buildings and stormwater
management facilities unless designed in a natural manner with native
vegetation with trails or other passive recreational amenities; schools and
recreation buildings will be considered open space.
      3.   Permanent common open space must be provided in the following
amounts:
         (a)   Forty percent (40%) of the total area in a single-family
residential planned development;
         (b)   Fifty percent (50%) of the total area in a multi-family
residential planned development; and
         (c)   Five percent (5%) in a shopping center or manufacturing planned
development.
   (L)   Recording Of Final Plan: Upon approval of the city council, the
applicant must record the subdivision plat (when required), protective
covenants and easements with the Bureau County recorder of deeds or registrar
of titles. Proof of recordation must be provided to the zoning administrator
prior to the issuance of building permits.
   (M)   Effect Of Approval: All final plans filed will:
      1.   Be binding upon the applicants, their successors and assigns;
      2.   Control the issuance and validity of all building permits; and
      3.   Limit the construction, location, use and operation of all land,
land improvements and structures to be located on such plans. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-
2008)
14-11-7: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2510.gif]
 
   (A)   Applicability: No building permit may be issued until required site
plan approval has been granted. Site plan review is required for new
construction and exterior additions for the following:
      1.   Multi-family development with three (3) or more units; and
      2.   Nonresidential development.
   (B)   Filing: Applications for site plan review must be filed with the
zoning administrator who will refer the site plan to the city engineer for
review and comment.
   (C)   Scope: The scope of site plan review includes review of the location
of principal and accessory structures, infrastructure, open space, landscaping,
exterior lighting, traffic and circulation (both vehicular and pedestrian),
number of parking spaces and design of parking lots. In reviewing site plans,
the Plan Commission must evaluate the relationship of the site plan to adopted
land use policies and the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan. In
addition, the committee will evaluate the following characteristics:
      1.   The arrangement of the structures and buildings on the site with
respect to how well it:
         (a)   Allows for the efficient use of the land;
         (b)   Is compatible with development on adjacent property;
         (c)   Minimizes potential impacts on existing or planned municipal
services, utilities, and infrastructure;
         (d)   Protects the public health, safety and general welfare; and
         (e)   Conforms to the requirements of this title and other applicable
regulations.
      2.   The arrangement of open space or natural features on the site with
respect to how well it:
         (a)   Creates a desirable and functional environment for patrons,
pedestrians, and occupants;
         (b)   Preserves unique natural resources;
         (c)   Provides adequate measures to preserve existing healthy, mature
trees and woodlands;
         (d)   Designs drainage facilities to promote the use and preservation
of natural watercourses and patterns of drainage; and
         (e)   Avoids unnecessary or unreasonable alterations to existing
topography.
      3.   Circulation systems with respect to how well they:
         (a)   Provide adequate and safe access to the site;
         (b)   Minimize potentially dangerous traffic movements;
         (c)   Separate pedestrian and auto circulation; and
         (d)   Minimize curb cuts.
      4.   Parking lots or garages with respect to how well they:
         (a)   Are located, designed, and screened to minimize adverse visual
impacts to adjacent properties;
         (b)   Promote logical and safe parking and internal circulation;
         (c)   Provide perimeter parking lot screening and internal landscaped
islands;
         (d)   Include site illumination that has been designed, located and
installed to minimize adverse impacts to adjacent properties.
      5.   Landscaping design with respect to how well it:
         (a)   Creates a logical transition to adjoining lots and developments.
         (b)   Screens incompatible uses.
         (c)   Minimizes the visual impact of the development to adjacent sites
and roadways.
         (d)   Utilizes native plant materials selected to withstand the
microclimate of the city and individual site microclimates.
   (D)   Site Plan Review: The site plan will be reviewed by the zoning
administrator. The zoning administrator shall consider the recommendations made
by the city engineer. When the zoning administrator approves the site plan, a
building permit may be issued provided that the requirements of all other
applicable codes and ordinances are satisfied. If the zoning administrator does
not approve the site plan, the applicant may revise it and submit it for
further review in accordance with this section.
   (E)   Denial And Appeals:
      1.   If the zoning administrator does not approve the site plan, the
applicant may appeal the decision to the board of zoning appeals. The
applicant's failure to submit a revised site plan or to file an appeal will be
considered a withdrawal of the application for a building permit.
      2.   If the applicant chooses to appeal, the written notice of appeal
must be filed with the zoning administrator no later than fifteen (15) days
after the date of the denial. The board of zoning appeals must act on the
appeal no later than thirty (30) days after the date of receipt of the written
appeal. The board of zoning appeals will vote to sustain or deny the appeal. A
majority vote is required to sustain the appeal. If the board of zoning appeals
sustains the appeal, the building permit may be issued, provided that the
requirements of all other applicable codes and ordinances are satisfied.
      3.   An applicant can appeal an adverse decision of the board of zoning
appeals to the Spring Valley city council. The Spring Valley city council may
vote to either uphold or reject the appeal.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-11-8: MULTI-FAMILY DESIGN REVIEW:
   (A)   Applicability: All multi-family developments containing three (3) or
more dwelling units are subject to design review.
   (B)   Filing: Applications for multi-family design review must be filed with
the zoning administrator.
   (C)   Procedure:
      1.   Preliminary and final plats are required according to the planned
development procedure.
      2.   In areas already subdivided and served with streets and all required
improvements, the plan commission may waive the preliminary plat. In this case,
the approved final plat will replace the final plat recorded earlier at the
time of subdivision.
      3.   Site design and flexibility and originality are encouraged within
the limitations of the use and dimensional standards cited for this district.
Preliminary and final plat must conform to the standards for this district and
comply with the comprehensive plan.
      4.   The recorded final plat will provide continuing control over the
completed development as specified in the planned development procedure. (Ord.
1379, 6-9-2008)
14-11-9: VARIATIONS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2512.gif]
 
   (A)   Applicability; Authorized Variations: Variations from the use
regulations of this title are prohibited. This section is intended to allow
variations from the dimensional standards of this title, such as setbacks or
building height; parking requirements; or landscape requirements.
   (B)   Filing: Applications for variations must be filed with the Spring
Valley city clerk.
   (C)   Public Hearing: The board of zoning appeals must hold a public hearing
on the proposed variation. Written and published notice must be provided
according to the requirements of subsections
14-11-1(F)1 and (F)2 of this chapter.
   (D)   Approval Criteria And Review Factors:
      1.   Evidence Of Practical Difficulties Or Particular Hardships: In order
to approve a variation, the board of zoning appeals must find evidence that
practical difficulties or particular hardships exist. The board must find
evidence of all of the following:
         (a)   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only according to the requirements of this chapter;
         (b)   The practical difficulties or particular hardships are due to
unique circumstances and are not generally applicable to similarly situated
property; and
         (c)   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or area.
      2.   Other Review Factors: In determining whether practical difficulties
or particular hardships exist, the board of zoning appeals must also consider
whether the evidence submitted supports the following:
         (a)   The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved would result in a particular
hardship upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the
regulations were strictly enforced;
         (b)   The conditions upon which the petition for variation is based
would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning
classification;
         (c)   The alleged practical difficulty or particular hardship has not
been created by any person presently having an interest in the property;
         (d)   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or harmful to other property or improvements in the neighborhood
or area; and
         (e)   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of
fire, or endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood.
   (E)   Conditions Of Approval: The board of zoning appeals shall make a
written recommendation to the Spring Valley city council on the proposed
variation. The board of zoning appeals may impose conditions and restrictions
upon the subject property as part of its recommendation that are necessary to
avoid or minimize any potentially harmful effects on other property in the
neighborhood, and to carry out the purpose and intent of this title, as stated
in section
14-1-6 of this title. The recommendation of the board of zoning appeals shall
be submitted to the Spring Valley city council and the Spring Valley city
council shall approve or reject the recommendation of the board of zoning
appeals on the proposed variation.
   (F)   Variations From Flood Protection Standards: Upon application and after
fifteen (15) days' notice of a public hearing, the city council may grant a
variance of the standards in chapter 8, "Flood Damage Prevention", of this
title, subject to compliance with the provisions of 44 CFR 60.6 of the rules
and regulations of the national flood insurance program and such other
conditions as the city council deems necessary to comply with the intent of
this chapter. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-11-10: WRITTEN INTERPRETATIONS:
   (A)   Application Filing: Applications for written interpretations must be
submitted to the zoning administrator.
   (B)   Zoning Administrator's Review And Decision: Following receipt of a
complete application for a written interpretation, the zoning administrator
must: 1) review and evaluate the application for compliance with this title in
consistency with the comprehensive plan and any other relevant documents; 2)
consult with other city officials, including the city attorney and city
engineer, as necessary; and 3) render a written opinion.
   (C)   Form: The interpretation must be provided to the applicant in writing
and be filed in the official record of interpretations.
   (D)   Official Record Of Interpretations: An official record of
interpretations must be kept on file in the zoning administrator's office. The
record of interpretations must be available for public inspection in the zoning
administrator's office during normal business hours.
   (E)   Appeals: Appeals of the zoning administrator's written interpretation
may be taken to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with appeal
procedures of section
14-11-11 of this chapter. If the appeal results in a change of interpretation,
the new interpretation must be filed in the official record of interpretations.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-11-11: APPEALS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2514.gif]
 
   (A)   Authority To File: Appeals from the decisions of the zoning
administrator concerning the interpretation, administration or enforcement of
this title may be made by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department,
board or bureau of the city.
   (B)   Filing: A notice of appeal, specifying the grounds for appeal, must be
filed with the zoning administrator and with the board of zoning appeals within
forty five (45) days of the action being appealed.
   (C)   Contents Of Application: The following must be included with all
appeals:
      1.   The name and address of the appellant or applicant and all abutting
and opposite property owners of record;
      2.   A plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing the
location, boundaries, dimensions, elevations, uses, and size of the following:
         (a)   The subject site;
         (b)   Existing and proposed structures;
         (c)   Existing and proposed easements, streets, and other public ways;
         (d)   Off street parking, loading areas and driveways;
         (e)   Existing highway access restrictions;
         (f)   Existing and proposed front, side, and rear yards; and
         (g)   The location, elevation, and use of any abutting lands and their
structures within forty feet (40') of the subject site.
      3.   Additional information required by the board of zoning appeals.
   (D)   Public Hearing: The board of zoning appeals must hold a public hearing
on the appeal. Written notice and published notice must be provided according
to the requirements of subsections
14-11-1(F)1 and (F)2 of this chapter. The board must also notify the appellant
and the zoning administrator of the public hearing.
   (E)   Board Of Zoning Appeals Action: Following the public hearing, the
board of zoning appeals must make written recommendation to the Spring Valley
city council regarding what action should be taken on the appeal. The Spring
Valley city council will then make a final decision on the appeal after
reviewing the written recommendations of the board of zoning appeals. (Ord.
1379, 6-9-2008)
14-11-12: SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND PLATTING, GENERALLY:
   (A)   Geographic Jurisdiction: No land within the city or any unincorporated
area that is located entirely or in part within 1.5 miles of the city limits
may be subdivided except in conformity with this chapter.
   (B)   Plat Requirements: No lots may be sold or offered for sale until the
approved final plat is recorded in accordance with subsection
14-11-15(F) of this chapter. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-11-13: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2516.gif]
 
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1578, 8-18-2014)
   (A)   Preapplication Procedure:
      1.   Preapplication Conference: Prior to the filing of an application for
approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may submit to the plan
commission plans and data as specified in this section. This step does not
require formal application, fee or filing of the plat. The purpose of the
preapplication conference is to give the subdivider an opportunity to receive
the advice and assistance of the plan commission and to consult early and
informally with the plan commission staff before preparation of the preliminary
plat and before a formal application for its approval, in order to save time
and money and to make the most of his opportunities.
      2.   Recommended Preapplication Plans And Data:
         (a)   The general subdivision information should describe or outline
the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary
to supplement the drawing listed below. This information may include data on
existing covenants; land characteristics; available community facilities and
utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number
of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas,
school, playground, park areas, other public areas, proposed protective
covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements.
         (b)   The sketch plan, on topographic survey, should show in simple
sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in
relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil
sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey. The sketch plan
should include the existing topographic data listed in subsection (C)1 of this
section.
      3.   Notification: Within thirty (30) days the plan commission must
inform the subdivider whether or not the plans and data as submitted or as
modified meet the objectives of this title. When the plan commission finds the
plans and data do not meet the objectives of this title, it must express in
writing to the subdivider its reasons for its findings.
   (B)   Filing: The subdivider must prepare a preliminary plat, together with
improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified in this
chapter. Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material
specified must be submitted to the secretary of the plan commission with a
written application for conditional approval.
   (C)   Preliminary Plat Contents:
      1.   Existing Conditions: Topographic data required as a basis for the
preliminary plat must include existing conditions as follows except when
otherwise specified by the plan commission:
         (a)   Boundary lines: Bearings and distances.
         (b)   Easements: Location, width and purpose.
         (c)   Streets on and adjacent to the tract: Name and right of way
width and elevation of surfacing; and legally established centerline
elevations; walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
         (d)   Utilities on and adjacent to the tract: Location, size and
invert elevation of sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of
water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone lines
and streetlights; of water mains and sewers which are not on or adjacent to the
tract, indicate the direction and distance to, and size of nearest ones,
showing invert elevation of sewers.
         (e)   Ground elevations on the tract, based on the city datum plane:
For land that slopes less than one-half percent (1/2%) show not less than one
foot (1') contours, show spot elevations at all breaks in grade, along all
drainage channels or swales, and at selected points not more than one hundred
feet (100') apart in all directions, and for land that slopes more than two
percent (2%) show not less than two foot (2') contours.
         (f)   Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the plan
commission: Location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil,
rock and groundwater conditions; depth to groundwater unless test pits are dry
at a depth of five feet (5'); location and results of soil percolation tests if
individual sewage disposal systems are proposed.
         (g)   Other conditions on the tract: Watercourses, marshes, rock
outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot (1') or more in
diameter, houses, barns, shacks and other significant features.
         (h)   Other conditions on adjacent land: Approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls;
character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and other
nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent
unplatted land; for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name,
recording date, and number, and show approximate percent built up, typical lot
size, and dwelling type.
         (i)   Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
         (j)   Proposed public improvements: Highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the tract.
         (k)   Key plan showing location of the tract.
         (l)   Title and certificates: Present tract designation according to
official records in offices of the county recorder; title under which proposed
subdivision is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owners, notation
stating acreage, scale, north arrow.
      2.   Preliminary Plat Data: The preliminary plat must be drawn to a scale
of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). It must show all existing
conditions required by this section, above, and must show all proposals
including the following:
         (a)   The proposed name of the subdivision.
         (b)   Its location by section, township and range and as forming a
part of some larger tract or parcel of land referred to in the indexes of the
records of the county clerk.
         (c)   Sufficient information to accurately locate the plat. (Reference
to existing streets, plats, etc., may be used. If there are none within a
reasonable distance of the proposed subdivision, a vicinity plat on a small
scale should accompany the preliminary plat.)
         (d)   The description and location of all survey monuments erected in
the subdivision.
         (e)   The names and addresses of the persons to whom the notice of the
hearing should be sent (the subdivider, the designer of the subdivision, and
the owners of the land immediately adjoining the land to be platted).
         (f)   The names, locations, roadway widths, right of way widths,
approximate gradients and other dimensions of streets, alleys, easements, parks
and other open spaces.
         (g)   Sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers,
churches and industry.
         (h)   All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or
reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose indicated. The
areas that are to be maintained by any proposed homeowners' association must be
identified.
         (i)   Location and size of utilities.
         (j)   Block numbers and layout, numbers, dimensions and area of lots.
         (k)   Setbacks, showing dimensions.
         (l)   North arrow, scale and date of preparation.
      3.   Covenants: A draft of protective covenants (if any), by which the
subdivider proposes to regulate land use and otherwise protect the proposed
development must be included. Upon approval, these would be enforced by a
"homeowners' association", as defined by this title.
   (D)   Plan Commission Conditional Approval:
      1.   The plan commission must review the preliminary plat for compliance
with the requirements of chapter 9 of this title. If the plan commission
determines that the plat complies with all requirements of this title, the plan
commission must recommend approval. If the plat does not comply, the plan
commission must recommend disapproval of the preliminary plat and must state
the reasons for disapproval. The plan commission must make its recommendations
within thirty (30) days.
      2.   If the plan commission conditionally approves the preliminary plat,
it must state the conditions of the approval; if it disapproves, it must state
the reasons for disapproval.
      3.   The action of the plan commission will be noted on three (3) copies
of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions applied. One
copy must be returned to the subdivider, one must be forwarded with a report to
the city council, and the other must be retained by the plan commission.
   (E)   City Council Action: The city council must conditionally approve or
deny the preliminary plat upon motion and a majority vote.
   (F)   Effect Of Conditional Approval: Conditional approval of a preliminary
plat does not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather it will be deemed
an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a
guide to the preparation of the final plat. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-11-14: CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
   (A)   Before submitting the final plat, the subdivider must submit three (3)
copies of the final plans and specifications for public improvements to the
plan commission. The following information, at a minimum, must be included:
      1.   Detailed drawings of a grading plan, street improvements plan,
sanitary sewer improvements plan, and water system improvement plan;
      2.   Plans and profiles drawn at a scale not to exceed one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100') horizontally and one inch equals ten feet (1" =
10') vertically, indicating additional horizontal and vertical location of
streets, sewers, and the existing grade; and
      3.   Detailed material and construction specifications concerning the
work to be performed including general conditions to the contract acceptable by
the city; and
      4.   All final plans must be submitted on twenty four inch by thirty six
inch (24" x 36") sheets and must bear the signature and seal of the Illinois
registered professional engineer under whose direction they were prepared.
   (B)   Upon receipt of these final plans, the plan commission must refer them
to the city engineer for his comments and corrections. The city engineer must
review these plans for compliance with the requirements of the city, and must
return them with his recommendations to the plan commission. The city engineer
may, at his discretion, confer with the developer's engineer concerning
correction to the final plans prior to his final recommendations.
   (C)   Upon the completion of all improvements within the subdivision the
subdivider must call for a final inspection by the city engineer.
   (D)   Prior to final approval of improvements, the subdivider must submit
twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") reproducible plans showing the
improvements as actually built.
   (E)   The city engineer will inspect the improvements within the subdivision
for compliance with the certified plans and specifications and the design
standards and specifications of this title.
   (F)   When the city engineer is satisfied that the required improvements
within the subdivision comply with the approved plans and this title, the city
engineer will recommend in writing to the city council that the improvements be
accepted by the city.
   (G)   No building permit will be issued until final inspection is approved
in writing by the city engineer.
   (H)   When the city engineer advises the plan commission chairman, the plan
commission secretary, the city clerk and the mayor that the improvements have
been constructed according to the approved plans and specifications; that all
improvements have been installed or performance guarantees have been posted in
accordance with section
14-9-3 of this title; and that all necessary data are shown on the final plat
as required, then the certificate of approval of final plat will be properly
endorsed by the plan commission chairman and secretary, the mayor and the city
clerk and recorded by the developer. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-11-15: FINAL PLAT:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2518.gif]
 
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1578, 8-18-2014)
   (A)   Relation To Preliminary Plat: The final plat must conform
substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and, if desired by the
subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary
plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time, provided, however,
that the portion conforms to all requirements of this title.
   (B)   Submission To Plan Commission: Preliminary plat approval will lapse
unless four (4) copies of the final plat and other required exhibits are
prepared as specified in subsection (C) of this section and are submitted to
the plan commission within twelve (12) months from the date of preliminary plat
approval. Upon request of the applicant, the plan commission may grant
extensions if the request is made prior to the expiration of the preliminary
plat approval.
   (C)   Final Plat Contents: The final plat must be drawn in ink on tracing
cloth or other permanent plastic base on sheets not to exceed thirty six inches
wide by forty eight inches long (36" x 48") long and must be at a scale of one
inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). Where necessary, the plat may be on
several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision.
For large subdivisions the final plat may be submitted for approval
progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the plan commission. The
final plat must show the following:
      1.   Name of the subdivision;
      2.   Location by township, section, town and range, or by other legal
description;
      3.   Scale one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') (shown
graphically);
      4.   Date and north arrow;
      5.   Boundary of plat, based on an accurate traverse, with angles and
linear dimensions;
      6.   Exact location, width and name of all streets within and adjoining
the plat, and the exact location and widths of all crosswalks; streets that are
obviously in alignment with others already existing and named must bear the
names of the existing streets;
      7.   True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or
official monuments (not less than 3), which must be accurately described in the
plat;
      8.   Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the
lines of the subdivision by distances and angles;
      9.   Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and
lengths of all arcs;
      10.   Location, dimensions and purpose for all easements;
      11.   All block and lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in
feet and hundredths;
      12.   Location and description of permanent monuments or bench marks;
      13.   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be
dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and
of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property
owners. Areas that are to be maintained by any proposed homeowners' association
must be clearly identified with that responsibility expressly stated on the
plat;
      14.   Setbacks, accurately shown by dimension;
      15.   Protective covenants which meet with the approval of the plan
commission must be lettered on the final plat or attached thereto;
      16.   A summary on its face of all restrictions applicable to any part of
such subdivision relating to building restrictions, use restrictions, setbacks
or otherwise; and
      17.   A blank certificate of approval as set out in this section.
   (D)   Documents To Accompany Final Plat: The following documents must
accompany the final plat:
      1.   Certification by a registered surveyor in the form set out in
section
14-11-16 of this chapter; (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
      2.   Notarized certifications, by owner or owners, and by mortgagee or
lienholder of record, acknowledging the plat and dedication of streets and
other public areas; (Ord. 1451, 2-15-2010)
      3.   An agreement executed by the owner and subdivider to make and
install the improvements provided for in this title according to the plans and
specifications accompanying the final plat;
      4.   A notice from the city council stating that the following related to
installation of required public improvements have been filed with and approved
by the council:
         (a)   A certificate by the city engineer that all improvements and
installations to the subdivision required for its approval have been made or
installed in accordance with the specifications; or that a performance
guarantee such as a surety bond, letter of credit, certificate of deposit, or
another surety instrument acceptable to the city council in accordance with
section
14-9-3 of this title has been provided that will:
            (1)   Be in an amount and form determined by the city council to be
sufficient to complete the improvements and installations in compliance with
this title;
            (2)   Be with surety by a company or financial institution entered
and licensed to do business in the state of Illinois that guarantees to the
city availability of an amount determined by the city council to be sufficient
to complete the improvements and installations in compliance with this title;
            (3)   In such form and substance as to be enforceable by the city
against such institution for the purpose of completing the improvements in the
event of default by the developer;
            (4)   Specify the time for the completion of the improvements and
installations;
            (5)   Be held by the city until the final completion of all of the
improvements to be constructed; and
            (6)   Be canceled or refunded to the developer upon certification,
in writing, of the city engineer that the improvements have been completed in
full, and have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications and all of the requirements of this title.
         (b)   Evidence of a deposit of a maintenance bond, certificate of
deposit or other surety instrument acceptable to the city council equal to
fifteen percent (15%) of the estimated cost of improvements to be held by the
city for a period of eighteen (18) months after the final completion of the
work as a guarantee against any defect in the material or workmanship furnished
in connection with such improvement latent in character and not discernible at
the time of the final approval of such improvement, and to guarantee against
any damage to such improvements by reason of settling of the ground, base or
foundation. After the termination of the eighteen (18) month period, the
deposit will be refunded to the depositor, if no defects have developed, or if
defects have developed then the balance of such deposit after reimbursement of
the city for any amounts expended by it in the curing of defects.
      5.   A certificate from the proper collector hereof that he finds no
delinquent general taxes and all special assessments constituting a lien on the
whole or any part of the land to be subdivided have been paid.
   (E)   Approval; Effect:
      1.   Within thirty (30) days after application for approval of the final
plat, the plan commission must approve or disapprove it. The plan commission
must set forth its approval or its disapproval and its reasons for disapproval
on its own records and provide the applicant with a copy.
      2.   Upon approval of the final plat by the plan commission, it must be
submitted to the city council for action. Council approval will be by motion
and majority vote and so recorded in the minutes.
      3.   Final plat approval will lapse unless all required improvements have
been installed and inspected by the city engineer or performance guarantees
approved in accordance with this section and section
14-9-3 of this title have been provided, and the plat has been recorded with
the county recorder of deeds within eighteen (18) months of final plat
approval. Upon request of the applicant, the plan commission may grant one 6-
month extension if the request is made prior to the expiration of the final
plat approval. Any request for extension of the time period for installation of
required public improvements may only be approved by the city council in
accordance with section
14-9-3 of this title.
   (F)   Certification And Recording:
      1.   Upon certification, in writing, by the city engineer, that the
improvements have been constructed in accordance with the approved construction
plans and specifications, that all necessary data are shown on the final plat
as required by this title, or a performance guarantee has been posted in
accordance with this section to ensure installation of all public improvements,
the plan commission and the city council will endorse such plat by their
appropriate officers and the corporate seal of the city affixed thereto.
      2.   When the final plat has been so certified, the developer must record
the plat with the county recorder of deeds prior to lapse of final plat
approval, as described in subsection (E) of this section. If not recorded prior
to the lapse of final plat approval, the approval and certification will be
null and void. Immediately after recording the original, a duly certified copy
of the recorded plat must be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-11-16: CERTIFICATES FOR RECORDING OF FINAL PLAT:
   (A)   The certificate on the final plat must be in the following form with
the signatures of the president of the county commissioners and the county
clerk to be necessary where the plat covers land in the unincorporated one and
one-half (11/2) mile fringe area. Other certificates, affidavits, endorsements
or dedications may be required by the plan commission or city council.
Under the authority provided by 65 ILCS 5/11-15-1, enacted by the State
Legislature of the State of Illinois and an ordinance adopted by the City
Council of the City of Spring Valley, Illinois, this plat was given approval by
the City of Spring Valley and MUST BE RECORDED WITHIN EIGHTEEN MONTHS OF THE
DATE OF APPROVAL BY THE CITY COUNCIL; OTHERWISE IT IS NULL AND VOID.
Approved by the Plan Commission at a meeting held    
Chairman       
Secretary       
Approved by the City Council at a meeting held    
Mayor          
City Clerk       
Approved by the City Engineer:       
Approved by the County Board of Commissioners of Bureau County, Illinois, at a
meeting held       
President       
County Clerk       
   (B)   Each final plat submitted to the city for approval must carry a
certificate signed by an Illinois registered land surveyor in substantially the
following form:
I, (Name), hereby certify that I am an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor in
compliance with the laws of the State of Illinois and that this plat correctly
represents a survey completed by me on (Date); that all monuments shown thereon
actually exist, and material is accurately shown.
SEAL          
Signature       
Illinois Land Surveyor No.    
   (C)   Each final plat submitted to the city for approval must carry a deed
of dedication in substantially the following form:
We, the undersigned, (Name), owners of the real estate shown and described
herein, do hereby layoff, plat, and subdivide said real estate in accordance
with the within plat. This subdivision will be known and designated as (Name).
All streets and alleys and public open spaces shown, and not heretofore
dedicated, are hereby dedicated to the public. Setbacks are hereby established
as shown on this plat, between which lines and the property lines of the
streets, there will be erected or maintained no building or structure. There
are strips of ground, (Number) feet in width, as shown on this plat and marked
`Easement` reserved for the use of public utilities for the installation of
water and sewer mains, ducts, lines, and wires, subject at all times to the
proper authorities and to the easement herein reserved. No permanent or other
structures are to be erected or maintained upon said strips of land, but owners
of lots in this subdivision will take their titles subject to the rights of the
public utilities, and to the rights of the owners of other lots in this
subdivision. (Additional dedications and protective covenants, or private
restrictions, would be inserted here upon the subdivider's initiative or the
recommendation of the Plan Commission or City Council; important provisions are
those specifying the use to be made of the property and, in the case of
residential use, the minimum habitable floor area.) The foregoing covenants (or
restrictions) are to run with the land and will be binding on all parties and
all persons claiming under them until January 1, 20 (twenty-five- year period
is suggested); at which time, said covenants (or restrictions) will be
automatically extended for successive periods of ten years unless indicated
otherwise by negative vote of a majority of the then owners of the building
sites covered by these covenants (or restrictions) in whole or in part, which
said vote will be evidenced by a petition in writing signed by the owners and
duly recorded. Invalidation of any one of the foregoing covenants (or
restrictions) by judgment or court order will in no way affect any of the other
various covenants or restrictions, which will remain in full force and effect.
The right to enforce these provisions by injunction together with the right to
cause the removal, by due process of law, of any structure or part thereof
erected or maintained in violation thereof, is hereby dedicated to the public
and reserved to the several owners of the several lots in this subdivision and
to their heirs and assigns."
Witness our Hands and Seals this day of    
State of Illinois
County of       
Before me, the undersigned Notary Public, in and for the County and State,
personally appeared (Name), (Name), (Name), and each separately and severally
acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument as his or her voluntary
act and deed, for the purposes therein expressed.
Witness my Hand and Notarial Seal this
day of          
Notary Public
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1578, 8-18-2014; Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-11-17: VARIATIONS FROM SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   When the subdivider can show that a provision of this title, if
strictly adhered to, would cause unnecessary hardship, and when in the opinion
of the plan commission, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar
to the site, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such
provisions, the plan commission may recommend a variance or modification to the
city council. The subdivider must apply in writing for such variance or
modification of the action. Any variance or modification thus authorized must
be attached to and made a part of the final plat.
   (B)   In any instance where the city has granted approval of a preliminary
plat of subdivision prior to the effective date specified in section
14-1-2 of this title and where the subdivision design or subdivision
improvements as shown on such preliminary plat are less restrictive than the
requirements of this title, the subdivider may apply in writing to the city
council for permission to proceed with subdivision as originally planned. The
city council, upon review of the preliminary plat as originally submitted, may
then grant such permission. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-11-18: MOBILE HOME PARK PERMIT:
   (A)   Applicability: A mobile home park permit is required for all new
mobile home parks and additions to existing mobile home parks.
   (B)   Filing: Applications for mobile home park permits must be filed with
the zoning administrator.
   (C)   Contents Of Application: Applications for mobile home park permits
must include:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant, and the present or last
occupation of the applicant at the time of filing of the application;
      2.   Location and legal description of the tract of land, certified on a
plat of a survey by a registered land surveyor, drawn to scale of at least one
inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100');
      3.   The proposed and existing facilities in the park for water supply,
sewage, garbage and waste disposal, fire protection, and any community
buildings;
      4.   The proposed method of lighting the structures and outdoor areas;
      5.   All corners and points of tangency are to be marked by galvanized or
wrought iron pipe or iron or steel bars at least eighteen inches (18") in
length and not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter. The top of the pipe
or bar is to be set level with the established grade of the ground;
      6.   The plot plans of the park drawn to scale including building plans
and specifications for existing buildings and facilities, and the plans and
specifications for new or altered buildings and facilities, all showing
compliance with the provisions of this title. The plot plans must be drawn on a
scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and must contain, the
following:
         (a) The date on which such plot plans were prepared;
         (b) An arrow indicating north;
         (c) All mobile home sites, which must be numbered;
         (d) Complete information regarding storm sewers;
         (e) Stormwater runoff, shown on a separate plat;
         (f) Contour lines at one foot (1') intervals, shown on a separate
plat, using United States geological survey data; and
         (g) Grades of driveways and all ditches, shown on a separate plat.
      7.   A performance bond or other security acceptable to the plan
commission in a sum sufficient to cover a written estimate made by a qualified
engineer or other qualified person of the cost of improvements. Such bond must
be payable to the city of Spring Valley, and conditioned upon the completion of
such construction in a reasonable time.
      8.   An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters
contained in the application.
   (D)   Issuance Of Mobile Home Park Permit:
      1.   If the plans conform to the requirements of this title, the zoning
administrator will recommend approval of the mobile home park permit to the
Spring Valley city council and the Spring Valley city council shall either
approve or deny a mobile home park permit.
      2.   If the application for a permit is denied, the zoning administrator
will give the reasons for denial in writing to the applicant. If the objections
can be corrected, the applicant may amend the application and resubmit it for
approval or the applicant may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator
to the board of zoning appeals for recommendation to the Spring Valley city
council and a final determination by the Spring Valley city council.
      3.   If a mobile home park permit is issued, the zoning administrator
will periodically make inspections during construction to verify compliance.
      4.   No change in any sanitary facilities, water supply, sewer, drainage,
garbage or waste disposal, or any element on the plot plan may be made without
an application for a permit from the zoning administrator. Such a permit does
not relieve the applicant from any other city ordinances or permit
requirements. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
      5.   If the mobile home park is completed in compliance with the accepted
application and the applicable fee has been paid, the zoning administrator will
present findings to the city council, who may then issue a mobile home park
permit. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1578, 8-18-2014)
14-11-19: BUILDING PERMITS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2520.gif]
 
   (A)   Applicability:
      1.    No building or structure, identified by this section may be used,
located, moved, constructed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or otherwise
structurally altered without obtaining a building permit and without complying
with all of the requirements of this title and all other applicable local,
state and federal regulations. Buildings and structures that require a building
permit are as follows:
         (a)   Principal and accessory buildings including garages, sheds,
gazebos, and greenhouses;
         (b)   Porches, decks, and carports;
         (c)   Driveways;
         (d)   Swimming pools (with the exception of temporary inflatable
swimming pools);
         (e)   Groundwater wells.
      2.   No building permit will be issued for the improvement of any lot in
a subdivision until the plat of subdivision and the plans and specifications
for the public improvements have been approved by the city council.
   (B)    Filing: Two (2) copies of a building permit application must be
submitted to the zoning administrator.
   (C)   Contents Of Application: Building permit applications must include the
following, where applicable:
      1.   Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site, architect,
professional engineer, and contractor;
      2.   Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded
subdivision;
      3.   Address of the subject site;
      4.   Type of structure;
      5.   Existing and proposed operation or use of the structure or site;
      6.   Number of employees;
      7.   The zoning classification of the subject site;
      8.   A plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing the
location, boundaries, dimensions, elevations, uses, and size of the following:
         (a) The subject site;
         (b) Existing and proposed structures;
         (c) Existing and proposed easements, streets, and other public ways;
         (d) Off street parking, loading areas and driveways;
         (e) Existing highway access restrictions;
         (f) Existing and proposed front, side, and rear yards; and
         (g) The location, elevation, and use of any abutting lands and their
structures within forty feet (40') of the subject site.
         (h) The requirements of this subsection may be waived at the request
of the applicant, but any building permit granted without information contained
in this subsection shall be granted subject to a later challenge by the city of
Spring Valley regarding the applicant's failure to comply with any of the
provisions of this subsection;
      9.   If municipal sewer service is not available, a proposed sewage
disposal plan approved by the city engineer, who must certify in writing that
satisfactory, adequate and safe sewage disposal is possible on the site as
proposed by the plan, and that the plan complies with all applicable health
regulations;
      10.   If municipal water service is not available, a proposed water
supply plan approved by the city engineer, who must certify in writing that an
adequate and safe supply of water will be provided.
   (D)   Issuance Of Building Permit:
      1.   All applications for building permits for planned unit developments,
multi-family dwellings, or commercial or industrial improvements must be
reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator, city engineer, and/or
licensed independent engineer or inspector retained by or approved by the city
before the issuance of the building permit.
      2.   The zoning administrator will grant or deny the building permit in
writing within thirty (30) days of application.
      3.   After construction is completed, the applicant must obtain a letter
of occupancy in accordance with section
14-11-20 of this chapter prior to occupying the premises.
   (E)    Expiration Of Building Permit: The building permit will expire within
twelve (12) months from the date it was issued unless construction is started
and diligently pursued unto completion. The zoning administrator may renew the
building permit before it expires at the applicant's request.
   (F)   City Right To Revoke Permit: The City may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Non-compliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's activities or the presence of permittee's building or
structure presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or
welfare; or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the building or structure
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (G)   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The City shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (H)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the City, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the City with evidence that no cause exists for
the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the City, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the City within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the building or structure to the satisfaction of
the City providing written proof of such removal to the City within ten (10)
days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The City may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods
provided in this subsection.
   (I)   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the City may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (F) of this
section.
   (J)   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection (H) of this section, the City or
its designee may, at the option of the City: 1) correct the deficiencies; or 2)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject building or structure. The permittee shall be liable in all events to
the City for all costs of removal. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1847, 7-5-
2022)
14-11-20: LETTER OF OCCUPANCY:
   (A)    Applicability: No building may be occupied or reoccupied (if forced
to be vacated during construction) before a letter of occupancy has been issued
by the city.
   (B)    Filing: Upon filing for a building permit, a property owner and/or
his/her authorized agent will be informed that they will be required to provide
a certificate from their contractor(s) that all work has been completed in
accordance with the approved building permits, prior to issuance of a letter of
occupancy by the city.
   (C)    Issuance Of Letter Of Occupancy:
      1.    After the completion of the building in accordance with approved
building permits, the applicant must request in writing that the zoning
administrator issue a letter of occupancy.
      2.    The zoning administrator will issue the letter of occupancy to the
property owner, only upon receipt of a certificate or letter signed by the
contractor(s) who conducted the work on the new building. This will serve as
certification to the property owner and the city that the building is in
compliance with applicable building and safety codes, all provisions of this
title; and that the building including its location and design on the lot is
consistent with the building permits issued by the city.
      3.    Copies of the contractors' certification or letter of compliance
and approved letter of occupancy will be kept on file by the zoning
administrator. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
CHAPTER 12
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
14-12-1: Purpose
14-12-2: Scope
14-12-3: Provisions Of General Applicability
14-12-4: Nonconforming Uses
14-12-5: Nonconforming Buildings And Structures
14-12-6: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
14-12-7: Nonconforming Signs
14-12-8: Other Nonconformities
14-12-1: PURPOSE:
The regulations of this chapter govern uses, structures, lots and other
situations that came into existence lawfully but do not comply with one or more
requirements of this title. These types of situations are said to be
nonconforming. The intent of this chapter is to clarify the effect of such
nonconforming status and avoid their confusion with illegal buildings and uses.
These regulations recognize the interests of landowners in continuing to use
and maintain their properties for uses and activities that were lawfully
established. The regulations also seek to encourage continued maintenance,
rehabilitation, and reuse of existing buildings and structures. However, these
regulations also place limitations on nonconformities that have the potential
to adversely affect surrounding properties. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-12-2: SCOPE:
This chapter applies to nonconformities created by the adoption of this title
or subsequent amendments to it. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-12-3: PROVISIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   Continuation Permitted: Any nonconformity that lawfully existed on the
date of adoption of this title or that becomes nonconforming upon the adoption
of any amendment to this title may be continued in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Illegal Uses, Buildings, And Structures: Uses, buildings, and
structures that were not lawfully established prior to adoption of this title
will not become legal by virtue of its enactment. Illegal uses, buildings, and
structures must be immediately brought into compliance with all ordinances of
the city.
   (C)   Determination Of Nonconforming Status: The burden of establishing that
a nonconformity exists will, in all cases, be upon the property owner of the
nonconforming use, building or structure and not upon the city.
   (D)   Replacement Value: Replacement value for all structures will be
interpreted as the assessed value of the improvement based on information
obtained from the township assessor unless the applicant provides replacement
value data prepared by a certified appraiser. When assessed value data is not
available and the subject owner has not provided appraisal data, the zoning
administrator is authorized to determine replacement value based on the best
available data.
   (E)   Repairs And Maintenance: Incidental repairs and normal maintenance of
nonconforming situations are permitted to maintain a property in sound
condition, unless expressly prohibited by this title or other city ordinances.
Examples of normal maintenance and incidental repairs include installation or
relocation of nonbearing walls, nonbearing partitions, fixtures, equipment,
wiring, roofing, and plumbing. Nothing in this chapter may be construed to
prevent structures from being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe
condition, in accordance with an official order of a public official.
   (F)   Safety Regulations: All police power regulations enacted to promote
the public health, safety, and welfare including, but not limited to, all
building, fire, and health codes, apply to nonconforming uses, buildings and
structures.
   (G)   Tenancy And Ownership: The status of a nonconformity is not affected
by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management. Nonconforming status "runs
with the land". (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-12-4: NONCONFORMING USES:
A nonconforming use is one that was lawfully established in accordance with the
zoning regulations at the time it was established, but no longer complies with
the standards of this title.
   (A)   Continuation: Nonconforming uses may remain, subject to the
regulations of this section.
   (B)   Alteration And Expansion:
      1.   Except as expressly prohibited by this section, the zoning
administrator is authorized to permit a nonconforming use to expand into
another part of the same building or alter or expand the existing building,
provided that the zoning administrator determines that such alteration or
expansion:
         (a)   Will not result in a violation of off street parking or loading
requirements;
         (b)   Will not violate any applicable dimensional standards;
         (c)   Will not result in greater adverse impacts on the surrounding
area, with respect to noise, traffic generation, odor, or other environmental
effects; and
         (d)   Is not expressly prohibited by subsection (B)2 of this section.
      2.   The following nonconforming uses may not be expanded:
         (a)   A nonconforming business or manufacturing use in an R district;
         (b)   A nonconforming residential use in a business or manufacturing
district if such expansion increases the number of dwelling units or the area
of the zoning lot.
   (C)   Relocation: A nonconforming use may not be relocated in whole, or in
part, to any other lot or parcel unless the relocation brings the use into
compliance with all regulations of the zoning district into which it is
relocated.
   (D)   Change Or Substitution Of Use:
      1.   Except as otherwise expressly authorized, a nonconforming use may
not be changed to any use other than a use allowed within the zoning district
in which the use is located. When a nonconforming use has been changed, in
whole or in part, to an allowed use, it may not be changed back to a use that
is not allowed. A change of use will be deemed to occur when an existing
nonconforming use has been terminated and an allowed use has commenced. Any
change in use in violation of this chapter will be deemed an abandonment of the
previous nonconforming use.
      2.   The zoning administrator has the authority to permit the
substitution of one nonconforming use for another nonconforming use within the
same use category, provided that the substituted use will create no greater
adverse impacts on the surrounding area than the previous use. In making such a
determination, the zoning administrator must consider the following factors:
         (a)   Hours of operation;
         (b)   Vehicular traffic generation;
         (c)   The number of employees, patrons, or other people expected to be
attracted to the use; and
         (d)   Other factors likely to affect the neighborhood in which the use
is located.
      3.   If the zoning administrator approves a use substitution, the
previous nonconforming use is deemed to have been abandoned. In permitting such
a change in use, the zoning administrator may impose conditions on the
substituting nonconforming use.
   (E)   Loss Of Nonconforming Status; Damage Or Destruction:
      1.   If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of twelve (12)
continuous months or more all nonconforming use rights are lost and
reestablishment of the nonconforming use is prohibited.
      2.   If a building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use is
damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, flood, or other means that is not
within the control of the property owner or tenant, to an extent of more than
fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of the building and/or structure
it may not be reestablished except in compliance with all regulations
applicable to the zoning district in which it is located. This provision does
not apply to single-family dwellings, which may be reestablished in any zoning
district in compliance with subsection (E)3 of this section.
      3.   If a building, structure, or property occupied by a nonconforming
use is damaged or destroyed, by any means not within the control of the
property owner or tenant, to an extent of fifty percent (50%) or less of the
replacement value, it may be repaired, reconstructed, or restored provided that
no new nonconformities are created and that the existing degree of
nonconformity is not increased. A building permit must be obtained for such
rebuilding, restoration, repair, or reconstruction within one year of the date
of damage or destruction, and the construction must be completed within one
year of issuance of the building permit. If a building permit is not obtained
within one year or the repairs or restoration are not completed within one year
of the issuance of the building permit, then the building and/or structure and
use may be reestablished only if it complies with all regulations of the
district in which it is located.
      4.   In the event that any building, structure, or property occupied by a
nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by a means within the control of the
property owner or tenant, the building and/or structure and use may be restored
or repaired only in compliance with all regulations of this title.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-12-5: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A nonconforming building or structure is one that was lawfully established in
accordance with the zoning regulations in effect at the time of its
establishment but that is no longer in compliance with one or more standards of
this title. Common examples of nonconforming buildings or structures are those
that do not comply with current setback, height, or building coverage
requirements.
   (A)   Continuation: Nonconforming buildings or structures may remain,
subject to the regulations of this section.
   (B)   Use: A nonconforming building or structure may be utilized for or
occupied by any use allowed in the applicable zoning district, subject to all
applicable use standards of chapter 3 of this title.
   (C)   Alteration And Expansion: The zoning administrator is authorized to
permit the alteration, expansion, enlargement, or increase in size of a
nonconforming building or structure provided that the zoning administrator
determines that such alteration or expansion:
      1.   Will not result in a violation of off street parking or loading
requirements; and
      2.   Will not create any new nonconformities with respect to bulk or
density standards; and
      3.   In the case of an addition that will expand a nonconforming
building, the addition will not encroach any further into the existing
setbacks, further increase nonconforming building height, or increase
nonconforming building coverage.
   (D)   Relocation: A nonconforming building or structure may not be relocated
in whole, or in part, to any other location on the same lot or parcel, or to
any other lot or parcel, unless the relocation brings the building or structure
into further or full compliance with the regulations of the zoning district in
which it is relocated. This provision may not be interpreted as prohibiting the
elevation of a nonconforming building or structure for the purpose of
floodproofing or repair.
   (E)   Loss Of Nonconforming Status; Damage Or Destruction:
      1.   If a nonconforming building or structure is damaged or destroyed by
fire, explosion, flood, or other means that is not within the control of the
property owner or tenant, to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the
replacement value of the building or structure it may not be reestablished
except in compliance with all regulations applicable to the zoning district in
which it is located. This provision does not apply to single- family dwellings,
which may be fully reestablished in any zoning district in compliance with
subsection (E)2 of this section.
      2.   If a nonconforming building or structure is damaged or destroyed by
any means not within the control of the property owner or tenant to an extent
of fifty percent (50%) or less of the replacement value, it may be repaired,
reconstructed, or restored provided that no new nonconformities are created and
that the existing degree of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit
must be obtained for such rebuilding, restoration, repair, or reconstruction
within one year of the date of damage or destruction, and the construction must
be completed within one year of issuance of the building permit. If a building
permit is not obtained within one year or the repairs or restoration are not
completed within one year of the issuance of the building permit, then the
building or structure and use may be reestablished only if it complies with all
regulations of the district in which it is located.
      3.   In the event that any nonconforming building or structure is damaged
or destroyed by a means within the control of the property owner or tenant, the
building or structure and use may be restored or repaired only in compliance
with all requirements of this title.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-12-6: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
A nonconforming lot of record is a tract of land designated on a duly recorded
subdivision plat, by a duly recorded deed, or by other lawful means that does
not comply with minimum lot area or lot width regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located. No nonconforming lot of record may be improved
except in compliance with this section.
   (A)   Use: Any lot in single ownership that became nonconforming upon the
effective date specified in section
14-1-2 of this title or any subsequent amendment and does not meet the
requirements of this title for lot area or lot width may be developed with a
use that is permitted within the applicable district, provided it meets the
standards of this section. The owner of a nonconforming lot of record must
furnish the following additional information with the application for a
building permit:
      1.   A survey by a duly licensed land surveyor, showing the lot upon
which the applicant proposes to build and at least a portion of the lots on
either side of such lot including the width of the adjoining existing side
setbacks as measured to the nearest part of the buildings or structures
thereon.
      2.   An affidavit by the owner of the lot described in the application
for a building permit, stating that no adjoining lots are currently under his
or her ownership.
   (B)   Criteria For Use Of Nonconforming Lots Of Record: Upon compliance with
the provisions of subsection (A) of this section and other applicable
provisions of this title, the zoning administrator may issue a building permit
if the subject lot and proposed development meets the following criteria:
      1.   The nonconforming lot is not adjoining and contiguous to a lot on
either side held under common ownership;
      2.   The nonconforming lot is at least two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet in area and twenty five feet (25') in width and was platted on or
before the effective date of this title;
      3.   If the underlying zoning district permits a variety of uses, only
one or some of which would meet the dimensional standards for lot area, width,
or yards, then only those uses that comply with applicable dimensional and use
standards will be permitted; and
      4.   The proposed development on the nonconforming lot will comply with
all other bulk and density standards of the subject zoning district. (Ord.
1379, 6-9-2008)
14-12-7: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Nonconforming signs are those that were lawfully established but no longer
comply with the sign regulations of this title.
   (A)   Continuation: A nonconforming sign may remain, subject to the
regulations of this section.
   (B)   Alteration And Expansion: A nonconforming sign cannot be enlarged,
expanded or otherwise improved except for the purpose of normal maintenance and
incidental repairs. The only alteration to a nonconforming sign that is
permitted is a change in the sign face, the words or symbols used or the
message displayed, only to advertise an activity, business, or use conducted or
a product sold on the premises where the sign is located, provided that the
sign is not abandoned, as defined in subsection (E) of this section. Any other
alteration or change must be to bring the nonconforming sign into compliance
with the regulations of this title.
   (C)   Relocation: A nonconforming sign cannot be relocated in whole or in
part to any other location unless the relocation results in the entire sign
being brought into compliance with all applicable regulations of this title.
   (D)   Loss Of Nonconforming Status; Damage Or Destruction: If a
nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means not within the control
of the property owner to the extent that the estimated expense of repairs
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, the sign must be removed
or otherwise brought into compliance with the regulations of this title.
Removal of a nonconforming sign must include removal of the sign face, all
support structures and lighting apparatus.
   (E)   Abandonment: Any nonconforming sign that no longer advertises an
activity, business, or use conducted or a product sold on the premises where
the sign is located will be deemed to be abandoned after a period of ninety
(90) days. All abandoned signs must be removed or brought into full compliance
with the regulations of this title. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-12-8: OTHER NONCONFORMITIES:
The types of other nonconformities to which this section applies include, but
are not limited to, landscaping, off street parking and loading, curb cuts,
accessory buildings or structures (except nonconforming signs) and other
nonconformities not involving signs, structural aspects of a principal
building, lot dimensions, or use of the property.
   (A)   Continuation: Other nonconformities, as defined by this section, may
remain subject to the regulations of this section.
   (B)   Alteration And Expansion: Unless otherwise stated in this title, the
zoning administrator is authorized to permit the alteration, expansion, or
enlargement of buildings, structures or other site improvement on sites with
other nonconformities, provided that the zoning administrator determines that
such alteration or expansion will not increase the degree of nonconformity. An
alteration or expansion or to a building that increases the number of required
parking spaces or further reduces the amount of landscaping (where the existing
number of parking spaces or amount of landscaping is currently not in
compliance with this title) are examples of increases in the degree of
nonconformity.
   (C)   Reduction In Nonconformities: Over time, it is the intent of this
title to eliminate or reduce the degree of nonconformities to the maximum
extent feasible as buildings, sites, or parking areas are redeveloped or
expanded. Examples of the manner in which nonconformities could be reduced are
the following:
      1.   Construction of additional parking spaces on sites that do not meet
parking requirements; and
      2.   Installation of required landscaping within a newly constructed
portion of a parking lot that does not meet landscaping requirements. (Ord.
1379, 6-9-2008)
CHAPTER 13
VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
14-13-1: Responsibility For Enforcement
14-13-2: Violations
14-13-3: Civil And Administrative Enforcement
14-13-4: Penalties
14-13-5: Other Remedies And Powers
14-13-6: Remedies Cumulative
14-13-7: Continuation Of Previous Enforcement Actions
14-13-8: Private Remedies Reserved
14-13-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT:
The zoning administrator is responsible for enforcing this title, unless
otherwise expressly stated. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-13-2: VIOLATIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this title or state law, any violation of
this title will be subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this
chapter. Such violations include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (A)   To use land or buildings in any way not consistent with the
requirements of this title;
   (B)   To erect a building or other structure in any way not consistent with
the requirements of this title;
   (C)   To engage in the development or subdivision of land in any way not
consistent with the requirements of this title;
   (D)   To transfer title to any lots or parts of a development unless the
land development plan or subdivision has received all approvals required under
chapter 11 of this title and an approved plan or plat, if required, has been
recorded with the county recorder of deeds;
   (E)   To submit for recording with the county recorder of deeds any
subdivision plat, land division or other land development plan that has not
been approved in accordance with the requirements of chapter 11 of this title
or that does not qualify for an exemption under this title;
   (F)   To install or use a sign in any way not consistent with the
requirements of chapter 7 of this title;
   (G)   To engage in the use of a building or land, the use or installation of
a sign, the subdivision or development of land or any other activity requiring
one or more permits or approvals under this title without obtaining all such
required permits or approvals;
   (H)   To engage in the use of a building or land, the use or installation of
a sign, the subdivision or development of land or any other activity requiring
one or more permits under this title in any way inconsistent with any such
permit or approval or any conditions imposed thereon;
   (I)   To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this
title or any condition imposed on such permit or approval;
   (J)   To obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted or
otherwise given under this title;
   (K)   To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under this
title; or
   (L)   To continue any violation as defined above, with each day of continued
violation to be considered a separate violation for purposes of computing
cumulative civil or criminal penalties. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-13-3: CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT:
The city has the following remedies and enforcement powers:
   (A)   Stop And Cease And Desist Orders: Upon finding the existence of any
violation of this title, the zoning administrator will notify, in writing, the
person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation
and ordering the action necessary to correct it; specifically, the zoning
administrator will order the discontinuance of any illegal use of land and
structures, the removal of illegal structures, additions, or alterations, and
the discontinuance of illegal work be undertaken.
   (B)   Legal Actions: In the enforcement of this title, the zoning
administrator will exercise all the powers authorized by the statutes of the
state of Illinois and city codes and ordinances to ensure compliance with, or
to prevent or abate any violation of the provisions of this title. In
particular, the zoning administrator will when necessary or appropriate,
institute or cause to be instituted by the city attorney in the name of the
city of Spring Valley any and all actions, legal or equitable, including
appeals that may be required for the enforcement of this title.
   (C)   Abatement And Liens: When authorized by state law, the zoning
administrator may order any work necessary to abate any violation of this title
and will assess the cost of such work to the property owner. Upon the failure
of the property owner to pay such cost, the zoning administrator will file a
lien for such costs and for all costs of collection against the property in
question.
   (D)   Revocation Of Permits: The violation of any provision of this title,
or of any permit or approval granted pursuant to this title will be grounds for
the revocation of any rezoning, permit, variation, special use, or approval
granted pursuant to this title and affecting the property involved in the
violation. The zoning administrator may recommend, and the city council may
order such revocation; provided, however, that where the original rezoning,
permit, variation, special use, or approval was granted following a public
hearing required pursuant to this title, the revocation will be preceded by a
similar public hearing.
   (E)   Fines: In the enforcement of this title, the zoning administrator
will, when necessary and appropriate, order the issuance and enforcement of
citations to recover fines and penalties for the violation of this title as
authorized by state law and this title. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-13-4: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of any
provision of this title will, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. Each day a violation exists or continues will
constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The city may seek any other penalties as provided by Illinois law.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1746, 4-22-2019)
14-13-5: OTHER REMEDIES AND POWERS:
The city will have such other remedies and enforcement powers as are and as may
be from time to time provided by Illinois law for the violation of zoning,
subdivision, sign or related provisions. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-13-6: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
The remedies and enforcement powers established in this chapter are cumulative,
and the city may exercise them in any order. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-13-7: CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS:
Nothing in this title may prohibit the continuation of previous enforcement
actions undertaken by the city pursuant to previous and valid ordinances and
laws. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
14-13-8: PRIVATE REMEDIES RESERVED:
Nothing in this chapter may be interpreted to prevent any person entitled to
relief in law or equity by reason of a violation of the provisions of this
title from bringing an appropriate action to secure such relief. (Ord. 1379, 6-
9-2008)
CHAPTER 14
TERMINOLOGY
SECTION:
14-14-1: Use Category Descriptions
14-14-2: Definitions
14-14-1: USE CATEGORY DESCRIPTIONS:
   (A)   Residential Use Group:
      1.   Household Living:
         (a)   Single-Family Dwelling, Attached: A dwelling unit designed for
one family with not more than two (2) lodgers or boarders, having its own
ground floor entrance and open space, and joined to two (2) or more dwellings
by common walls, or other horizontally unifying structural element. This use
type includes townhouses, row houses, and other similar dwelling types.
         (b)   Single-Family Dwelling, Detached: A dwelling unit designed for
one family with not more than two (2) lodgers or boarders that does not share a
common wall with any other dwelling and is surrounded on all sides by open
space located on the same lot.
         (c)   Multi-Family Dwelling: A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by three (3) or more families.
         (d)   Two-Family Dwelling: A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by two (2) families with not more than two (2) lodgers or boarders
per dwelling unit. A two-family dwelling also includes the terms "duplex" and
"two-flat".
         (e)   Employee Living Quarters: Living quarters for persons employed
on the premises and not rented otherwise as a separate dwelling.
         (f)   Manufactured Home Park: A lot or adjacent lots providing sites
and utilities for independent manufactured homes either free of charge or for a
fee, including any building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended
for use as a part of the manufactured home park. This does not include mobile
homes without plumbing facilities or motorized recreational vehicles.
Any park defined in the mobile home park act 1  or by the city of Spring Valley
as a "mobile home park" is defined as a "manufactured home park". See also the
applicable use standards for manufactured home parks in subsection
14-3-2(G) of this title.
         (g)   Residential Planned Development: A residential development
improved according to an overall unified plan that was approved according to
the procedure in chapter 11 of this title.
      2.   Group Living: Residential uses other than household living; usually
provide common kitchen/dining facilities.
         (a)   Assisted Living: A group living facility that provides health
and living services for persons who because of age, illness or infirmity cannot
live independently but do not require continuous nursing care.
         (b)   Community Residence: A single dwelling unit occupied on a
relatively permanent basis in a family like environment by unrelated persons
with disabilities.
            (1)   Small: Small community residences house no more than eight
(8) residents plus staff, are certified by the state of Illinois, and are
supervised by full time paid professional support staff whenever residents are
present.
            (2)   Large: Large community residences are either not licensed or
certified by the state of Illinois, or are not supervised, or have five (5) or
more persons plus staff, whether licensed or not.
         (c)   Nursing Care Facility: A facility that provides shelter, and
medical, nursing, and/or rehabilitation services for persons who require twenty
four (24) hour skilled nursing supervision and care.
         (d)   Transitional Residence: A temporary residential living
arrangement for persons receiving therapy or counseling for purposes including,
but not limited to, the following:
            (1)   Recuperation from drug or alcohol addiction;
            (2)   Assistance with reentering society while housed under
supervision as an alternative to imprisonment, including prerelease, work
release and probationary programs; or
            (3)   Assistance with family or school adjustment problems that
require specialized attention in order to achieve personal independence.
         (e)   Group Living Not Otherwise Classified: Group living uses that do
not fit into any other category, such as fraternities, sororities, convents,
and monasteries.
   (B)   Public And Civic Use Group: The public and civic use group includes
uses that are public or quasi-public in nature.
      1.   College Or University: Institution of higher learning that offers
courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree and is certified by
the state or a recognized accrediting agency.
      2.   Cultural Exhibits And Libraries: Museum like preservation and/or
exhibition of objects in one or more of the arts and sciences; gallery
exhibition of works of art; or a library collection of books, manuscripts and
other materials for study and reading, excluding public assembly facilities,
which are classified as places of public assembly.
      3.   Daycare: A place where three (3) or more unrelated children or
adults are cared for by persons other than parents or guardians, for part or
all of a day.
         (a)   Daycare Center: A daycare use that regularly provides care for
eight (8) or more children or adults, whether in a family home or in another
facility.
         (b)   Daycare Home: A daycare use that regularly provides care for up
to eight (8) children or adults.
      4.   Hospital: Uses providing medical or surgical care to patients and
offering inpatient (overnight) care.
      5.   Parks And Recreation: Recreational, social, or multipurpose uses
typically associated with public parks, public open spaces, outdoor recreation
areas, public or private golf courses, and associated buildings.
      6.   Post Office: Uses associated with the processing and delivering of
mail, including those either owned or leased by postal service companies.
      7.   Public Safety Services: Public safety services that provide fire,
police or life protection, together with incidental storage and maintenance of
necessary vehicles, including, but not limited to, fire stations, police
stations, and ambulance services.
      8.   Religious Assembly: Religious uses commonly involving public
assembly as customarily occurs in churches, synagogues, mosques, and temples.
      9.   School: Public or private institutions providing education at the
elementary, junior high or high school level that provide state mandated basic
education.
      10.   Social Club Or Lodge: Any establishment, public or private,
commercial or nonprofit, that provides a gathering place for people, with or
without food and beverage, commonly known as, but not limited to, the
following:
         (a)   Teen centers.
         (b)   Youth centers.
         (c)   Senior centers.
         (d)   Dance clubs.
      11.   Utility, Major: Services and utilities that have substantial
impacts on surrounding areas, including, but not limited to, water and
wastewater treatment facilities, major water storage facilities, pumping
stations, electric substations, gas regulator stations, telephone transmission
structures, radio, and television and microwave relay towers.
      12.   Utility, Minor: Public utilities that have few, if any, impacts
upon the surrounding neighborhood, such as electrical and gas distribution
substations or power transmission lines.
   (C)   Commercial Use Group:
      1.   Adult Use: The term "adult use" includes adult bookstores, adult
motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets, adult model studios, massage establishments or similar
establishments.
         (a)   Adult Bookstore: An adult bookstore is an establishment having
as a substantial or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade, books,
magazines, films for sale or viewing on premises by use of motion picture
devices or any other coin operated means, and other periodicals that are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or "specified
anatomical areas" or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the
sale or display of such material, or an establishment that holds itself out to
the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising,
displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin operated booths, the
exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises, or any other factors
showing that the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
         (b)   Adult Entertainment Cabaret: An adult entertainment cabaret is a
public or private establishment that: 1) features topless dancers, strippers,
male or female impersonators; 2) not infrequently features entertainers who
display "specified anatomical areas"; or 3) features entertainers who by reason
of their appearance or conduct perform in a manner that is designed primarily
to appeal to the prurient interest of the patron or entertainers who engage in,
or engage in explicit simulation of, "specified sexual activities".
         (c)   Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater: An adult mini-motion picture
theater is an enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50)
persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas", for observation by patrons
therein.
         (d)   Adult Motion Picture Theater: An adult motion picture theater is
an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used
regularly and routinely for presenting material having as a dominant theme
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas", for observations by patrons therein.
         (e)   Adult Model Studio: Any public or private establishment that
describes itself as a body shop or model studio, or where for any form of
consideration or gratuity, figure models who display sexually oriented
anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by persons paying such
consideration or gratuity, or where for any form of consideration or gratuity,
nude and seminude dancing, readings, counseling sessions, body painting and
other activities that present materials distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities and specified anatomical areas are provided for observation by or
communication to persons paying such consideration or gratuity. Excluded from
this definition are recognized art courses at accredited schools, colleges or
universities that as a portion of their instruction include drawing, painting,
sculpting or photographing a model.
         (f)   Massage Establishment: An establishment that engages in, or
permits to be engaged in, the performance of manual manipulation on the body by
another person other than a massage therapist that involves the hands or a
mechanical device. This does not include "therapeutic massage", which is
defined as the practice of manual muscle manipulation by a massage therapist
who is a member of a nationally recognized professional organization for
massage therapists that adheres to a code of ethics, or recreational facilities
with more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area for exercise
rooms, gymnasiums, tennis courts, racquetball courts, swimming pools or similar
uses directly related to exercising the human body that do not derive more than
five percent (5%) of yearly income from massage services.
         (g)   Specified Sexual Activities: The phrase "specified sexual
activities" in connection with adult uses means:
            (1)   Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
            (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
            (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast.
         (h)   Specified Anatomical Areas: The phrase "specified anatomical
areas" in connection with adult uses means:
            (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered: a) human genitals,
pubic region, b) buttock and c) female breast below a point, immediately above
the top of the areola; and
            (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      2.   Animal Services:
         (a)   Shelters And Kennels: Any premises where three (3) or more
animals are owned, boarded, bred and/or offered for sale, including, but not
limited to, boarding kennels, dog training centers and animal rescue shelters.
         (b)   Veterinary Services: Any building or portion thereof designed or
used for the care, observation, or treatment of domestic animals.
      3.   Art Gallery: Uses dedicated to the showing or sale of art, including
art galleries and studios. Art museums are classified in the "cultural exhibits
and libraries" use category.
      4.   Banks And Financial Services:
         (a)   Banks: Financial or securities brokerage services, including,
but not limited to, banks, savings and loan, or consumer investment businesses.
         (b)   Payday Loan Store: An establishment other than a bank that
engages in the business of offering payday loans, cashing checks, or exchanging
currency. A "payday loan" is a loan transaction where a postdated check or
other check that the parties agree will be held for a period of time before
presentment for payment or deposit is accepted as collateral for the loan.
         (c)   Consumer Loan Establishment: Any business that makes loans in a
principal amount not exceeding twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
secured other than by a mortgage or lien on the borrower's real property or on
personal property acquired by the borrower with the proceeds of the loan, not
including any bank, savings bank, savings and loan association or credit union.
         (d)   Pawnshop: An establishment or person (pawnbroker) engaged in the
business of receiving property in pledge or as security for money or other
things advanced to the pawner or pledger.
      5.   Body Art Services: Provision of any of the following procedures:
body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding, and scarification. This
definition does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by
the Illinois medical board, which may not be performed in a body art services
establishment.
      6.   Business Support Services: Provision of clerical, employment,
protective, or minor processing services to firms rather than individuals,
excluding any storage of goods other than samples. Typical uses include
secretarial services, telephone answering services and copying or blueprint
services. Also includes business or trade schools that do not involve any
outdoor storage or manufacturing processes.
      7.   Construction Sales And Service: Construction activities and
incidental storage on lots other than construction sites. Also includes the
retail or wholesale sale of materials used in the construction of buildings or
other structures other than retail sale of paint, fixtures, and hardware, and
excluding those uses classified under "vehicle sales and service". This
category includes, but is not limited to, uses such as building materials
stores, tool rental or sales and building contracting/construction offices.
      8.   Eating And Drinking Establishment:
         (a)   Restaurant: An establishment primarily engaged in serving
prepared food to the public, including those with outdoor seating areas.
         (b)   Tavern: An establishment primarily engaged in serving alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises and in which the serving of prepared
food and live entertainment may be provided.
      9.   Entertainment And Spectator Sports: Provision of cultural,
entertainment, athletic and other events to spectators.
      10.   Funeral And Interment Services:
         (a)   Cemetery: Land or facilities used for burial of the dead.
         (b)   Cremating: Services involving the purification and reduction of
human remains by fire.
         (c)   Funeral Home: An establishment providing services of preparing
the dead for burial and arranging or managing funerals.
      11.   Gas Station: Any building or premises whose principal use is the
dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any motor vehicle fuels, oil
or accessories, where repair service or car wash facilities is incidental,
where no motor vehicle storage is present and where no motor vehicles are
offered for sale.
      12.   Lodging:
         (a)   Bed And Breakfast: An owner occupied detached house in which
sleeping rooms are available for rent for transient occupancy by registered
guests, not including multi-unit residential or accessory buildings.
         (b)   Hotel/Motel: An establishment containing lodging rooms for
occupancy by transient guests, with the extent of occupancy limited to thirty
(30) days. Such an establishment may provide customary hotel services such as
maid and bellboy services, furnishing of and laundry of linens used in the
lodging rooms, central desk, and meeting rooms.
      13.   Medical Or Dental Clinic: An establishment where patients are not
lodged overnight but are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of
physicians or dentists practicing medicine.
      14.   Miniwarehouse: Storage or warehousing service within a building for
individuals to store personal effects and for businesses to store materials for
operation of an industrial or commercial enterprise located elsewhere, where
such storage space is not used for any retail, manufacturing, wholesale,
business or service use.
      15.   Office: Professional, governmental, executive, management or
administrative offices of private or governmental organizations.
      16.   Personal And Consumer Service: Sale of any service to individual
customers for their own personal benefit, enjoyment, or convenience. For
example, consumer services include the provision of personal services such as
beautician and barbering services, specialized instruction, laundry and dry
cleaning services, and all other similar services.
      17.   Retail Sales: Businesses that sell, lease, or rent new or used
products to the general public that are not intended for resale.
      18.   Shopping Center Planned Development: A large commercial development
improved according to an overall unified plan that was approved according to
the procedure in chapter 11 of this title.
      19.   Vehicle Sales And Service:
         (a)   Car Wash: Any building or site providing facilities for washing
motor vehicles, using either automatic equipment or providing space and
equipment for hand washing of vehicles by either customers or employees.
         (b)   Motor Vehicle Repair: A business or premises where repair work
on or for motor vehicles, the replenishing of parts thereto, the changing of
tires, the diagnosis of malfunctions of a motor vehicle, or the estimating of
damage and necessary repairs is conducted.
            (1)   Major: Any motor vehicle repair business or premises that
also performs bodywork, painting or commercial vehicle repairs.
            (2)   Minor: Any motor vehicle repair business or premises that
does not perform bodywork, painting or commercial vehicle repairs.
         (c)   Light Equipment And Vehicle Sales/Rental: Businesses that sell,
lease, rent, or wholesale from the premises automobiles, noncommercial trucks,
motorcycles, trailers with less than ten thousand (10,000) pounds of gross
cargo capacity, motor homes and boat dealers, along with incidental
maintenance.
         (d)   Heavy Equipment Sales Or Rental: Businesses that sell, lease,
rent or wholesale from the premises heavy construction equipment, farm
implements, tractors, trucks, or aircraft, along with incidental maintenance.
         (e)   Vehicle, Recreational Vehicle Or Boat Storage/Towing: The
operating of a vehicle towing service or the storage of automobiles,
recreational vehicles or boats as a principal use.
   (D)   Industrial Use Group:
      1.   Manufacturing, Production And Industrial Service:
         (a)   Limited: Manufacturing of finished parts or products, primarily
from previously prepared materials, including, but not limited to, printing and
related support activities; machinery manufacturing; food manufacturing;
computer and electronic product manufacturing/assembly; electrical equipment,
appliance, component manufacturing/assembly; furniture and related product
manufacturing/assembly; and other manufacturing and production establishments
that typically have very few, if any, negative external impacts on surrounding
properties.
         (b)   General:
            (1)   Manufacturing of finished or unfinished products, primarily
from extracted or raw materials, or recycled or secondary materials, or bulk
storage and handling of such products and materials, including, but not limited
to: textile mills; textile product mills; apparel manufacturing; leather and
allied product manufacturing; wood product manufacturing; paper manufacturing;
chemical manufacturing; plastics and rubber products manufacturing; nonmetallic
mineral product manufacturing; transportation equipment manufacturing; primary
metal manufacturing; and fabricated metal product manufacturing.
            (2)   Industrial service firms engaged in the repair or servicing
of industrial or commercial machinery, equipment, products or byproducts,
including, but not limited to: welding shops; machine shops; industrial tool
repair; fuel oil distributors; solid fuel yards; laundry, dry cleaning, and
carpet cleaning plants; and photo finishing laboratories.
      2.   Manufacturing Planned Development: An industrial development
improved according to an overall unified plan that was approved according to
the procedure in chapter 11 of this title.
      3.   Research Laboratory: A building or group of buildings in which are
located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation, but not primarily facilities for the manufacture or sale of
products.
      4.   Trucking/Freight Terminal: A building or area where freight is
collected, stored and/or dispatched for intrastate or interstate shipment.
      5.   Waste Related Use:
         (a)   Junkyard: Any land or structure used for a salvaging operation,
including, among other things, the storage and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap
metal and discarded materials, and the collecting, dismantling, storage and
salvaging of unlicensed, inoperative vehicles.
         (b)   Sanitary Landfill: A method of disposing of refuse by spreading
and covering such refuse with earth to a depth of two feet (2') or more on the
top surface and one foot (1') or more on the sides of the bank.
         (c)   Recycling Facility: Any business that engages in the collection,
storage or processing of any type of aluminum, glass, paper, plastic, rubber,
textile, landscape waste or other similar materials for the purpose of
marketing the material for use in the manufacturing process of new, reused or
reconstituted products.
      6.   Warehousing And Wholesaling: Storage, wholesale sales and
distribution of materials and equipment, including, but not limited to, storage
warehouses, moving and storage firms, trucking or cartage operations, truck
staging or storage areas, and wholesale sales of materials and equipment to
parties other than the general public.
   (E)   Agricultural Use Group:
      1.   Farming: Activities including, but not limited to, horticulture,
forestry, crop and tree farming, truck farming, natural areas, gardening,
dairy, stock and poultry farming, incidental operation of vehicles; and
excluding uses in violation of IEPA performance standards.
   (F)   Other Use Group:
      1.   Accessory Use: A subordinate use that is incidental to and customary
in connection with the principal building or use and is located on the same
lot.
      2.   Drive-Through Facilities: Facilities used to provide or dispense
products or services, through an attendant or a window or an automated machine,
to persons remaining in vehicles that are in a designated stacking aisle. A
drive-through facility may be in combination with other uses, such as a
financial institution, personal service use, retail store, or eating
establishment. A drive-through facility does not include a car wash or gas
station.
      3.   Home Occupation: A business use within a dwelling unit, where the
dwelling unit is the principal residence of the business operator.
      4.   Parking:
         (a)   Accessory: Motor vehicle parking facilities that provide parking
that is accessory to a specific use or uses.
         (b)   Nonaccessory: Facilities that provide motor vehicle parking that
is not accessory to a specific use, regardless of whether a fee is charged.
      5.   Wireless Communication Facility: Facilities related to the use of
the radio frequency spectrum for the purposes of transmitting or receiving
radio signals, and may include, but is not limited to, radio towers, television
towers, telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers, telephone transmission
equipment buildings and commercial mobile radio service facilities. The
wireless communication facility use category includes all associated equipment
unless the written context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.
The term "associated equipment" is to be read broadly and in context.
Associated equipment may include, but is not limited to: antenna, equipment
shelter or platform, lighting, monopole tower, mounting hardware, and
supporting electrical or mechanical equipment.
         (a)   Freestanding: A wireless telecommunication facility that is
attached to an existing pole, tower, or other structure including, but not
limited to, a structure that can accommodate the future installation of two (2)
or more antenna systems.
         (b)   Collocated: A new tower, monopole, or other unattached structure
erected to support wireless communication antennas and connecting
appurtenances. (Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 115.
14-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
The words and terms set forth in this section, wherever they occur in this
title, must be interpreted as defined in this section. Any words not defined as
follows will be construed in their general accepted meanings as defined in the
most recent edition of "Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary". For a
detailed description of the measurement of lot area, setbacks, height, building
coverage and other dimensional standards, see section
14-4-3 of this title.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure that is customarily
incidental to and subordinate in size or purpose to the principal building or
use and is located on the same lot as the principal building or use.
ACCESSORY USE: A use that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the lot and is located on the same lot.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: An adult-use cannabis cultivation
center, craft grower, processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing
organization or transporting organization.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
(P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (PA. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (PA. 101-0027), as it may
be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (PA. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR: A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, (RA. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER: A facility
operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis
business establishment or a community college licensed under the Community
College Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
ALLEY: A public right of way that provides a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
ALTERATION: Any enlargement, addition, relocation, remodeling, or change in
number of dwelling units of buildings that would improve or prolong the life of
the building by affecting supporting members of a building or structure, such
as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, girders, or exterior walls that
are not cosmetic or decorative in nature; an alteration to other than a
building may include a change in site grading, open space, or topography,
changes to signs or other structures, but excluding painting and incidental
maintenance and repairs to buildings and structures that do not require a
permit.
APARTMENT: See definition of Dwelling Unit.
BASEMENT: A portion of a building that is entirely or partly below grade. A
basement is counted as a story when more than one- half (1/2) of its floor to
ceiling height is below grade.
BERM: A raised earth form that provides screening from adjoining land uses.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and built
for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any
kind.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building that is surrounded by open space on the same
lot.
BUILDING LINE: A line representing the actual location of an exterior building
wall.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building of primary importance or function containing
the principal use of the lot.
CALIPER: The diameter of a tree trunk measured six inches (6") above the
ground, or measured at twelve inches (12") above the ground for trees larger
than six inches (6") in diameter.
CITY: The city of Spring Valley, Illinois.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Any sign, wording, logo, or other representation that,
directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business,
product, service or other commercial activity.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan for the development of the city of Spring Valley
that is prepared by the plan commission and adopted by the city council.
CONDITIONAL USE: See definition of Use, Special.
CONSERVATION: Preservation of land, water, flora, fauna, and cultural artifacts
in their original state.
CONTRACTOR: Any person or firm engaged in construction, building services or
maintenance on a contract basis.
CROSSWALK: A right of way that crosses a block and provides pedestrian access
to adjacent streets or properties.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street with one open end and the other end permanently closed
with a vehicle turnaround.
DECIDUOUS: A plant that sheds its leaves at the end of each growing season.
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per acre.
DEVELOPER: The legal or beneficial owner or the representative thereof, of a
lot or parcel of any land proposed for inclusion in a development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase.
DEVELOPMENT: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels; the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alternation, relocation,
or enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of any buildings or
land; any extension of any use of land or any clearing, grading, excavation or
other movement of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this
code.
DRIP LINE: A tree protection zone that is measured as the diameter defined by
the outermost leaves on a tree.
DRIVEWAY: A strip of land that provides access from the public right of way
onto a lot.
DWELLING UNIT: A building or portion of a building designed or used as living
quarters for a single family.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner by lawful agreement for the use of a
strip of land by the general public, a corporation, or persons for specific
purposes.
FACADE: The exterior face of a building.
FAMILY: Two (2) or more persons related to each other by blood, marriage, or
legal adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of
not more than three (3) persons, who need not be related by blood, marriage, or
legal adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit and occupying a
single dwelling unit; in either case, exclusive of usual domestic servants. For
the purpose of this title, however, an unrelated family does not include
persons living together in a community residence.
FENCE: A structure that is a barrier used to mark a boundary, or for
protection, confinement, screening, or decoration.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor of a building,
measured from the exterior limits or faces of the building, not including areas
below grade or accessory structures.
FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which
are one foot (1') from a uniform point source of one standard candle.
GARAGE: An accessory building, or an accessory portion of a principal building,
enclosed on at least three (3) sides that is intended for and used to store
private passenger motor vehicles and no more than one 3/4-ton or lesser sized
truck.
GRADE: The highest level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building or structure.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION: An incorporated nonprofit organization operating under
recorded land agreements through which:
   (A)   Each lot and/or homeowner in a subdivision or development or other
described land area is automatically a member;
   (B)   Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate
share of the expenses for the organization's activities that may include
enforcement of governing documents and restrictive covenants, rules regarding
construction and maintenance, and maintenance of common open space and
facilities; and
   (C)   The charge if unpaid becomes a lien against the property.
ILLUMINATION: As related to a sign, means any light directed at, attached to or
otherwise related to a sign, including exposed tubing or bulbs on the sign,
lamps or lights shining onto its surface, or illumination transmitted through
the sign face(s).
   (A)   "Direct illumination" means a light source that is placed outside of
or away from the sign in a manner so as to illuminate the sign externally.
   (B)   "Internal illumination" means a light source that is enclosed within
the sign and viewed through a translucent panel.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA: A hard surface area that prevents or substantially
impedes the natural infiltration of water into the underlying soil, resulting
in an increased volume and velocity of surface water runoff. Impervious surface
includes, but is not limited to, buildings, roadways, driveways, parking,
sidewalks, patios and courts for sports activities.
INTERSECTION, STREET: The point of crossing or meeting of two (2) or more
streets.
LANDSCAPED AREA: An area that is permanently devoted and maintained to the
growing of shrubbery, grass and other plant material.
LOADING SPACE: A space within the main building or on the same lot for the
standing, loading, or unloading of trucks, having adequate ingress and egress
to a public street.
LODGING ROOM: A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without
cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of
rooms, each room providing sleeping accommodations will be counted as one
lodging room.
LOT: A "zoning lot" unless the context clearly indicates a "lot of record". The
term lot includes the terms "site", "parcel", and any other similar undefined
term.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through
front, side and rear property lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting two (2) streets at their intersection.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2522.gif]
 
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE OR THROUGH LOT: A lot that has a pair of opposite property
lines along two (2) substantially parallel streets and that is not a corner
lot. On a through lot both street lines will be considered front property
lines, but in the case of two (2) or more contiguous through lots, there will
be a common property line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2543.png]
 
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot that is not a corner lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2545.png]
 
LOT, RECORDED: A lot designated on a subdivision plat or deed, duly recorded
pursuant to statute in the county recorder's office. A recorded lot may or may
not coincide with a zoning lot.
LOT, ZONING: A parcel of land, composed of one or more recorded lots; occupied
or to be occupied by a principal building or buildings, or principal use or
uses along with permitted accessory buildings or uses; and meeting all the
requirements for area, buildable area, frontage, width, yards, setback and any
other requirements set forth in this title.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A residential structure that:
   (A)   Is transportable in one or more sections and is essentially ready for
occupancy upon leaving a factory and being installed on a building site;
   (B)   Does not require a significant amount of construction on site, unlike
other structures with factory produced components such as modular, panelized or
precut homes;
   (C)   Is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation and
connected to utilities such as plumbing, heating, and electrical systems; and
   (D)   Complies with the federal manufactured home construction and safety
standards, but does not comply with local building codes.
Any home defined as a "mobile home" in this title is included in this
definition of "manufactured home".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A lot or adjacent lots providing sites and utilities
for manufactured homes either free of charge or for a fee, including any
structure or enclosure used or intended for use by occupants. This does not
include mobile homes without plumbing facilities or motorized recreational
vehicles. Any park defined in the mobile home park act 1  or by the city of
Spring Valley as a "mobile home park" is defined as a "manufactured home park".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK SERVICE OR COMMUNITY BUILDING: A building housing the
manager's office, recreation facilities, storage facilities, laundry
facilities, maintenance equipment, toilet facilities for employees, emergency
sanitary accommodations, and/or other facilities intended for the use of
manufactured home park occupants.
MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE: A parcel of land designated for the exclusive use of
the occupants of a single manufactured home.
MANUFACTURED HOME STAND: A part of a manufactured home space that has been
reserved for the placement of the manufactured home, related structures, and/or
additions.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who practices or administers therapeutic massage,
and who has completed at least five hundred fifty (550) hours in a regular
course of study of the underlying principles of anatomy and physiology as
generally recognized by an approved school of massage.
MOBILE HOME: A factory built residential structure that is transportable on
temporary or permanent wheels that was produced prior to the national
manufactured housing construction and safety standards act, effective June 30,
1976, and contains toilet and bath or shower facilities. Any home defined as a
"mobile home" in this title is included in the definition of "manufactured
home". This definition does not include recreational vehicles, travel trailers,
campers, or buses.
MODULAR HOME: A residential structure built in a factory up to local building
code standards, that is then transported to the site and installed.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A building or structure or portion thereof that was
lawfully established in accordance with zoning and other regulations at the
time it was established but no longer complies with the standards of this
title.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use that was lawfully established in accordance with
zoning regulations at the time it was established, but no longer complies with
the standards of this title.
ORNAMENTAL TREE: A tree less than thirty feet (30') tall at maturity that is
planted for its aesthetic and/or screening value.
PANELIZED HOME: A residential structure partially built in a factory and then
transported in sections, such as an entire wall with windows, doors, electrical
wiring, and siding, and assembled on a site. Panelized homes must comply with
local building codes.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material other than water that is suspended in or
discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid at
outdoor ambient conditions.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION: A closed concrete or other masonry foundation that
extends to a depth below the frost line and extends above the surface a
sufficient height to safely support the weight (all lateral and vertical loads)
of the structure. Loose blocks, loose brick or silt construction will not be
considered a permanent foundation.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company or association.
PLAN COMMISSION: The plan commission of the city of Spring Valley.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A development improved according to an overall unified
plan that was approved according to the procedure in chapter 11 of this title.
PLOT: A map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider's plans of the
subdivision are presented, submitted for approval and intended to be recorded
in final form.
PRECUT HOME: A residential structure constructed of building materials that are
precut in a factory to design specifications, and then constructed on a site.
Precut homes must comply with local building codes and may include "kit" type
homes or log homes.
PROPERTY LINE, CORNER SIDE: The boundary of a corner lot that adjoins a public
street, other than the front property line.
PROPERTY LINE, FRONT: The boundary of a lot that adjoins an existing or
dedicated public street; or where no public street exists, is along a public
way. On a corner lot, the front property line is the property line adjacent to
the street that is substantially parallel to the facade with the primary
building entrance.
PROPERTY LINE, REAR: The boundary of a lot that is most distant from and is, or
is most nearly, parallel to the front property line; in the case of an
irregular, triangular or gore shaped lot, a line ten feet (10') in length
within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front property
line.
PROPERTY LINE, SIDE: A boundary of a lot that is not a front property line or a
rear property line.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any boat, boat trailer, trailer, any camping trailer,
travel trailer, pickup coach, motor home or other unit built or mounted on a
vehicle or chassis, without permanent foundation, that may legally be driven or
towed by a motor vehicle on a highway or street.
ROAD OR ROADWAY: The paved portion of the street right of way.
SCREENING: A structure erected or vegetation planted for concealing an area
from view.
SETBACK: An area that must be maintained as open space between a building or
structure and the property line.
SETBACK, CORNER SIDE: The setback required between a building and the corner
side property line, extending from the required front setback to the required
rear setback.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2547.png]
 
SETBACK, FRONT: The setback required between a building and the front property
line, extending the full width of the lot between the side property lines.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2549.png]
 
SETBACK, REAR: The setback required between a building and the rear property
line, extending the full width of the lot between the side property lines.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2551.png]
 
SETBACK, SIDE: The setback required between a building and the side property
line, extending from the required front setback to the required rear setback.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2553.png]
 
SIGN: Any display, figure, painting, drawings, placard, poster or other device
visible from a public way that is designed, intended or used to convey a
message, advertise, inform or direct attention to a person, institution,
organization, activity, place, object or product. It may be a structure or part
thereof painted on or attached directly or indirectly on a structure. This
definition does not include any flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state,
city or other political units, as well as any sign, board or surface used to
display or announce official notice of such political units.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: A sign that generally advertises goods or services that are
not available on the premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign with action, motion or color changes requiring
electrical energy, electronic or manufactured sources of supply, including wind
activated elements, including video screens, and including intermittent or
sudden changes in light intensity, but not including signs defined as
changeable copy signs.
SIGN, BUSINESS: Any sign that directs attention to the name of the business
establishment's goods or commodities sold or services rendered, on the lot on
which the sign is located.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY: A sign, such as an electronically or electrically
controlled time, temperature and date sign, message center or reader board
where different copy changes of a public service or commercial nature are shown
on the same lamp bank.
SIGN, FREE SPEECH: A sign that contains a message related to a matter of public
interest deemed by the person posting the sign, including, but not limited to,
a candidate for office or a ballot issue, but containing no commercial message.
SIGN, INCIDENTAL: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary
to the use of the zoning lot on which it is located, such as "no parking",
"entrance", "loading only", "telephone", and similar information and
directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the
zone lot on which the sign is located will be considered incidental.
SIGN, MARQUEE: A sign that is attached to the side or underside of a marquee or
canopy that extends from a building and covers the walkway, which identifies
the entrance to an establishment or its attraction.
SIGN, PORTABLE: A sign that is freestanding, self-supporting and is not
attached to, supported by or part of a structure that is designed to be
transported by means of wheels, skids or other similar device. "Portable signs"
does not include "sandwich board signs".
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign that is suspended from, attached to or supported by a
building or structure extending away from the building or structure a distance
of more than twelve inches (12").
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: Any sign which advertises or announces the sale, rental or
lease of the premises upon which lot the sign is located.
SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD: A portable sign constructed to form an "A" or tentlike
shape, hinged or not hinged at the top.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign of any type to announce special events or sales or to
announce the sale, lease or rental of property, and designed for use for a
limited period of time.
SIGN, WALL OR PANEL: A sign integral with the exterior face of an exterior wall
of a building, or attached to the wall or parallel with the wall and projecting
not more than twelve inches (12") from the wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2555.png]
 
SIGN, WINDBLOWN: A sign consisting of balloons or objects designed and
fashioned in such a manner as to move when subjected to wind pressure.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign painted, attached or affixed to the interior or exterior
surface of the windows or doors of a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86510d308203c0398e8a2510725bc9833f9d3dc4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2557.png]
 
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above; or if there is no floor above, the space
between the floor and ceiling next above, including all levels with at least
half of their height aboveground. A basement or below grade floor will be
counted as a story when more than one-half (1/2) its floor to ceiling height is
aboveground.
STREET: A public right of way that provides a primary means of access to
abutting property.
   Frontage Road: A local street that is parallel and adjacent to arterial
streets and expressways, and that provides access to abutting properties and
protection to local traffic from fast, through-moving traffic on the arterial
streets and expressways.
   Street, Arterial: A street designed to carry large traffic volumes between
areas of the city, including Dakota Street, and Spalding Street.
   Street, Collector: A street designed to carry low to medium traffic volumes
at lower speeds, including Greenwood Street, Richards Street, and St. Paul
Street.
   Street, Local: A street intended primarily as access to abutting properties.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent
location on the ground; or attached to something having a permanent location on
the ground. A sign, billboard, or other advertising device detached or
projecting will be construed to be a structure.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into two (2) or more parts, for the immediate
or future purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, including
all public streets, alleys, ways for public service facilities, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds or other public grounds, and all the tracts,
parcels, lots, or blocks, and numbering all such lots, blocks or parcels by
progressive numbers, giving their precise dimensions. The following will not be
considered a subdivision and will be exempt from the requirements of this
title:
   (A)   The division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels or tracts
of five (5) acres or more in size that does not involve any new streets or
easements of access;
   (B)   The redivision of land not involving more than three (3) lots and not
requiring new streets to be dedicated;
   (C)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land;
   (D)   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as
right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities that does not
involve any new streets or access easements;
   (E)   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
that does not involve any new streets or access easements;
   (F)   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes; grants or
conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use; or instruments
relating to the vacation of land for a public use;
   (G)   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE: The practice of a profession, scientifically applied to
the patient by the massage therapist by means of manual manipulation of the
muscle tissue that affects all systems of the human body.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE: Material that is capable of causing injury to living organisms
by chemical means when present in relatively small amounts.
TRANSITION YARD: An area that functions as a buffer between land uses and/or
zoning districts that is landscaped and free of buildings or other site
improvements.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
Unless otherwise expressly indicated, the term "use" means "principal use".
USE, PERMITTED: A use that is allowed by right in the subject zoning district
in accordance with all applicable regulations of this title.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The primary activity or combination of activities for which the
land, buildings or structures on the lot are intended, designed or ordinarily
used.
USE, SPECIAL: A use allowed in the subject zoning district only if reviewed and
approved in accordance with the special use procedures of chapter 11 of this
title and with all applicable regulations of this title.
YARD: An open space on a lot that is unoccupied and unobstructed from its
lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise provided in this title.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of this title.
(Ord. 1379, 6-9-2008; amd. Ord. 1578, 8-18-2014; Ord. 1772, 12-16-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 115.
