VILLAGE CODE
of
ST. JOSEPH, ILLINOIS
2005
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-015, passed 9-9-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the Village of St. Joseph, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 2025-015, passed September 9, 2025. Ordinances of
the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code
to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2005-12A
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
   THE VILLAGE CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF ST. JOSEPH, ILLINOIS
BE IT ORDAINED by the president and board of trustees of the village of St.
Joseph, Illinois as follows:
   Section 1: Pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/1-2-3, and from and after
the date of passage of this ordinance, the village code of the village of St.
Joseph, Illinois prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc. containing the
compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes
made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the
village, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code
and law of the village as enacted by the village president and board of
trustees.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official village code is identified by the proper catchline and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which
shall be maintained in the office of the village clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official
village code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision
and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the
governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said official village code. All
ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in
full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of
the village code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the
official village code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such village
code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper
with such village code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the
village to be misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: The zoning board of appeals for the village of St. Joseph
considered the proposed changes to the zoning regulations, which are contained
in title 10 of the village code, at its meeting held on April 25, 2005 pursuant
to public notice thereof, and said zoning board of appeals voted to make its
recommendations to the board of trustees which are reflected in said title 10
of the village code.
   Section 6: The plan commission for the village of St. Joseph considered the
proposed changes to the subdivision regulations, which are contained in title
11 of the village code, at its meeting held on March 8, 2005, pursuant to
public notice thereof, and said plan commission voted to make its
recommendations to the board of trustees, which are reflected in said title 11
of the village code.
   Section 7: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 8: This ordinance and the village code adopted by the same shall be
recorded and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
PASSED this 13th day of September, 2005.
APPROVED this 13th day of September, 2005.
                              
Village President
ATTEST:
                              
Village Clerk
Roll Call Vote:
AYES:
NAYS:
ABSENT:
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the board of trustees this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official village code of the village of St.
Joseph. This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the ST. JOSEPH
MUNICIPAL CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the board of
trustees and shall be kept up to date as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the village attorney, acting for
said village board of trustees. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this code by title in any legal document. (1973 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title 1 . (2005 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-6.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the
village code as soon as available after the date of its final passage. (2005
Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
village board. The clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk.
Any person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain said code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the village
clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the village and shall
be returned to the office of the clerk when directed so to do by order of the
village board. (1973 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVINGS CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following section), from which are excluded
the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
village; and all special ordinances. (1973 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue
of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1973 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or a penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the village herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (1973 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions
1-3-3: Headings
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words
importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be
deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be
repugnant thereto. (1973 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the board of trustees of the
village.
CODE: The municipal code of St. Joseph and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: County of Champaign.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
village of St. Joseph".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or
omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any knowledge
of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code
which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law.
NEGLIGENT: The word "negligent", as well as "neglect", "negligence" and
"negligently" imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in
acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the village
of St. Joseph".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation in his or its own capacity or as administrator, conservator,
executor, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed by the court.
Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this code prescribing a
penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or associations, the word shall
include the partners or members thereof, and such word as applied to
corporations shall include the officers, agents or employees thereof who are
responsible for any violation of said section.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
STATE: Unless otherwise indicated shall mean the state of Illinois.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public
places and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the
whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The village of St. Joseph, county of Champaign, state of Illinois.
WHOLESALER: The words "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (1973 Code)
1-3-3: HEADINGS:
The headings of the several sections of this code are intended as mere headings
to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be
titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly
so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the
headings, are amended or reenacted. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalty
1-4-2: License
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-4: NSF Checks
1-4-1: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code shall be deemed
guilty of petty offense and fined in a sum not to exceed seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), excepting any specific section of this code wherein the
maximum fine is limited to a lesser amount. Any continuing violation that
occurs over a period of more than one day shall be considered a separate
violation for each day the violation occurs or continues. (2005 Code)
1-4-2: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code any
license previously issued him by the village may be revoked by the court or by
the board of trustees. (1973 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any village officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intention of the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such
officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section
creating the duty. (2005 Code)
1-4-4: NSF CHECKS:
Any payments made to the village for fees, charges, penalties, reimbursements
or other reasons, for which payment is made by check or other means that is
returned from the bank or other financial institution for nonsufficient funds
or otherwise failed to honor, shall result in an additional service charge of
thirty five dollars ($35.00) to the person or entity making the payment. (Ord.
2006-3, 1-24-2006)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Elective Officers
1-5-2: Elected Officers; Term
1-5-3: Village Corporation
1-5-4: Appointive Officers
1-5-5: Village Treasurer; Duties, Bond
1-5-6: Clerk; Duties
1-5-7: Removal From Office
1-5-8: Salaries
1-5-9: Commencement Of Terms
1-5-1: ELECTIVE OFFICERS:
The elective officers of the Village shall consist of the Village President and
six (6) Trustees who shall hold their respective offices until their successors
are elected and qualified as provided by statute. (2005 Code)
1-5-2: ELECTED OFFICERS; TERM:
The elected officers (first elected on the third Tuesday of April, 1881) shall
hold their offices for a term of four (4) years, and until their successors
shall be elected and qualified as provided by statute. (2005 Code)
1-5-3: VILLAGE CORPORATION:
The Village shall be known and considered in law and equity a body corporate
and politic, by the name and style of the Village of St. Joseph, and by such
name and style, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with, acquire
and hold real and personal property, necessary for corporate purposes, adopt a
common seal and alter the same at pleasure and possess all other powers of a
Village corporation conferred by law. (2005 Code)
1-5-4: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Village
Board, a Clerk, a Treasurer, a President Pro Tem, and all other officers whose
election or appointment is not otherwise provided for, and said appointments
shall be made by the President and Board of Trustees voting jointly. Any
vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner.
The President Pro Tem shall be selected from current members of the Board of
Trustees. A Clerk Pro Tem may be appointed to keep the minutes of a meeting
when the Village Clerk is temporarily absent. (Ord. 2009-9, 4-28-2009)
1-5-5: VILLAGE TREASURER; DUTIES, BOND:
Duties of the Village Treasurer shall be to:
   (A)   Maintain funds in the bank and keep record of time deposits and
certificates.
   (B)   Reconcile cash with bank for all funds each month.
   (C)   Sign all checks.
   (D)   Prepare monthly reports for board meetings.
   (E)   Prepare annual report for publication.
The Treasurer shall execute a surety bond in the amount of sixty thousand
dollars ($60,000.00). (2005 Code)
1-5-6: CLERK; DUTIES:
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall keep the Corporate Seal and all papers
belonging to the Village the custody and control of which are not given to
other officers. The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Village Board and
the Planning and Zoning Commission and keep a full record of their proceedings
in the journal. The written minutes of each Board of Trustees' meetings shall
be made available to the President and Trustees no later than the Friday prior
to the next Board meeting. The written minutes of meetings of the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be submitted to the Chairman of said committee for
approval and correction, and corrected minutes made available to the Trustees
prior to the next Board meeting. (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff.
4-8-2017)
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall have other duties prescribed by the Corporate
Authorities. (2005 Code)
1-5-7: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
Except where otherwise provided by statute, the president may remove any
officer appointed by the president, on any written charge, whenever the
president is of the opinion that the interests of the village demand removal.
The president shall report the reasons for the removal to the board of trustees
at a meeting to be held not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days
after the removal. If the president fails or refuses to report to the board of
trustees the reasons for the removal, or if the board of trustees by a two-
thirds (2/3) vote of all members authorized by law to be elected disapprove of
the removal, the officer thereupon shall be restored to the office from which
the officer was removed. The vote shall be by yeas and nays, which shall be
entered upon the journal of the corporate authorities. Upon restoration, the
officer shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer shall
be removed a second time for the same offense. (2005 Code)
1-5-8: SALARIES:
   (A)   Beginning with the first regular meeting in May 2001, the village
president shall be paid one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each board of
trustees meeting at which he/she is in attendance.
   (B)   Each village trustee shall be paid one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
each board of trustees meeting at which he/she is in attendance.
   (C)   The annual salary of the village clerk shall be three thousand three
hundred dollars ($3,300.00), which shall be paid monthly ($275.00 per month).
   (D)   The compensation paid to the appointed officials and employees of the
village shall be set from time to time by the president and board of trustees.
(2005 Code)
1-5-9: COMMENCEMENT OF TERMS:
The terms of elected officers shall commence at the first regular or special
meeting of the corporate authorities in the month of May following the
proclamation of the results of the regular municipal election at which the
officers were elected. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 6
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Board Meetings
1-6-2: Ad Hoc Work Groups Committees
1-6-3: Duties Of Committees
1-6-4: Rules
1-6-1: BOARD MEETINGS:
Regular meetings of the village board of trustees shall be held on the second
Tuesday of each month and the fourth Tuesday of each month in the village
municipal building commencing at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Special meetings may
be called by the president or by three (3) trustees whenever in the president's
or the board's discretion it may be deemed necessary, in which event it shall
be the duty of the village clerk to cause all members of the board within the
village to be duly notified of such special meetings. (2005 Code)
1-6-2: AD HOC WORK GROUPS COMMITTEES:
The Village President and the Board of Trustees may, in their discretion,
create ad hoc work groups or committees to study or review specific issues.
These ad hoc work groups shall have a specific deadline for completion of work
that will not exceed 90 days from the date of creation. These groups do not
have any authority other than to report to the Board of Trustees on their
activity and shall not be considered to be standing committees. (Ord. 2025-02,
4-8-2025)
1-6-3: DUTIES OF COMMITTEES:
It shall be the duty of standing committees of the board to keep a close watch
of the affairs of their respective departments of the village government and to
make report to the board of whatever facts may be deemed of importance. Each
committee shall promptly and thoroughly investigate and report in writing upon
all matters referred to it by the board, and do and perform such other and
further duties as the board may from time to time by ordinance or resolution
prescribe. (2005 Code)
1-6-4: RULES:
   (A)   Rules of the village board shall consist of the following:
      1.   The president shall take the chair as near as may be at the hour
appointed for the board to meet and immediately call the board to order and at
the instance of any two (2) members present, compel the attendance of absent
members. In case of the nonattendance of the president at any meeting, the
president pro tem shall preside at that meeting.
      2.   A majority of the members elected shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, except as hereinafter provided.
      3.   Order of business:
First: Review and approval of the minutes of the preceding meeting, unless
dispensed with, and their amendment or correction.
Second: Treasurer's reports.
Third: Review and approval of payment of bills.
Fourth: Review and approval of investments.
Fifth: Address from the audience.
Sixth: Report from zoning board/planning commission.
Seventh: Reports of standing committees.
Eighth: Reports of special committees.
Ninth: Communications to the board.
Tenth: Unfinished business of the preceding meeting.
Eleventh: New business.
Twelfth: President's report.
      4.   The president shall reserve order and decorum, and shall decide all
questions of order, subject to an appeal to the board.
      5.   When two (2) or more members shall address the president, he shall
decide who is first to speak.
      6.   While any member is speaking, no member shall entertain any private
discourse, or pass between him and the president.
      7.   Every member, previous to his speaking shall address the president,
but shall not proceed until recognized and named by the president.
      8.   No personalities or reflections, injurious to the feeling of any
member, or the harmony of the board shall be tolerated, and every member
indulging in such personalties shall be called to order by the president.
      9.   A member called to order shall immediately come to order unless
permitted by appeal to the board to continue. If he or she appeals, the board
shall decide the matter without debate. If no appeal is taken, the decision of
the president shall be conclusive.
      10.   No motion shall be entertained unless seconded; when seconded it
shall be acknowledged by the president, and if any member requires it, reduced
to writing.
      11.   When a motion or resolution has been acknowledged by the president,
it shall be deemed to be in the possession of the board, but may be withdrawn
at any time before a decision or amendment.
      12.   If a question under consideration contains more than one distinct
proposition, it may be divided on the request of any member.
      13.   When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received,
unless for the "previous question", to postpone indefinitely, to adjourn to a
certain day, to lay on the table, to amend or to adjourn the board.
      14.   A motion for the previous question, to lay the question on the
table or to commit it until decided shall preclude all amendment or debate of
the main question; and a motion to postpone the question indefinitely or to
adjourn to a certain day shall, until it is decided, preclude all amendments to
the main question.
      15.   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, and shall be decided
without debate.
      16.   In all cases the name of a member offering a resolution or motion
shall be entered with it upon the journal.
      17.   The yeas and nays shall be taken on the vote of every ordinance and
a list of names of all persons voting and how they voted shall be entered upon
the journal, and if any member requires it, upon any question before the board.
      18.   No ordinance shall be repealed or passed, or appropriation made
unless by the affirmative vote of a majority of the board of trustees then
holding office or as otherwise required by statute.
      19.   The village clerk shall deliver all papers to the appropriate
committees and officers as early as the next day after the reference shall be
made.
   (B)   The foregoing rules or any of them shall not be repealed or amended,
abridged, modified or suspended, except by a majority vote of the board. (2005
Code)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: General Election Law
1-7-1: GENERAL ELECTION LAW:
The general election law of the state of Illinois applies to the scheduling,
manner of conducting, voting at, and contesting of municipal elections. (2005
Code)
CHAPTER 8
DEPOSITORY
SECTION:
1-8-1: Depositories Designated
1-8-1: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED:
The Village Board of Trustees shall, from time to time and at is discretion,
designate approved depositories for the Village which shall be reflected in the
minutes of its Board of Trustees meetings. (Ord. 2005-12, 7-26-2005; amd. Ord.
2022-01, 1-11-2022)
CHAPTER 9
INVESTMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-9-1: Village Investment Policy
1-9-2: Scope
1-9-3: Prudence
1-9-4: Objectives
1-9-5: Delegation Of Authority
1-9-6: Ethics And Conflicts Of Interest
1-9-7: Authorized Financial Dealers And Institutions
1-9-8: Authorized And Suitable Investments
1-9-9: Collateralization
1-9-10: Diversification
1-9-11: Maximum Maturities
1-9-12: Investment Policy Adoption
1-9-1: VILLAGE INVESTMENT POLICY:
It is the policy of the village to invest public funds in a manner which will
provide the highest investment return with the maximum security while meeting
the daily cash flow demands of the Village and conforming to all state and
local statutes governing the investment of public funds. (Ord. 99-16, 12-28-
1999)
1-9-2: SCOPE:
This policy includes all funds governed by the board of trustees. (Ord. 99-16,
12-28-1999)
1-9-3: PRUDENCE:
Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then
prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in
the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment,
considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the probable
income to be derived. (Ord. 99-16, 12-28-1999)
1-9-4: OBJECTIVES:
   (A)   The primary objectives, in order of priority, shall be:
      1.   Legality: Conformance with federal, state and other legal
requirements.
      2.   Safety: Preservation of capital and protection of investment
principal.
      3.   Liquidity: Maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating
requirements.
      4.   Yield: Attainment of market rates of return.
   (B)   The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its effectiveness
in meeting the village's needs for safety, liquidity, rate of return,
diversification and its general performance. (Ord. 99-16, 12-28-1999)
1-9-5: DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY:
Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the finance committee which, under the delegation of the
board of trustees, shall establish written procedures for the operation of the
investment program. (Ord. 99-16, 12-28-1999)
1-9-6: ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to
make impartial decisions. (Ord. 99-16, 12-28-1999)
1-9-7: AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS:
The finance committee will maintain a list of financial institutions authorized
to provide investment services. (Ord. 99-16, 12-28-1999)
1-9-8: AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS:
Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in Illinois
statutes regarding the investment of public funds.
Investments shall be made that reflect the cash flow needs of the fund type
being invested. (Ord. 99-16, 12-28-1999)
1-9-9: COLLATERALIZATION:
Funds on deposit (checking accounts, certificates of deposit, etc.) in excess
of FDIC limits must be secured by some form of collateral, witnessed by a
written agreement and held at an independent third party institution in the
name of the municipality. (Ord. 99-16, 12-28-1999)
1-9-10: DIVERSIFICATION:
The village shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability based on
the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
Diversification can be by type of investment, number of institutions invested
in, and length of maturity. (Ord. 99-16, 12-28-1999)
1-9-11: MAXIMUM MATURITIES:
To the extent possible, the village shall attempt to match its investments with
anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a specific cash flow, the
village will not directly invest in securities maturing more than one year from
the date of purchase. (Ord. 99-16, 12-28-1999)
1-9-12: INVESTMENT POLICY ADOPTION:
The investment policy shall be adopted by the board of trustees. The policy
shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the finance committee and any
modifications made thereto must be approved by the board of trustees. (Ord. 99-
16, 12-28-1999)
CHAPTER 10
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
1-10-1: Title
1-10-2: Scope
1-10-3: Definitions
1-10-4: Notices
1-10-5: Late Payment
1-10-6: Payment
1-10-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
1-10-8: Audit Procedure
1-10-9: Appeal
1-10-10: Hearing
1-10-11: Interest And Penalties
1-10-12: Abatement
1-10-13: Installment Contracts
1-10-14: Statute Of Limitations
1-10-15: Voluntary Disclosure
1-10-16: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
1-10-17: Liens
1-10-18: Application
1-10-19: Severability
1-10-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in
connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
ACT: The "local government taxpayers' bill of rights act".
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village's president and board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's finance chairman is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
property tax code or fees collected by the village other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
VILLAGE: The village of St. Joseph, Illinois. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local
tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
   (A)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
   (B)   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate
postage prepaid. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-6: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for
the applicable period. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four (4) or less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in
error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not
paid the amounts directly to the village.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of receipt by the local tax administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per annum, based on
a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or
the grant of a credit. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer fails to
provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local
tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax
administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax
liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-9: APPEAL:
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination
and assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five
(45) day period. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-10: HEARING:
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section
1-10-9 of this chapter, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
   (C)   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be eight
percent (8%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days
and the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a
failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 2001-1,
1-9-2001)
1-10-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of
the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   (A)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (B)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
   (C)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-17: LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   (A)   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   (B)   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   (C)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be
controlling. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
1-10-19: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter shall be held to be
invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of
such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-1, 1-9-2001)
CHAPTER 11
STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT
SECTION:
1-11-1: Adoption Of Act
1-11-1: ADOPTION OF ACT:
   (A)   The regulations of section 5-15 1  and article 10 2 of the state
officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq., (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this section) are hereby adopted
by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the village
to the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the village, is
hereby prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the village under the act, is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by
any officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall
be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the village.
   (I)   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the village if the act is found unconstitutional
by the Illinois supreme court.
   (J)   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act,
or does not address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the village. (Ord. 2004-3, 5-11-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 – 10-40.
CHAPTER 12
PUBLIC RECORDS
SECTION:
1-12-1: Request For Records
1-12-2: Retrieval Of Records
1-12-3: Fees
1-12-4: Denial Of Request; Appeal
1-12-5: Duties Of Village Clerk
1-12-6: Conflict With Illinois Freedom Of Information Act
1-12-1: REQUEST FOR RECORDS:
The village clerk is hereby designated as the person to whom all initial
requests for access to the records of the village are to be referred. Such
requests are to be made at the offices of the village at 207 E. Lincoln, St.
Joseph, Illinois, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to twelve
thirty o'clock (12:30) P.M. and one o'clock (1:00) P.M. to four thirty o'clock
(4:30) P.M., Monday through Friday. In the event that the village clerk is not
available during the times described above, the village office manager is
designated as the person to whom such initial requests are to be made. (Ord.
2008-7, 2-12-2008)
1-12-2: RETRIEVAL OF RECORDS:
Any records which are the subject of a request under the freedom of information
act shall be retrieved from such place as they are stored, by the village clerk
or the deputy village clerk, or by an employee of the village acting under the
direction of the clerk or deputy clerk. In no event shall records be retrieved
by the party requesting them or by any person who is not employed by the
village. (Ord. 2008-7, 2-12-2008)
1-12-3: FEES:
If copies of records are requested, the fees for such copies, whether certified
or not, shall be as determined from time to time by the village clerk. The
village clerk shall maintain a written schedule of current fees in the clerk's
office. The fees so charged shall reflect the actual cost of copying the
records, and the cost of certifying copies, if certification is requested.
(Ord. 2008-7, 2-12-2008)
1-12-4: DENIAL OF REQUEST; APPEAL:
In the event that a request to inspect village records is denied by the village
clerk or the village office manager, the denial may be appealed to the village
president. Such an appeal must be made within fourteen (14) days after the
requesting party receives the written notice denying said request; or, in the
event that the denial is not by letter, the appeal must be made fourteen (14)
days after the request is effectively denied. In the absence of the village
president, appeals from denials of requests for access shall be made to the
village attorney in the times set forth above. (Ord. 2008-7, 2-12-2008)
1-12-5: DUTIES OF VILLAGE CLERK:
The village clerk shall prepare: a) a village information directory; b) a block
diagram of the functional subdivisions of the village; c) a village records
directory; and d) a records catalog. (Ord. 2008-7, 2-12-2008)
1-12-6: CONFLICT WITH ILLINOIS FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT:
In any case of conflict between the Village ordinance and the Illinois Freedom
of Information Act 5 ILCS 140, the Village of St. Joseph shall comply with the
Illinois Freedom of Information Act. (Ord. 2025-002, 4-8-2025)
CHAPTER 13
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-13-1: Creation And Nature Of Position
1-13-2: Appointment
1-13-3: Term
1-13-4: Bond
1-13-5: Compensation
1-13-6: Other Employment
1-13-7: Duties Generally
1-13-8: Overriding Administrator's Decisions
1-13-9: Temporary Administrator
1-13-1: CREATION AND NATURE OF POSITION:
The position of village administrator is hereby created for the village of St.
Joseph. The village administrator shall be appointed by the village president,
by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees pursuant to section
3.1-30-5 of the Illinois municipal code. The village administrator shall have
the qualifications substantially equivalent to those of a city manager,
including: educational and professional training and/or experience in
administrative and management principles and procedures; considerable knowledge
of modern policies and practices of public administration; working knowledge of
municipal finance, human resources, public works, public safety, and community
development; skill in preparing and administering municipal budgets; skill in
planning, directing and administering municipal programs; skill in operating
any listed tools and equipment; ability to prepare and analyze comprehensive
reports; ability to carry out assigned projects to their completion; ability to
communicate effectively verbally and in writing; ability to establish and
maintain effective working relationships with employees, village officials and
the public; ability to efficiently and effectively administer a municipal
government. The statutory provisions of section 3.1-35-10 of the Illinois
municipal code are hereby made expressly applicable to the position of village
administrator. (Ord. 2009-1, 1-13-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-10, 10-27-2020)
1-13-2: APPOINTMENT:
The village administrator shall be approved by majority vote of the village
board of trustees. The administrator shall be chosen on the basis of executive
and administrative qualifications with special references to actual experience
in or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office
described herein and in the current village job description for said position.
At the time of this appointment, the appointee need not be a resident of the
village of St. Joseph or state of Illinois, but during the administrator's
tenure in office, shall reside within the village of St. Joseph, or elsewhere
within the 61873 zip code, within six (6) months of appointment unless extended
by the board. Neither the president, a trustee, nor the village clerk shall
receive such appointment during the term for which such individual shall have
been elected or appointed, or within one year after the expiration of that term
or appointment. (Ord. 2009-1, 1-13-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-10, 10-27-2020)
1-13-3: TERM:
The term of the position of village administrator shall be at will and shall be
established by the terms of a contract of employment. (Ord. 2009-1, 1-13-2009;
amd. Ord. 2020-10, 10-27-2020)
1-13-4: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of the position, the administrator shall
furnish a surety bond, to be conditioned on the faithful performance of the
duties of the position, in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to
be approved by the board of trustees. The premium of the bond shall be paid by
the village. (Ord. 2009-1, 1-13-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-10, 10-27-2020)
1-13-5: COMPENSATION:
   (A)   The administrator shall receive compensation in such amount and manner
as the board of trustees shall periodically fix by ordinance or resolution, and
in accordance with the contract of employment with the administrator.
   (B)   The village administrator shall be subject to the vacation schedule as
authorized by the president and board of trustees, but not less than the
provisions provided in the contract of employment with the administrator.
   (C)   The village administrator shall be subject to the same sickness and
disability provisions as other village employees, other than to the extent the
same are modified by the contract of employment with the village administrator.
   (D)   The village administrator shall be paid for the use of his/her own
private vehicle when used for village business at the per mile rate established
by the board of trustees and not to exceed the national established rate for
compensated travel. In connection with being compensated for the use of a
private vehicle, the administrator shall keep accurate records of such use
which shall be subject to approval by the board of trustees prior to payment,
or the village may provide a vehicle to be used by the administrator for
village business. (Ord. 2009-1, 1-13-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-10, 10-27-2020)
1-13-6: OTHER EMPLOYMENT:
The administrator shall have no employment other than the fulfillment of the
obligations of the position of administrator. The administrator shall not be
prohibited from occasional teaching, writing, consulting, speaking, or self-
employed activities not in conflict with the village's interests. (Ord. 2009-1,
1-13-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-10, 10-27-2020)
1-13-7: DUTIES GENERALLY:
The duties of the village administrator shall be:
   (A)   To aid and assist the president and board of trustees in the
formulation and development of policies, programs and procedures, as
established by the president and board of trustees and to supervise and
administer the implementation of such policies, programs and procedures.
   (B)   To recommend to the president and board of trustees the appointment of
heads of all departments and divisions subject to appointment by the president
and board of trustees and to supervise the work of said department or division
heads and all other employees of the village of St. Joseph.
   (C)   To serve as budget director, as such duties may be provided for by
ordinance or resolution.
   (D)   To provide for the development and dissemination of sufficient
information relating to the business of the village.
   (E)   To direct the general operations and business of all departments and
divisions of the village, and to provide for communications within the village
among the various departments and divisions, and to provide for coordinated
planning of the various activities and duties thereof, provided that nothing
herein shall be construed to remove direction and supervision vested in the
village treasurer or village clerk by statute or ordinance, nor shall this
chapter be construed as altering the lawful powers and duties of the president
and board of trustees.
   (F)   To assist the president and board of trustees in the enforcement of
all laws and ordinances within the municipality.
   (G)   To perform such other duties as described in the current village job
description for said position and as may be further directed by the president
and board of trustees. (Ord. 2009-1, 1-13-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-10, 10-27-2020)
1-13-8: OVERRIDING ADMINISTRATOR'S DECISIONS:
The corporate authorities then holding office may override any decision of the
administrator. (Ord. 2009-1, 1-13-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-10, 10-27-2020)
1-13-9: TEMPORARY ADMINISTRATOR:
During the absence or disability of the administrator, or if said position is
vacant for any reason, the president, with the advice and consent of the board
of trustees, may designate a properly qualified person to act as a temporary
administrator to perform the duties of the position, or if no such temporary
administrator is appointed, then the village president may exercise the duties
of the administrator as necessary. (Ord. 2009-1, 1-13-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-10,
10-27-2020)
CHAPTER 14
PURCHASING
SECTION:
1-14-1: Bidding Procedures
1-14-1: BIDDING PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Competitive Bidding Required: All work or other public improvement and
purchases that are not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment
or special taxation, except as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated
cost thereof shall exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), shall be
purchased from the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids,
unless competitive bidding is waived by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the
Trustees then holding office.
   (B)   Advertisements For Bids: A notice inviting bids shall be published at
least once in a newspaper with general circulation within the Village. The
Village shall also advertise all pending work or purchases by posting a notice
on the public bulletin board in the Village Municipal Building.
   (C)   Scope Of Notice: The newspaper notice required herein shall include a
general description of the work to be performed or the articles to be
purchased, shall state where specifications may be secured, and shall specify
the time and place for opening bids.
   (D)   Bid Deposits: When deemed necessary by the Board of Trustees, bid
deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful
bidders shall be entitled to the return of their bid deposits upon the award of
the contract by the Board of Trustees. A successful bidder shall forfeit any
bid deposit required by the Board of Trustees upon failure on its part to enter
into a contract within ten (10) days after the award. Such bid deposit may be
in the form of a certified check, bond, or letter of credit in an amount as
specified in the advertisement for bids to ensure finalization of the contract
and to indemnify the Village against all loss, damages, and claims that may
accrue against the Village as a consequence of the granting of the contract.
   (E)   Bid Opening Procedure:
      1.   Sealed: Bids shall be submitted sealed to the Village and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope.
      2.   Opening: Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated
in the public notice.
      3.   Tabulation: A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the
Board of Trustees or by a Village employee, in which event a tabulation of the
bids shall be furnished to the Board of Trustees at its next regular meeting.
   (F)   Rejection Of Bids: The Village, through its Corporate Authorities,
shall have the authority to reject all bids or parts of all bids and waive
minor irregularities when the public interest will be served thereby.
   (G)   Bidders In Default To Village: The Village shall not accept the bid of
a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses, or other
money due the Village.
   (H)   Award Of Contract:
      1.   Authority In Village: The Board of Trustees shall have the authority
to award contracts within the purview of this section.
      2.   Lowest Responsible Bidder: Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best interests of the
Village to accept. In awarding the contract, in addition to price, the Board of
Trustees shall consider:
         (a)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract to provide the service required;
         (b)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
         (c)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and
efficiency of the bidder;
         (d)   The quality of the performance of previous contracts or
services;
         (e)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service;
         (f)   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
         (g)   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
         (h)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract; and
         (i)   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
      3.   Performance Bonds: The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to
require a performance bond before entering into a contract, in such amounts as
it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the Village
and to conform to the statutory requirements for such bonds.
   (I)   Open Market Procedure: All work and purchases of supplies, materials,
and services not requiring competitive bids hereunder shall be made in the open
market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure
prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts in such a manner
so as to ensure the best interests of the public after solicitation of bids on
proposals by mail, telephone, facsimile transmission, or otherwise.
   (J)   Professional Services Exempt From Bidding Requirements: All agreements
for professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers,
real estate appraisers, and architects, and any other profession whose ethical
code involved prohibits or discourages involvement in normal bidding
procedures, may be entered into by the Village without observing the bidding
procedures prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts.
Regular employment contracts in the Municipal service shall likewise be exempt
from the provisions of this section.
   (K)   Emergency Purchases: In case of an apparent emergency that requires
immediate work or purchase of supplies, materials, or services, the Board of
Trustees shall be empowered to secure by open market procedure as herein set
forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any work, supplies, materials, or
services regardless of the amount of the expenditure. A finding of such an
emergency shall be made in an affirmative vote of at least two- thirds (2/3) of
the Board of Trustees at the time of such emergency contract or no later than
the first regular Village Board meeting thereafter.
   (L)   Cooperative Purchasing: The Village shall have the authority to join
with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best
interests of the Village would be served thereby. (Ord. 2017-14, 9-26-2017)
CHAPTER 15
OUTSTANDING OBLIGATIONS
SECTION:
1-15-1: Withholding Of Services
1-15-1: WITHHOLDING OF SERVICES:
Where any individual or entity is more than 15 days in arrears of owing any
unpaid sums to the Village for any and all outstanding balance(s) including but
not limited to payment for services, sewer fees, mowing fees, fines, court
costs, application fees, license fees and I or any other obligation of any kind
to the Village, the Village shall withhold providing any further services to
such individual or entity. The within provision shall not supplant any notice
and shut off procedures for the provision of sewer services otherwise provided
for by ordinance and/ or state statute but shall extend to every other service
provided by the Village including but not limited to issuance of permits and/or
issuance of licenses. All such services shall resume after any and all
outstanding balances have been brought current. (Ord. 2022-16, 11-8-2022)
CHAPTER 16
EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-16-1: Purpose
1-16-2: Objectives
1-16-3: Acquisition
1-16-4: Maintenance
1-16-5: Replacement Schedule
1-16-6: Initial Funding
1-16-7: VERF
Appendix A: Vehicle Equipment Evaluation Form
1-16-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Equipment Replacement Policy is to propose a vehicle
replacement plan for the Village to follow, and the specific vehicle and
equipment needs and requirements of the Village. This policy reflects the
vision of the Village of St. Joseph to create a multi-year vehicle and
equipment replacement plan that will serve as a guide in providing direction to
meet needs. This policy shall be administrated by the Village Administrator in
consultation with the Village Board of Trustees. The annual appropriations for
replacement, operations, maintenance, repair vehicles and equipment will be
provided for in the annual Appropriations Ordinance. (Ord. 2023-03, 4-25-2023)
1-16-2: OBJECTIVES:
The primary objective of the Village is to control the overall cost of
operating and maintaining the fleet of vehicles and equipment, to maintain
vehicles and equipment in a manner that extends their useful life, to control
the growth in size of the fleet, to standardize the composition of the fleet
and to accurately budget for maintenance and replacement costs. All new
purchases for vehicles and equipment are part of the budget cycle and are
coordinated through the Village Administrator for recommendation. (Ord. 2023-
03, 4-25-2023)
1-16-3: ACQUISITION:
The goal of the Village's acquisition practices is to obtain the lowest
possible price and the highest possible quality for vehicles and equipment. All
purchases of vehicles and equipment will follow the applicable purchasing
codes. Annually before the preparation of the Village Budget the Village
Administrator will review the vehicle replacement schedule and plan for the
acquisition of replacement vehicles and equipment. Any request for new
equipment that would increase the size of the fleet must be cost justified to
the Village Board. (Ord. 2023-03, 4-25-2023)
1-16-4: MAINTENANCE:
The goal of the Village is to keep vehicles and equipment in sound operating
condition. Preventive maintenance routines and intervals shall be based upon
local driving conditions and manufacturer's recommendations for each type of
vehicle or equipment and each type of maintenance service. (Ord. 2023-03, 4-25-
2023)
1-16-5: REPLACEMENT SCHEDULE:
   (A)   The Village Administrator shall maintain an invento1y of existing
vehicles and equipment and prepare a replacement schedule for same. The
schedule will be updated annually and will be used as the basis for planning
for the replacement of vehicles and equipment through the Village budget. The
vehicle and equipment replacement schedule will include the following
information for each vehicle or unit of capital equipment:
      1.   Age in years, also known as life
      2.   Usage in hours or miles
      3.   Useful life (based on commonly used standards for municipal vehicles
and equipment)
      4.   Cost of maintenance
      5.   Overall condition: mechanical, operating, safety, or appearance
      6.   Downtime
      7.   Availability of replacement parts
      8.   Funding The guidelines for vehicles considered for replacement are
based on vehicles meeting predetermined age and/or hour and/or mileage
criteria. Additional consideration is given to functionality and overall
condition of the vehicle or equipment. As vehicles reach the threshold miles or
age of replacement criteria, a vehicle maintenance evaluation is performed by
an individual designated by the Village Administrator. The evaluation form will
be provided to the Village Administrator for further review and consideration.
   (B)   If the evaluation proves the vehicle would be economical to retain for
an additional year, the vehicle will be targeted for retention. Depending on
the availability of funds, vehicles and equipment will be replaced when they
are at the encl 'of their economic life, no longer safe to operate, not
reliable enough to perform their intended function, or there is a demonstrated
cost saving to the Village of St. Joseph. (Ord. 2023-03, 4-25-2023)
1-16-6: INITIAL FUNDING:
A Vehicle Equipment Replacement Fund ("VERF") is hereby created. It shall be
restricted for use in acquiring new vehicles and/or equipment pursuant to the
within policy. The Village Administrator shall tender proposals for vehicle/
equipment replacement to be paid from this Fund to the Village Board comprised
of a not to exceed number enabling the Village Administrator to secure
authority to purchase while pursing the lowest possible purchase price. Any
lease payments for new vehicles/equipment shall be made from VERF unless
otherwise directed by the Village Board. (Ord. 2023-03, 4-25-2023)
1-16-7: VERF:
For the next ten years, funds will be transferred into the VERF, in even
amounts. These transfers shall be automatic and initiated by staff, funding
permitted. Only a majority vote of the Board of Trustees can interrupt this
automatic transfer. This automatic transfer will stop at the beginning of the
2032/2033 fiscal year and will be reassessed by the Board of Trustees. The
following transfers into the Fund will be from the General Fund, Sewer
Enterprise Fund, and Stormwater Fund in the following amount:
   (A)   General Fund: $116,307.01 per Fiscal Year;
   (B)   Sewer Fund: $79,727.47 per Fiscal Year;
   (C)   Stormwater Fund: $25,707.42; and
   (D)   Total Transfers per year: $219,302.70. (Ord. 2023-03, 4-25-2023)
1-16-8: SALE OF OLD STOCK:
Each old, replaced vehicle/equipment will be deemed surplus and then listed in
a competitive auction to ensure that best possible price is received complying
with applicable law. All funds resulting from a sale will automatically be
transferred into the VERF fund directly and will not pass through any other
fund. (Ord. 2023-03, 4-25-2023)
1-16-9: TRACKING:
On an ongoing basis, The Village Administrator will maintain separate folder
for each item in the VERF fund, with each to contain all maintenance records as
well other improvements. This will be tracked on an ongoing basis and will be
continuously monitored. The Village Administrator will justify future
replacement/acquisition based on expenses of maintaining current equipment. All
unspent money from the VERF will be invested in a Certificate of Deposit to
carry-over to the next Fiscal Year. Only enough cash to make the acquisitions
budgeted for in the Current Fiscal year will be kept in cash. At the end of the
Fiscal year, all extra cash, proceeds from sales, and new transfers will be
analyzed and weighed against the list of equipment being proposed for the next
fiscal year. (Ord. 2023-03, 4-25-2023)
1-16-10: FORM:
The Village shall utilize a form substantially similar to the form appearing
below to evaluate existing equipment and vehicles. (Ord. 2023-03, 4-25-2023)
APPENDIX A: VEHICLE/EQUIPMENT EVALUATION FORM
Vehicle or Equipment VIN or Serial#                   
Vehicle or Equipment#                         
Make:           Model:        Year:          
Mileage:              Hours of Operation:          
Date of Evaluation:           Evaluator:                
System Diagnosis Estimated Repair Cost
System                      Diagnosis Estimated Repair Cost
Engine                                
Transmission                          
Differential                          
Exhaust                               
Pumping System                        
Hydraulic System                      
Electrical System                     
Brakes                                
Tires                                 
Body                                  
Interior/Exterior                     
Front End/Suspension                  
Air Conditioning                      
Other                                 
Total Estimated Repair Cost           
 
 
Diagnosis Code Code Description
5              Excellent condition; like new; no repair needed in the near
               future
4              Good condition; minor wear and tear; system functions perfectly;
               no repair needed in the near future
3              Fair condition; significant signs of wear; system functions
               moderately well; repairs expected soon
2              Poor condition; substantial signs of degradation; system barely
               functions; repairs needed very soon
1              Bad condition; system inoperable; repair needed immediately
 
Evaluator's Comments:
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
(Ord. 2023-03, 4-25-2023)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Board Created
2-1-2: Term Of Office
2-1-3: Organization Of The Board
2-1-1: BOARD CREATED:
There is hereby created for the village a board of local improvements, that
shall consist of the following members: the president of the board of trustees
of the village and all the members of the board of trustees of the village
shall be and constitute the board of local improvements during their respective
terms of office and until their successors are duly elected and qualified.
(2005 Code)
2-1-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The expiration of the term of office of any of the members or of the president
of the board of trustees of the village shall automatically result in the
expiration of the office of any such member of said board of local
improvements, and the election of any member as president or as a member of the
board of trustees shall automatically make any such person a member of the
board of local improvements from the time said party duly qualifies and becomes
such president or member of the board of trustees of the village. (2005 Code)
2-1-3: ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD:
The president of the board of trustees of the village shall be and constitute
the president of the board of local improvements and have all the powers and
duties which the statute of the state of Illinois relating to local
improvements confers upon the engineer, but the president and the board of
local improvements shall have authority to employ an engineer to assist the
president of the board of trustees in his or her said duties and to obligate
the village for the payment of his or her fees and for services rendered in
that behalf. The regular qualified and acting clerk of the board of trustees of
the village shall be and constitute during his or her term of office the ex
officio clerk of the board of local improvements of the village. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Establishment, Composition
2-2-2: Membership, Term Of Office
2-2-3: Organization And Meetings
2-2-4: Powers, Duties, And Functions
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT, COMPOSITION:
There is hereby established a Planning and Zoning Commission, which shall
consist of seven (7) members, appointed by the Village President, subject to
confirmation by the Village Board. (Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
2-2-2: MEMBERSHIP, TERM OF OFFICE:
   (A)   Any appointive member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be a
qualified elector of the Village and shall have been a resident thereof for at
least one year. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed
and is qualified.
   (B)   The members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be appointed
for terms of four (4) years, the same to be staggered to provide continuity of
service. The Village President shall appoint one of the members as Chairperson,
subject to confirmation by the Village Board.
   (C)   Appointments to fill a vacancy shall be for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
   (D)   Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall receive such
compensation for their service as may be fixed from time to time by the Village
Board.
   (E)   Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be removed by the
Village President for non-performance of duty, misconduct in office, or other
cause upon written charges having been filed with the Village Board and after a
public hearing has been held before the Village Board regarding the charges.
Three (3) consecutive absences without good cause shall be grounds for removal.
The grounds for removal shall be served upon the member so charged at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing, either personally or by registered mail, or by
leaving the same at his or her usual place of residence. The member shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and answer the charges. A majority vote of all
the Corporate Authorities then holding office shall be necessary to sustain the
removal. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
   (F)   All meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be held in
accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. The Chairperson, or in his or
her absence, an Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths. The Planning and
Zoning Commission may compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena when
hearing appeals, special uses, or variance requests under title 10, "Zoning
Regulations", of this Code. All business of the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be transacted at the meetings. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating the fact, and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the Office of the Village Clerk and shall be a public
record. A quorum of all members is required for a meeting. Any absent member
who certifies that he or she has read the transcript of the proceedings before
the Planning and Zoning Commission may vote upon any question before the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission is necessary to render a decision or make a
recommendation. (Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
2-2-3: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
   (A)   The Chairperson shall cause the Planning and Zoning Commission to
organize by the election of a Secretary and such other officers as it deems
necessary. Such officers, as selected by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
shall hold office for a term of one year and may succeed themselves.
   (B)   The Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be a non-
member of the Planning and Zoning Commission, and, if so, shall have no vote.
   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt such bylaws governing
its procedures and regulating its business as it deems proper and necessary.
(Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
2-2-4: POWERS, DUTIES, AND FUNCTIONS:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Planning:
      1.   Preparing and/or reviewing a comprehensive plan for the present and
future development and redevelopment of the Village. The comprehensive plan may
be recommended for adoption in whole or in separate geographical or functional
parts which, when adopted by the Village Board, shall be the official
comprehensive plan of the Village or part thereof;
      2.   Recommending amendments to the comprehensive plan as may be deemed
necessary;
      3.   Preparing an official plan map of the Village and such later
revisions in the official plan map as may be deemed necessary by the Planning
and Zoning Commission or the Village Board; and
      4.   Planning for specific improvements pursuant to the provisions of the
official plan map. In connection with the foregoing, the commission shall:
         (a)   Review and make recommendations for neighborhood or area
renewal, conservation, redevelopment, urban esthetics, and civic design,
         (b)   Call upon any officials of the Village for aid and advice upon
any matter properly within the scope of interest of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and give aid to the officials of the Village and other governmental
agencies charged with the direction of projects for improvements included in
the official plan map, to further the making of such improvements and to
generally promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan. If the
Planning and Zoning Commission deems it advisable to secure technical
assistance or service, it may do so upon authority from and within
appropriations made by the Village Board, and
         (c)   Exercise such other powers, duties, and functions as may be
specified in this Code; as may, from time to time, be conferred on the Planning
and Zoning Commission by the Village Board; and exercise the statutory powers
granted to Zoning Boards of Appeal and Plan Commissions as may be provided by
any applicable provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code or other State
Statute.
   (B)   Zoning: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall exercise and perform
any power, duty, or function as may be specified in titles 4, "Development
Regulations", and 10, "Zoning Regulations", of this Code and exercise the
statutory powers granted to Zoning Boards of Appeal and Plan Commissions as may
be provided by any applicable provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code or
other State Statute.
   (C)   Subdivisions: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall exercise and
perform any power, duty, or function as may be specified in title 11,
"Subdivision Regulations", of this Code, and exercise the statutory powers
granted to Zoning Boards of Appeal and Plan Commissions as may be provided by
any applicable provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code or other State
Statute. (Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
CHAPTER 3
COMMUNITY FESTIVAL PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION
2-3-1: Establishment Of The Community Festival Planning Commission
2-3-2: Composition Of The Commission
2-3-3: Term Of Appointment
2-3-4: Chairperson
2-3-5: Meetings Of The Commission
2-3-6: Powers And Duties Of The Commission
2-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COMMUNITY FESTIVAL PLANNING COMMISSION:
There is hereby established a formal commission under the Board of Trustees of
the Village of St. Joseph, to be known as the Festival Planning Commission
(hereafter referred to as the "Commission"). (Ord. 2023-O-004-2, 5-23-2023)
2-3-2: COMPOSITION OF THE COMMISSION:
The Commission shall consist of six members, to be appointed by the President,
and confirmed by the Board of Trustees of the Village of St. Joseph. The
members of the Commission shall be residents of the Village, with a
demonstrated interest in the Festival and its success. (Ord. 2023-O-004-2, 5-
23-2023)
2-3-3: TERM OF APPOINTMENT:
The members of the Commission shall serve for a term of four years and may be
reappointed for subsequent terms at the discretion of the President and Board
of Trustees. (Ord. 2023-O-004-2, 5-23-2023)
2-3-4: CHAIRPERSON:
The Chairperson of the Commission shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees
from among the members of the Commission. The Chairperson shall preside over
all meetings of the Commission and shall be responsible for repo1ting to the
Board of Trustees on the progress of the Commission. (Ord. 2023-O-004-2, 5-23-
2023)
2-3-5: MEETINGS OF THE COMMISSION:
The Commission shall meet regularly, at a time and place designated by the
Chairperson. Additional meetings may be called by the Chairperson as needed.
Written minutes of all such meetings shall be made and approved by the
Commission at its subsequent meetings. All members shall abide by the Illinois
Open Meetings Act and other applicable law. (Ord. 2023-O-004-2, 5-23-2023)
2-3-6: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION:
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To plan and organize the annual Festival event, including but not
limited to selecting dates, coordinating with vendors and sponsors, securing
necessary permits, and arranging for entertainment and activities.
   (B)   To develop a budget for the Festival, and in coordination with the
Village Administrator, oversee the allocation of funds for the event.
   (C)   To promote the Festival within the Village and surrounding
communities.
   (D)   To evaluate the success of the future events. Festival and make
recommendations for improvements for
   (E)   To abide by the expenditure policies established by the Village Board
of Trustees and enforced by the Village Administrator. (Ord. 2023-O-004-2, 5-
23-2023)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Registration Required
3-1-2: Definitions
3-1-3: Requirements Of Registration
3-1-4: Village Policy On Soliciting
3-1-5: Notice Regulating Soliciting
3-1-6: Duty Of Solicitors
3-1-7: Time Limit On Soliciting
3-1-8: Penalty
3-1-9: Signs And Notices
3-1-1: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant, itinerant
vendor, or solicitor, to engage in such business within the village without
first registering with the village clerk. Provided, however, this chapter shall
not be construed as applying to any person(s) who hold a "garage sale" as
defined herein, if the duration of such sale is not held on more than three (3)
consecutive days and if no such sale is held on more than two (2) separate
occasions in any calendar year on the same premises. (Ord. 2015-6, 10-13-2015)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words are defined as set forth
herein:
CHARITABLE SOLICITATION: All solicitation by or on behalf of a charitable
organization within the meaning of section 501(a) and (c)3 of the internal
revenue code, 1954 (as amended).
GARAGE SALE: A sale of used items, goods, and wares legally owned at the time
such goods, items and wares are offered for sale by the person(s) actually
residing on the premises upon which such sale is held or legally owned by the
neighbors of said person(s).
GOODS, WARES AND MERCHANDISE: Any and all items of tangible or intangible
personal property.
RESIDENCE: Shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied for
residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of
building or structure.
SOLICITOR: Any person, whether a resident of the village of St. Joseph or not,
traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance,
from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying,
conveying or transporting goods, wares and merchandise, offering and exposing
the same for sale, or making sales and delivery articles to purchasers, or
offering services for hire, or who, without traveling from place to place,
shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicles, or
other vehicle or conveyance. One who solicits orders and as a separate
transaction makes deliveries to purchasers at a future date shall be deemed a
solicitor subject to the provisions of this chapter.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT OR ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person, firm or
corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident
of the village of St. Joseph or not, who engages in a temporary business of
selling and/or delivering goods, wares and merchandise within said village, and
who in furtherance of such purpose hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat, public room
in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley, or other
place within the village, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and
merchandise, either privately or at public auction. This definition shall
include any person, firm, or corporation who, while occupying such temporary
location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose
of securing orders for future delivery. No person, firm, or corporation shall
be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason
of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer, or by reason of conducting such transient business in connection
with, as part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant, or
auctioneer. (Ord. 2015-6, 10-13-2015)
3-1-3: REQUIREMENTS OF REGISTRATION:
Before a registration card may be issued under this chapter, a written sworn
application signed by the applicant, if an individual; or by a duly authorized
partner, if a partnership; or by a duly authorized officer of a corporation, if
a corporation; or by the managing member, if an LLC, or association; or
managing official of any other entity, containing the following must be
submitted:
   (A)   The name or names of the person or persons having the management or
supervision in the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed
that business will be carried on in the village.
   (B)   The name or names of the person or persons who are in fact the
ultimate owners and person or persons responsible for the applicant's business.
   (C)   The local address or addresses of such person or persons while engaged
in such business; the permanent address and addresses of such person or
persons.
   (D)   The capacity in which such person or persons shall act (e.g.,
proprietor, agent or otherwise).
   (E)   The name, address and phone number of the person for whose account the
business will be carried on, if any, and if a corporation, LLC or association,
under what state the same is incorporated or organized.
   (F)   The place or places in the village where it is proposed to carry on
the applicant's business and length of time during which it is proposed that
such business shall be conducted.
   (G)   The place or places other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant where the applicant within six (6) months next preceding the date of
application conducted his/her/its business, stating the nature thereof and
giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which
said business was conducted.
   (H)   A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares
and merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant in the village,
a statement whether such goods, wares and merchandise are sold from stock in
possession or by sample, credentials from the person for which the applicant
proposes to do business authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative, and such other reasonable information as to identify the person
or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business, or
the method or plan of doing business.
   (I)   Written proof of compliance with the Illinois "transient merchant act
of 1987" 1 , as amended, the Illinois "solicitation for charity act" 2 , as
amended, or other applicable state or county laws, ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. 2015-6, 10-13-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 465.
2 2. 225 ILCS 460.
3-1-4: VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the board of trustees of this village
that the occupant or occupants of the residences in this village shall make the
determination of whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their
respective residences. If no determination is made as provided in section
3-1-5 of this chapter, then in that event, solicitors may go upon such premises
for any lawful purpose, as long as said solicitor has been properly registered
and has been issued a permit for solicitation, and provided that entry onto the
premises is not refused or prohibited by some other lawful means. (Ord. 2015-6,
10-13-2015)
3-1-5: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
   (A)   Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided
by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter shall
comply with the following directions:
      1.   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to
solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence shall
be given in the manner following:
         (a)   A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches
(3" x 4") in size or larger, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance
door to the residence indicating the determination by the occupant, containing
the applicable words, as follows:
   NO SOLICITORS INVITED
   or
   CHARITABLE SOLICITORS ONLY
         (b)   The letters shall be at least one-third inch (1/3") in height.
         (c)   Such cards so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to
any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon. (Ord. 2015-6, 10-13-2015)
3-1-6: DUTY OF SOLICITORS:
   (A)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of any prospective solicitor
to make application through the village clerk a minimum of two (2) business
days prior to the intended time of solicitation. Upon approval of the
application and payment of the appropriate fees, a permit will be issued for a
period not to exceed five (5) working days.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of each applicant to pay a nonrefundable
application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) upon initial application for each
person who shall be soliciting or acting as a transient merchant, itinerant
merchant or itinerant vendor provided that there shall be no fee for
"charitable solicitation" as defined in section
3-1-2 of this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the village upon which a "residence", as defined in section
3-1-2 of this chapter, is located, to first examine the notice provided for in
section
3-1-5 of this chapter, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement
contained on the notice. If the notice states "CHARITABLE SOLICITORS ONLY",
then the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises
unless such person represents a charitable organization, as defined in section
3-1-2 of this chapter; and if the notice states "NO SOLICITORS INVITED", then
the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
   (D)   Any solicitor who has gained entry to any residence, whether invited
or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
   (E)   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance
for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any
door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as defined in this
chapter, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance
with the provisions of section
3-1-5 of this chapter or to otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-6, 10-13-2015)
3-1-7: TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises in the village and ring the doorbell upon or
near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or
create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as defined in this chapter, prior to
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after sunset or eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. whichever
is earlier, on any day other than Sunday or a national or state holiday. No
soliciting shall be lawful on Sunday or a national or state holiday, except for
charitable soliciting. (Ord. 2015-6, 10-13-2015)
3-1-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined in
accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code. Each solicitation or offer to sell in violation of this
chapter shall be considered a separate violation for the purposes of this
chapter. (Ord. 2015-6, 10-13-2015)
3-1-9: SIGNS AND NOTICES:
The president of the village is authorized to order and display appropriate
signs and notices to be placed at appropriate places within the village
advising that solicitors must register with the village clerk. (Ord. 2015-6,
10-13-2015)
CHAPTER 2
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: Tax Imposed
3-2-3: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
3-2-4: Returns To Department
3-2-5: Resellers
3-2-6: Severability
3-2-7: Effective Date
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor or service of the costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case
credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid.
"Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each
channel termination point within a municipality that has imposed a tax under
this chapter and charges for the portion of the interoffice channels provided
within that municipality. Charges for that portion of the interoffice channel
connecting two (2) or more channel termination points, one or more of which is
located within the jurisdictional boundary of such municipality, shall be
determined by the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge
for the interoffice channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number
of channel termination points that are located within the jurisdictional
boundary of the municipality and the denominator of which is the total number
of channel termination points connected by the interoffice channel. However,
"gross charge" shall not include any of the following:
   (A)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the
internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to customers'
bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public
utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce
commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
   (B)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such
municipality;
   (C)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
   (D)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   (E)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-
222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the department of commerce and community
affairs;
   (F)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
this chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service;
   (G)   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   (H)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication
devices;
   (I)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act; or
   (J)   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if: 1) those
charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are
taxable, 2) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or
invoice, and 3) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges on
the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the
nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from the
sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a
combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or
telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the
retailer of the telecommunications.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or
a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of
any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities
created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision
of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby
imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state,
who, to the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to
ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued,
without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be
the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state.
The permit may be revoked by the department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this state,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the
retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or
agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or
whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and
state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air to ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or
permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line" means
a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications"
subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this section,
"prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section
2-27 of the retailers' occupation tax act. (Ord. 2005-2, 3-8-2005)
3-2-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all of the following acts or privileges:
   (A)   For bills issued before July 1, 2005, the act or privilege of
originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate
telecommunications by a person at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To
prevent actual multimunicipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject
to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer
has paid a tax in another municipality on that event, shall be allowed a credit
against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent
of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the municipality that was not
previously allowed as a credit against any other municipal tax.
   (B)   For bills issued on or after July 1, 2005, the act or privilege of
originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate
telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%) of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To
prevent actual multimunicipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject
to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer
has paid a tax in another municipality on that event, shall be allowed a credit
against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent
of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the municipality that was not
previously allowed as a credit against any other municipal tax.
   (C)   For bills issued before July 1, 2005, the act or privilege of
originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality interstate
telecommunications by a person shall continue at a rate of five percent (5%) of
the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual multistate or multimunicipal taxation of the act or
privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon
proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or municipality in this
state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant
to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of such tax
properly due and paid in such other state or such tax properly due and paid in
a municipality in this state which was not previously allowed as a credit
against any other state or local tax in this state.
   (D)   For bills issued on or after July 1, 2005, the act or privilege of
originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality interstate
telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%) of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To
prevent actual multistate or multimunicipal taxation of the act or privilege
that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof
that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or municipality in this state
on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or
authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due
and paid in such other state or such tax properly due and paid in a
municipality in this state which was not previously allowed as a credit against
any other state or local tax in this state.
   (E)   The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such act or
privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
municipality. (Ord. 2005-2, 3-8-2005)
3-2-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   (A)   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall
be remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect
the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in
the manner prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter
shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if
unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for
such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
department in the manner provided by the department.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 2005-2, 3-8-2005)
3-2-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
On or before the last day of August 2005, and on or before the last day of
every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication
retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required
by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement the
act. (Ord. 2005-2, 3-8-2005)
3-2-5: RESELLERS:
   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the department may reasonably require.
   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person having discontinued the making of resales.
   (C)   Except as provided in this section, the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax
free on the grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active
resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in
connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is
nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 2005-2, 3-8-2005)
3-2-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this
chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall
not affect other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that can be
given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2005-
2, 3-8-2005)
3-2-7: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
approval and publication as required by law and shall be published in pamphlet
form, provided, however, that the tax provided for herein shall take effect for
all bills issued on or after July 1, 2005; and the tax provided for in
ordinance 2002-26 passed by the president and board of trustees for the village
of St. Joseph, Illinois, on September 24, 2002, shall continue in effect for
bills issued prior to July 1, 2005. Copies of the ordinance codified herein
shall be certified and sent to the Illinois department of revenue prior to
March 20, 2005. (Ord. 2005-2, 3-8-2005)
CHAPTER 3
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-3-1: Title And Purpose
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: Liquor Control Act Adopted
3-3-4: Licenses
3-3-5: Classification
3-3-6: Fees, Number And Display Of Licenses
3-3-7: License Required
3-3-8: Applications
3-3-8-1: Persons Ineligible To Hold A License
3-3-8-2: Issuance Of License; Determining Factors
3-3-8-3: Transfer Of License
3-3-8-4: Changes Of Interest; Partnerships And Corporations
3-3-8-5: Liability Of Owner Of Premises
3-3-8-6: Nuisance Declared
3-3-8-7: Absolute Liability Offenses
3-3-8-8: Grounds For Suspension, Revocation; Appeals; Fines
3-3-8-9: Notice Of Hearing; Emergency Closure
3-3-8-10: Use Of Premises After Revocation
3-3-8-11: Forfeiture Of Fees
3-3-9: Restrictions
3-3-10: Disposition Of Fees
3-3-11: Record Of Licenses
3-3-12: Change Of Location
3-3-13: Restricted Areas
3-3-14: Hours Of Sale
3-3-15: Violation; Displaying Samples Of Liquors
3-3-16: Inspection Of Premises
3-3-17: Enforcement
3-3-18: Sale To Minors Or Other Intoxicated Persons
3-3-19: Unlawful For Minors To Purchase Liquor
3-3-20: Warning To Minors
3-3-21: Minors As Managers Or Employees
3-3-22: Prohibited Conduct
3-3-23: Effective Date
3-3-24: Delivery Of Alcohol
3-3-25: BASSET Requirement
3-3-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be and constitute the liquor control ordinance of the
Village of St. Joseph, Illinois, which is adopted pursuant to Illinois Statutes
authorizing the empowered municipalities to control and regulate the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor within the Municipality and this chapter shall be in
effect for that purpose on and after its effective date as provided herein.
(Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise defined in this chapter, the words and phrases used in this
chapter and which are defined in the Act of the General Assembly of the State
of Illinois, known as "an Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors", approved January
31, 1934, as amended, shall have the same meaning in this chapter as defined in
that Act, "Liquor Control Act of 1934", Illinois Compiled Statutes, chapter
235, section 5/1-1 et seq. (Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-3: LIQUOR CONTROL ACT ADOPTED:
All the regulations and requirements set forth in the said Act of the General
Assembly, as amended, which relate in any way to the licensing or sale of
alcoholic liquors at retail within cities of less than one million (1,000,000)
population, shall be taken and construed as a part of this chapter as though
the same were fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-4: LICENSES:
   (A)   A license for the sale of alcoholic liquors shall be granted for a
term of not to exceed one year and all licenses shall expire April 30 following
the date of issuance. License fees shall be paid in full for the remainder of
the Municipal year from the date of application and fees for the payments of
such licenses shall accompany the application. However, the license fee shall
be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the
Municipal year prior to the date of application. No part of any license fee,
after issuance of said license shall be refunded.
   (B)   Such numbers of license of each classification may be issued as set
forth in section
3-3-6 of this chapter.
   (C)   A temporary licenses(s) (Class T licenses(s)) shall, however, be valid
only on and for the days designated thereon, which cannot exceed three (3)
consecutive days, and which cannot exceed ten (10) days in a calendar year. The
authorized dates of the Class T license shall appear on the application and on
the license. There shall be no proration of the temporary license fee as said
fee is computed on a per diem basis.
   (D)   The provisions of this chapter do not supersede or affect any
applicable private restrictions or covenants regarding the use of real estate.
   (E)   Any license application made under this ordinance shall be made at
lease five (5) business days prior to any requested issuance date or else it
shall be declined. (Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005; amd. Ord. 2023-06, 8-22-2023)
3-3-5: CLASSIFICATION:
   (A)   Fees: The following license classifications allow the holder to sell
alcoholic beverages seven (7) days each week. Fees for licenses for all
classifications are established in section
3-3-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
   (B)   Classes: Licenses for the sale of alcoholic liquors at retail shall be
issued in the following categories or classes: (Ord. 2012-4, 2-28-2012)
      1.   Class R License (Restaurant With No Package Sales): To be issued
only to a restaurant type of establishment, the principal business of which is
the sale of food prepared on the premises for consumption on the premises. A
Class R license shall entitle the licensee to sell alcoholic liquor at retail
by the drink for consumption on the premises only, in an enclosed building, and
shall only authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor at such times that prepared
meals are being sold in the same location on said premises. All licensees
holding a Class R license shall file with the Commissioner on or before January
30 and July 30 of each year an affidavit signed under oath by licensee or an
authorized agent of licensee setting forth the gross revenue for the previous
six (6) months in each of the following categories: food, alcoholic liquor, and
video gaming. The licensee shall, at any other time, provide upon the request
of the Commissioner an audit report prepared by an independent certified public
accountant at the expense of the licensee for a time period designated by the
Commissioner.
Total gross revenues from the sale of alcoholic liquor by a restaurant having a
Class R license shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total gross
revenues from the combined sale of food and alcoholic liquor on the premises in
any calendar year.
Total gross revenues from video gaming for a Class R license shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the total gross revenues from the combined sale of food
and alcoholic liquor and video gaming on the premises in any calendar year.
The fact that fifty percent (50%) or more of the combined gross revenues from
sale of food and alcoholic liquor is derived from the sale of alcoholic liquor
alone shall be prima facie evidence that the licensed premises is not a
restaurant within the meaning of this chapter.
The fact that fifty percent (50%) or more of the combined gross revenues is
derived from video gaming alone shall be prima facie evidence that the licensed
premises is not a restaurant within the meaning of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-16,
12-11-2017)
      2.   Class P-1 License (Package Only): A Class P-1 license shall entitle
the licensee to sell alcoholic liquor in the original packages not to be
consumed on the premises where sold.
      3.   Class P-2 License (Beer And Wine Package): A Class P-2 license shall
entitle the licensee to sell beer and/or wine in the original packages not to
be consumed on the premises where sold.
      4.   Class T-1 License (Special Events): A Class T-1 license may be
issued to civic, service, charitable or other not for pecuniary profit
organizations for premises on private property. No alcoholic beverage may be
sold or consumed within ten feet (10') of any public street open to vehicular
traffic. A Class T-1 license shall entitle the licensee to sell alcoholic
liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises or within the
area(s) specified and designated on the license application and the license,
and only during the hours specified on the days designated on the license
application, and on the license. Class T-1 licensees must comply with all the
provisions of this chapter and any amendments thereof, and all special
restrictions or requirements provided in the license. Class T-1 licenses shall
be issued for no more than ten (10) days.
      5.   Class T-2 License (Special Events): A Class T-2 license may be
issued to a current liquor license holder for an area which the liquor licensee
owns or has the right to use, which is contiguous to and which extends no
farther than one hundred feet (100') from the business premises for which the
liquor licensee holds an existing license. A Class T-2 license shall entitle
the licensee to sell alcoholic liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on
the premises or within the area(s) specified and designated on the license
application and the license, and only during the hours specified on the days
designated on the license application, and on the license. Class T-2 licensees
must comply with all provisions of this chapter and any amendments thereof, and
all special restrictions or requirements provided in the license. Class T-
2 licenses shall be issued for no more than ten (10) days.
      6.   Class T-3 License (Special Events): A Class T-3 license may be
issued to a current Village of St. Joseph liquor license holder for an area
which is owned by the Village of St. Joseph, or other government or not for
profit entity and which the liquor licensee has the written permission from the
owner to use for this purpose. A Class T-3 license shall entitle the licensee
to sell alcoholic liquor at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises
or within the area(s) specified and designated on the license application, and
on the license, and only during the hours specified on the days designated on
the license application, and on the license. Class T-3 licensees must comply
with all provisions of this chapter and any amendments thereof, and all special
restrictions or requirements provided in the license. Class T-3 licenses shall
be issued for no more than ten (10) days.
      7.   Class OC License (Outdoor Café):
         (a)   A Class OC outdoor café license shall permit the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor by any person holding a Class R or Class MB/W-2 license upon
adjacent public property if approved by the Village Board of Trustees, or upon
the licensee's outdoor private property designated in an outdoor café permit on
the licensed premises during the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday, provided that a valid outdoor café
permit has been issued, pursuant to this chapter.
         (b)   During the times when alcoholic liquor may be served under the
Class OC license the licensee shall:
            (1)   Not allow or permit any customer, employee or other person to
remove open alcoholic liquor from the area designated in the outdoor café
permit or the service premises of the licensee.
            (2)   Not serve, allow or permit any person to be served, be in
possession of, or consume alcoholic liquor in the area designated in the
outdoor café permit unless that person is utilizing the seating which has been
provided in accordance with the site plan approved with the outdoor café
permit.
            (3)   Provide table service, which may include incidental, snack
food service, in the outdoor cafe area during the hours when alcoholic liquor
is permitted to be served.
            (4)   Abide by other specific requirements imposed by the Liquor
Control Commissioner or Board of Trustees and described in the permit.
         (c)   The outdoor café area shall be subject to all provisions of this
chapter as though the outdoor café area was a part of the licensee's service
premises during the times permitted by this section for alcoholic liquor sales.
         (d)   Prior to the issuance of a Class OC outdoor café license the
licensee shall provide proof of liquor liability (dramshop) insurance. In the
event the license permits sale and consumption of liquor on public property,
the policy shall name the Village of St. Joseph as an additional insured, and
licensee, by accepting such license, shall indemnify and hold the Village
harmless from any action, proceeding or claim of liability asserted against the
Village as a result of or in any way related to the operation of an outdoor
café. Failure by the licensee to maintain the insurance required by this
section shall result in the revocation of the license. (Ord. 2012-4, 2-28-2012;
amd. Ord. 2019-6, 11-12-2019)
      8.   Class MB/W Licenses (Microbrewery/Winery):
         (a)   Class MB/W-1 Licenses:
            (1)   A Class MB/W-1 license shall permit the licensee to:
               a.   Manufacture spirits, beer, ale, wine, honey, and other
fruit or malt-based alcoholic beverages on the premises of the licensee in
quantities of no more than four hundred sixty-five thousand (465,000) gallons
(fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels) per year;
               b.   Sell licensee's manufactured spirits, beer, ale, wine,
honey, and fruit or malt-based alcoholic beverages to importing distributors
and distributors;
               c.   Sell to other liquor licensees which are licensed to sell
at retail alcoholic beverages including spirits, beer, ale, wine, honey, and
other fruit or malt-based alcoholic beverages; and
               d.   Store and inventory on the licensed premises such spirits,
beer, ale, wine, honey, and other fruit or malt-based alcoholic beverages
manufactured by the licensee.
            (2)   In the event that a Class MB/W-1 licensee applies for and is
granted a Class MB/W-2 license, the Class MB/W-1 license fee shall be rebated
to licensee on a prorated basis for the period when the Class MB/W-2 license is
issued through the following April 30.
         (b)   Class MB/W-2 Licenses:
            (1)   A Class MB/W-2 license shall permit the licensee to:
               a.   Engage in the same manufacturing, storing and inventory
activity which holders of Class MB/W-1 licenses are permitted to do;
               b.   Obtain a single and separate liquor license which allows
the Class MB/W-2 licensee to sell the licensee's manufactured spirits, beer,
ale, wine, honey, and other fruit or malt-based alcoholic beverages to the
general public for on-premises and/or off-premises consumption and/or provide
for tasting of the licensee's manufactured spirits, beer, ale, wine, honey, and
other fruit or malt-based alcoholic beverages on the licensee's premises;
               c.   Sell goods and products, other than alcoholic beverages,
incident to the manufacture and retail sale of the spirits, beer, ale, wine,
honey, and other fruit or malt-based alcoholic beverages; and
               d.   Sell spirits, beer, ale, wine, honey, and other fruit or
malt-based alcoholic beverages to the general public upon public property
adjacent to licensee's leased or owned premises, which use has been approved by
the Village Liquor Commissioner and a Class OC license is obtained.
            (2)   In the event that the licensee intends to make or produce
food products in a kitchen for service and human consumption on the Class MB/W-
2 licensee's premises, or upon public property adjacent to licensee's leased or
owned premises, a Class R license shall be obtained and such licensee shall
comply with all local and state public health codes concerning the preparation
and service of such food.
            (3)   Applicants for a Class MB/W-2 license must either have
another class of liquor license other than a Class MB/W-1 license or apply
simultaneously for another class of liquor license other than a Class MB/W-
1 license (eg., R, P2, OC).
            (4)   In the event that a Class MB/W-1 licensee applies for and is
granted a Class MB/W-2 license, the Class MB/W-2 license fee shall be prorated
from the date the Class MB/W-2 license is issued through the following April
30.
            (5)   A Class MB/W-2 licensee shall not be required to give notice
to the local liquor control commissioner in order to conduct sampling and/or
tasting activities, notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter.
            (6)   A Class MB/W-2 licensee may maintain separate addresses and/
or premises to conduct the separate activities covered under this section,
which shall not require the licensee to maintain separate licenses for each
address or premises, notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, provided
that all addresses/premises and activities thereon are disclosed in the license
application and approved by the Village Liquor Commissioner.
            (7)   Licensee may further engage in all activities permitted under
the Liquor Control Act, as amended, and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
(Ord. 2019-6, 11-12-2019)
   (C)   Sampling:
      1.   A retail licensee may conduct wine sampling/tasting for consumption
at a retail location currently licensed to sell wine in the Village. Up to
three (3) samples, consisting of no more than one ounce of wine may be served
to a consumer in one day, provided that the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
must be notified in advance, in writing, of any sampling/tasting practice and
must approve of the same.
      2.   The term "sampling" or "tasting" as used herein means a supervised
presentation of alcoholic products to the public on the premises of a licensed
retailer for the purpose of disseminating product information and education,
with consumption of wine products being an incidental part thereof.
      3.   The person serving the wine shall be at least nineteen (19) years of
age.
      4.   All State and Village ordinances shall be followed. (Ord. 2010-3, 2-
23-2010)
3-3-6: FEES, NUMBER AND DISPLAY OF LICENSES:
The number of licenses authorized and the annual fee for the license
classifications set forth in section
3-3-5 of this chapter are as follows:
Classification                        Annual Fee Number Of Licenses Authorized
Class R (restaurant no package sales) $1,300.00  6
Classification                        Annual Fee Number Of Licenses Authorized
Class R (restaurant no package sales) $1,300.00  6
Class P-1 (package only)              1,200.00   3
Class P-2 (beer and wine package)     1,000.00   0
Class T-1 (special events)            100.00/day No limit
Class T-2 (special events)            150.00/day No limit
Class T-3 (special events)            150.00/day No limit
Class OC (outdoor café)              100.00     No limit
Class MB/W-1 (microbrewery/winery)    600.00     1
Class MBW-2 (microbrewery/winery)     1,000.00   1
 
Each establishment so licensed shall display in some prominent place on the
premises the license issued to it, at all times during business hours. (Ord.
2018-7, 4-10-2018; amd. Ord. 2019-6, 11-12-2019; Ord. 2021-01, 3-23-2021)
3-3-7: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell, or offer for sale, in the Village of St.
Joseph any alcoholic liquor without having a liquor dealer's license, or to
sell the same in violation of the terms of such license.
   (B)   Where two (2) or more operations, places or premises are in the same
building or at one street address, a separate local retail liquor dealer's
license shall be obtained for each such operation, place or premises. (Ord.
2018-6, 4-10-2018)
3-3-8: APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   Applications for a liquor license, or renewal thereof, shall be made
in writing to the President of the Board of Trustees, or such other person as
he/she may appoint with the consent of the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Each application for a license required by this section and
application for the renewal of a license shall be accompanied by evidence of
dramshop liability insurance in the form of a certificate of insurance issued
by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State. The certificate
shall insure the applicant and the owner or lessor of the premises in at least
the minimum required by Illinois State law. Such coverage shall be kept current
at all times. Upon request of the Commissioner, a licensee shall provide
evidence of coverage at times other than the initial application and
application for a renewal of a license.
   (C)   Each license application for an original license, transfer of location
or expansion of the premises shall be accompanied by a set of floor and site
plans. The plans shall show the dimensions of the premises, its location on and
the dimensions of its site; the property lines and their relationship to the
building and all parking areas located on the property; its control premises
and service premises; and the design and layout for determination of occupancy,
including but not limited to exiting, seating, game and waiting areas and
position of equipment and fixtures therein whether or not an application for a
license has been or will be submitted. The plans will show on the face thereof
a written computation of proposed occupancy limits. The layout may not be
changed without submission of a new set of plans and approval by the
Commissioner.
   (D)   Each application for a license required by this section, or renewal
thereof, shall be signed by the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership,
all partners shall sign the application. If the applicant is a corporation or
club, all officers shall sign the application and indicate their official
position; each application shall contain at least the following information and
statements:
      1.   The name, birthdate, social security number, driver's license number
and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a
partnership or LLC, the names, birthdates, social security numbers, driver's
license numbers and addresses of all partners or members; in the case of a
corporation or a club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was
organized, the names, birthdates, social security numbers, driver's license
numbers and addresses of the officers, directors, managers, and if a majority
in interest of the stock of the corporation is owned by one person or his/her
nominees, the name, birthdate, social security number, driver's license number
and address of that person.
      2.   The class of license applied for.
      3.   The nature of the business which the applicant intends to carry out,
and, in the case of an applicant for a Class R and Class P license the amount
of the applicant's anticipated gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic liquor
with the gross revenue from other sources within the proposed licensed
premises.
      4.   The nature of entertainment proposed to be offered within the
proposed premises.
      5.   The length of time that the applicant has been a resident of the
State of Illinois, the County of Champaign and the Village of St. Joseph or, if
a partnership, the length of time that each partner has been a resident of the
said State, County and Village, or if a corporation, the length of time which
its proposed resident manager has been a resident of the said State, County and
Village.
      6.   The length of time that the applicant has been in a business of that
character or, in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued, the state of incorporation, and if a foreign corporation, the date of
being qualified to do business under the "Business Corporation Act of 1983" 1 .
      7.   The addresses, and telephone numbers of the premises, business
office if different and manager, and in the case of an original application,
new premises application, expansion of premises application, an exterior
photograph. In the case of all other applications, a statement that the
physical premises has not been modified or altered since the prior submission
of an application.
      8.   A list of governmental entities to which the applicant has submitted
an application for a liquor license, the dates of such application, the
disposition of such application, amounts of and reasons for any fines imposed,
and the dates, reason and length of suspension or revocation of such license,
if any.
      9.   A list of convictions of the applicant for any non-traffic
violations of any ordinance or statute of any city, county or state or of the
Federal government indicating the names of the offenses and dates of
conviction.
      10.   A completed criminal background and credit check authorization
form, including finger prints, for each person required to report conviction
information. The applicant shall pay all processing fees based on the cost to
the Village.
      11.   Documentation sufficient to establish that the licensee
beneficially owns the premises for which a license is sought or has a lease
thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued and that the
licensee has sole or exclusive possession of the premises for which the license
is sought.
   (E)   In the case of a corporation such information must be supplied by/
about all officers, directors, shareholders owning more than five percent (5%)
of the stock and by the manager. In the case of a partnership or LLC, such
information must be supplied by/about all partners, members or managers
thereof. However, any of the requirements of this section, sections
3-3-8-1 and
3-3-8-3 of this section
3-3-8 as to the providing of conviction and credit information which applies to
corporations need only be provided by/about the president, secretary and
resident manager of the corporation or by any stockholder holding twenty five
percent (25%) or more of the stock where that corporation's stock is publicly
traded.
   (F)   Background checks shall be conducted upon initial application and any
change of interest, and every third year thereafter. (Ord. 2018-6, 4-10-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 805 ILCS 5/13.05 et seq.
3-3-8-1: PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO HOLD A LICENSE:
   (A)   No license of any kind issued by the Commissioner shall be issued to:
      1.   A person who has been convicted of:
         (a)   A felony under any Federal or State law, unless the Liquor
Control Commissioner determines that such person has been sufficiently
rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set forth
in such person's application and obtained through the Commissioner's
investigation.
         (b)   A violation of any Federal or State law or ordinance concerning
the manufacturing, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor subsequent to the
passage of "an Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors" 1 ;
         (c)   Any Federal, State, or Municipal law in relation to gambling;
         (d)   Pandering or other crime or misdemeanor which is one of moral
turpitude;
         (e)   Being the keeper of a house of or is keeping a house of
prostitution;
      2.   A person whose license has been revoked under "an Act Relating to
Alcoholic Liquors" 2 ;
      3.   A person who at the time for renewal of any license pursuant to this
chapter would not be eligible for such license upon a first application;
      4.   A partnership, unless all the members of such partnership shall be
qualified to obtain a license;
      5.   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
pursuant to this chapter;
      6.   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it
is a foreign corporation, which is qualified under the "Business Corporation
Act of 1983" 3  to transact business in Illinois;
      7.   A person whose business is conducted by a manager unless the manager
possesses the same qualifications required for the license;
      8.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued, and who does not have sole or exclusive
possession of the premises for which the license is sought; provided, however,
that the applicant may employ or contract with other persons to provide
services for the licensee;
      9.   Any law enforcing public official including, but not limited to, the
Village President, Trustees, and Deputy Commissioner; no official shall have a
direct interest in any way in the manufacture, sale or distribution of
alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 2018-6, 4-10-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
2 2. Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
3 1. 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.
3-3-8-2: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; DETERMINING FACTORS:
   (A)   In deciding whether there is reason to refuse to issue a license, the
Commissioner shall consider at least the following criteria:
      1.   The eligibility of the applicant pursuant to section
3-3-8-1 of this section
3-3-8;
      2.   The compliance of the premises with all ordinances of the Village;
      3.   Any monies owed to the Village by the applicant which have remained
unpaid for a period of more than forty five (45) days, whether for bills,
taxes, licenses or otherwise;
      4.   Whether or not the premises will be located within five hundred feet
(500') of any Residential Zone;
      5.   Compliance with provisions of "an Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquor"
1 ;
      6.   The possible negative land use impact of the premises on surrounding
areas, including but not limited to the Village's Comprehensive Land Use Plan
and Zoning Ordinance;
      7.   The likelihood that the establishment will cause or contribute to
parking and traffic congestion problems;
      8.   Law enforcement problems, if any, which would be created by the
location, design or operation of the premises.
   (B)   If the Commissioner determines that there is no reason to refuse to
issue the license, and a license is available, the Commissioner shall issue the
license.
   (C)   If the Commissioner has reason to believe that it would be in the best
interests of the Village to refuse to issue the license, the Commissioner shall
hold a hearing upon the issue of whether or not the application for the license
shall be granted. The notice of hearing shall be in accord with State Statute,
however, a Class T applicant shall be given only such notice of such hearing as
is reasonable. (Ord. 2018-6, 4-10-2018)
 
Notes
1 2. Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
3-3-8-3: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
   (A)   A license required by this chapter shall be a purely personal
privilege and shall not constitute property pursuant to section 1 of article VI
of "an Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors" 1 .
   (B)   Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, application for the
transfer of a license to a new business owner may be made to the Commissioner
in the case of a bona fide sale or transfer for valuable consideration of the
business.
   (C)   The death of a licensee, termination of a partnership or corporation,
or bankruptcy of a licensee shall cause the license to cease to exist except
that the administrator or executor of the estate or the trustee in bankruptcy
may continue to operate the business for six (6) months in accordance with
section 1 of article VI of "an Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors" 2 ; provided,
however, that the administrator or executor of an estate must meet the
qualifications set out in section
3-3-8-1 of this section
3-3-8. Further provided that the heirs of an estate or purchaser of the assets
of a debtor's estate may apply for and have the opportunity to qualify for the
transfer of the license prior to any other person being given the opportunity
to apply and qualify for the license. The licensee, administrator or executor
of an estate, or a personal representative of a licensee or the heirs of a
licensee, shall give written notice to the Commissioner within ten (10) days of
the death of a licensee, or filing of petition in bankruptcy of those
individuals required to provide criminal background information pursuant to
subsection
3-3-8(D)10 of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-6, 4-10-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
2 2. Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
3-3-8-4: CHANGES OF INTEREST; PARTNERSHIPS AND CORPORATIONS:
   (A)   Changes in personnel of any person or entity licensed pursuant to this
chapter are subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Any changes in partners, officers, directors, persons holding
directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership
interest or managers of establishments licensed under this chapter shall be
reported in writing to the Commissioner within ten (10) days of the change;
provided, however, that changes in stock ownership need not be reported where
the stock is publicly traded if the stock transfer is less than twenty five
percent (25%) of the stock. All such persons shall meet all the standards of
this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a license.
      2.   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible
to hold a liquor license, such license shall terminate effective on the date of
such change.
      3.   When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes
place in the officers, directors, managers or shareholders of more than five
percent (5%) of the stock resulting in the holding of office or such shares by
one who is not eligible for a license, such license shall terminate effective
on the date of such change.
      4.   The licensee shall submit a criminal background and credit check
authorization form, including finger prints, for each change of individual
interests referred to in subsection (A)1 of this section. The licensee shall
pay processing fee which sum shall be determined by the Commissioner based upon
the cost to the Village. (Ord. 2018-6, 4-10-2018)
3-3-8-5: LIABILITY OF OWNER OF PREMISES:
If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from whom the licensee
derives the right to possession of such premises or the agent of such owner or
person, shall knowingly permit the licensee to use the licensed premises in
violation of this chapter, such person shall be deemed guilty of a violation of
this chapter to the same extent as the licensee and shall be subject to the
same penalties provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-6, 4-10-2018)
3-3-8-6: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any premises, licensed or unlicensed, used to conduct the sale of alcoholic
liquor in violation of "an Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors" 1  or this
chapter, is hereby declared a public nuisance per se. (Ord. 2018-6, 4-10-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
3-3-8-7: ABSOLUTE LIABILITY OFFENSES:
Except in those provisions where the mental state of knowledge, recklessness or
negligence is specifically required, the violation of any prohibition or
requirement contained in this chapter is hereby declared to be an absolute
liability offense. (Ord. 2018-6, 4-10-2018)
3-3-8-8: GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION; APPEALS; FINES:
   (A)   The Commissioner may suspend or revoke any license issued under this
chapter for any one of the following reasons:
      1.   Violation of the laws of the United States, the laws of this State
or any of the ordinances of the Village where such violations relate to the
operation of a licensed premises;
      2.   Knowingly, permitting without protest, any violation of this
chapter, any disorderly practices upon the premises or violations of any law or
ordinance, whether upon the control premises or the service premises, where the
licensee is licensed to operate under this chapter; for the purposes of this
section "protest" shall mean a formal declaration, whether verbal or written,
made by a person interested or concerned in some act or course of conduct about
to be done, already performed or being presently done, whereby that person
expresses his or her dissent or disapproval or affirms the act is against his
or her own will;
      3.   The willful making of any false statement as to a material fact in
the application for the license;
      4.   Failure to comply with the provisions of section
3-3-7 of this chapter;
      5.   Failure to obtain and keep current at all times at least the minimum
amount of dramshop liability insurance required by subsection
3-3-8(B) of this chapter;
      6.   Failure to comply with any rules and regulations promulgated by the
Commissioner;
      7.   Failure to pay a fine imposed by the Commissioner or costs imposed
by this section within twenty one (21) days of notice of such costs; or
      8.   Failure to answer under oath all relevant and material questions
propounded to the licensee at a hearing conducted by the Commissioner.
   (B)   In lieu of or in addition to the suspension or revocation of a
license, the Commissioner may impose a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such
violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
   (C)   All costs of preparing and transcribing the official record on appeal
to the State Liquor Control Commission by the licensee shall be borne by the
licensee whose license has been suspended or revoked or against whom a fine has
been imposed. (Ord. 2018-6, 4-10-2018)
3-3-8-9: NOTICE OF HEARING; EMERGENCY CLOSURE:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no such license
shall be revoked or suspended or a fine imposed except after a public hearing
by the Commissioner is held. The licensee shall be given a three-day written
notice affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
   (B)   If the Commissioner has reason to believe that the continued operation
of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community, the Commissioner may, upon the issuance of a written order stating
the reason for the conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed
premises closed for not more than seven (7) days. A hearing shall be held
within a seven-day period. Such period shall begin on the date of the closing.
The hearing shall give the licensee the opportunity to be heard on the matter.
If the licensee is engaged in the conduct of another business on the licensed
premises other than the sale of alcoholic liquor, the closure order shall not
be applicable to such business. (Ord. 2018-6, 4-10-2018)
3-3-8-10: USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION:
When a license has been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to
any person for the period of one year thereafter for the conduct of the
business of selling alcoholic liquor at retail on the premises described on
such revoked license. (Ord. 2018-6, 4-10-2018)
3-3-8-11: FORFEITURE OF FEES:
Revocation of a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall result in the
forfeiture of all fees or moneys paid therefor. (Ord. 2018-6, 4-10-2018)
3-3-9: RESTRICTIONS:
If any license is surrendered, not renewed or revoked, the number of authorized
licenses in that classification shall automatically be reduced by one,
notwithstanding the number of licenses set forth in section
3-3-6 of this chapter. However, this section shall not prevent the renewal of a
license, otherwise renewable, that was not timely renewed if such renewal
application is made within thirty (30) days of the license's expiration. The
Corporate Authorities may, from time to time, amend section
3-3-6 of this chapter clarifying the actual number of licenses authorized.
(Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-10: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
All such retail liquor dealer's license fees received by the President, or the
Liquor Commissioner, shall be forthwith turned over to the Village Clerk, if
the application for such license is accepted. In the event the license applied
for is denied, the fee shall be forthwith returned to the applicant. Such fees,
when received, shall be deposited to the General Corporation Fund of the
Village, or such fund as may be designated by the Board of Trustees. (Ord.
2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-11: RECORD OF LICENSES:
The President, or such other Liquor Control Commissioner as may be appointed by
him/her with the approval of the Board, shall keep a complete record of all
retail liquor licenses issued by the Village, and shall furnish the Village
Clerk and Champaign County Sheriff with a copy thereof, and he/she shall give
notice to the Village Clerk and Champaign County Sheriff of the revocation or
surrender of any such licenses within forty eight (48) hours thereof. (Ord.
2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-12: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only
in the premises described in the application. The licensee may change the
location only upon application and approval of the Liquor Control Commissioner.
(Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-13: RESTRICTED AREAS:
It is hereby determined that the following described portions of the Village
are predominately residential in character:
All real estate that is now or is hereafter zoned R-1 or R-2 (Single-Family
Residential), or R-3 or R-4 (Multiple-Family Residential District) under the
zoning ordinances of the Village of St. Joseph, Illinois.
No retail liquor licenses, except Class T, shall be issued for any property
located in any of the residentially zoned areas. (Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-14: HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquors in the
Village of St. Joseph, Illinois, as follows:
For all liquor licenses except R: Between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the same day, Tuesdays through Saturdays;
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. on Mondays; and between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays.
For R liquor licenses: Between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and
eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M.
All establishments licensed to sell alcoholic liquor at retail shall close such
bar or place of sale promptly at the specified closing time and shall stop
serving at such time prior thereto as to be able to close by said hour. (Ord.
2013-5, 7-9-2013)
3-3-15: VIOLATION; DISPLAYING SAMPLES OF LIQUORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to sell alcoholic liquors for
consumption upon the premises to violate any of the provisions of "an Act
Relating to Intoxicating Liquors" approved January 31, 1934, as amended, and it
shall also be unlawful for such licensee to display samples of liquor or
liquors in show windows. (Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-16: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
The licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the Village Authorities at
any time for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-17: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   The Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend or revoke any retail
liquor dealer's license for any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, or for any violation of any State or Federal law pertaining to
alcoholic liquor, as provided in the manner provided by statute.
   (B)   In addition to the suspension, the Liquor Control Commissioner may
levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed for a first
violation in any license year shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
The fine imposed for each subsequent violation in any license year shall not
exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day in which a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than seven thousand
five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) in fines under this section may be imposed
against any licensee during the period of his license. Proceeds from such fines
shall be paid into the General Corporate Fund.
   (C)   Notice of hearings regarding such suspension or revocation shall be
sent to the Champaign County Sheriff, Village Clerk, and the Board of Trustees.
The citations of violations, notice of hearings, conduct of hearings and
decisions thereon shall be as provided by statute 1 . The appeal of any
decision of the Liquor Control Commissioner shall be limited to a review of the
official record of proceedings of such Liquor Control Commissioner. Any penalty
imposed may be appealed within thirty (30) days as provided by law, unless a
different period is provided by applicable law.
   (D)   If any person, other than a licensee, violates any provision of this
chapter, said violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed for each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/7-9.
3-3-18: SALE TO MINORS OR OTHER INTOXICATED PERSONS:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, give or deliver any alcoholic
liquors to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to any
intoxicated person. (Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-19: UNLAWFUL FOR MINORS TO PURCHASE LIQUOR:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to
purchase or have in their possession or obtain any alcoholic liquor at any
place where alcoholic liquor is sold in the Village of St. Joseph; it shall
likewise be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or receiving
alcoholic liquor in any place in the Village of St. Joseph. (Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-
2005)
3-3-20: WARNING TO MINORS:
Every place of business in the Village of St. Joseph where alcoholic liquor is
sold shall display in a prominent place a printed card warning persons under
the age of twenty one (21) years against the purchase of alcoholic liquor and
advising them that violations of this chapter will subject such minors to a
fine up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) under this chapter. (Ord.
2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-21: MINORS AS MANAGERS OR EMPLOYEES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any licensee
under this chapter to permit or allow any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to be in charge of any licensed or permitted premises when any such
premises is open to the public for business.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any licensee
or permittee under this chapter to permit or allow any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to sell any alcoholic liquor, to attend the bar or to
draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor on the licensed or permitted premises;
provided, however, that any person who is of the age of eighteen (18) years and
older may deliver alcoholic liquor from the bar to patrons seated at booths or
tables in the licensed premises and may sell package liquor for consumption off
the premises only. This section shall not prohibit a minor employee of a Class
P licensee from assisting a customer with sold packaged alcoholic liquor to the
customer's vehicle on or adjacent to the premises where sold. (Ord. 2018-12,
11-13-2018)
3-3-22: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   (A)   Reporting Of Disorderly Conduct And Violations Of Law: All licensees
hereunder shall have the affirmative duty of reporting to the on duty radio
dispatcher of the Champaign County Sheriff's Department any and all incidents
of disorderly conduct or any and all criminal violations of this chapter which
take place within or upon premises for which a liquor license has been issued
pursuant to this chapter immediately upon observance or notification of the
incident. The licensee, employee or agent making the report of an incident
shall identify himself or herself to the police dispatcher and shall state the
nature of the incident. For the purpose of this chapter, "disorderly conduct"
as used herein shall mean such act or behavior of any person which in any
unreasonable manner alarms or disturbs another or provokes a breach of the
peace within or upon such premises. Failure to report to the police as herein
provided shall be deemed sufficient cause to suspend or revoke the license
issued hereunder.
   (B)   Nude Dancing And Sexually Provocative Conduct: The following kinds of
conduct on premises in this Village licensed to sell alcoholic liquor are
prohibited:
      1.   The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
acts which are prohibited by law.
      2.   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breast, buttocks, anus or genitals.
      3.   The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva,
genitals, or female breast below the top of the areola.
      4.   The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon the
licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his or her
genitals, anus, pubic hair or female breast below the top of the areola.
      5.   The performance of topless and/or bottomless dancing, go-go dancing,
stripping, lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows, or similar entertainment
where such performers are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
activities or anatomical areas described in subsections (B)1, (B)2, and (B)3 of
this section.
      6.   The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a live
performance of which is prohibited by the regulations stated above.
   (C)   Possession Prohibited On Public Property And Business Parking Lots:
      1.   Public Property Defined: "Public property" for the purpose of this
section shall mean any real property owned, controlled or managed by the
Village, or the St. Joseph Community Unit School District 169 and St. Joseph-
Ogden Community Unit School District 305. Any street, alley, sidewalk, public
parking lot, parkway, school grounds, or park shall be prima facie public
property for the purpose of this section.
      2.   Possession Prohibited: No person shall possess any open container of
or consume alcoholic liquor in any public property or the parking lot of any
business establishment or in any vehicle traveling upon or parked on any public
property or parking lot of any business establishment, except where such
possession or consumption has been authorized pursuant to the terms of a liquor
license, or pursuant to a resolution of the Governing Body of the public
property. (Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-23: EFFECTIVE DATE:
Due to recent approval by voters of sale of alcohol in the Village of St.
Joseph, it is urgent that this chapter go into effect immediately and therefore
this chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately upon passage and
approval and shall be published in pamphlet form. (Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
3-3-24: DELIVERY OF ALCOHOL:
   (A)   Class P-1 and P-2 package retailer's license shall permit the licensee
to deliver alcohol in its original package off the licensed premises.
   (B)   Licensee shall not be allowed to deliver alcohol off the licensed
premises between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. (Ord. 2011-8, 8-9-2011)
3-3-25: BASSET REQUIREMENT:
All liquor license holders shall comply with State law for employee Beverage
Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training (BASSET) and shall sign an
affidavit at the time of renewal of any liquor license, and any other time
requested by the Liquor Commissioners, confirming that the license holder is in
compliance. At any time requested by the Liquor Commissioners, a license holder
shall provide the names and addresses of all employees for the purpose of
verifying BASSET certification of all employees. (Ord. 2018-12, 11-13-2018)
CHAPTER 4
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited
3-4-3: Public Nuisance Declared
3-4-4: Violations
3-4-5: Severability
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
                                        A cultivation center, craft grower,
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS             processing organization, infuser
ESTABLISHMENT:                          organization, dispensing organization
                                        or transporting organization.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, dry, cure and package
                                        cannabis and perform other necessary
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:        activities to make cannabis available
                                        for sale at a dispensing organization
                                        or use at a processing organization,
                                        per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act
                                        (P.A.101-0027), as it may be amended
                                        from time to time, and regulations
                                        promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, process, transport and
                                        perform necessary activities to provide
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:  cannabis and cannabis-infused products
                                        to licensed cannabis business
                                        establishments, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act (P.A.101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time to time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Financial and
                                        Professional Regulation to acquire
                                        cannabis from licensed cannabis
                                        business establishments for the purpose
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING           of selling or dispensing cannabis,
ORGANIZATION:                           cannabis-infused products, cannabis
                                        seeds, paraphernalia or related
                                        supplies to purchasers or to qualified
                                        registered medical cannabis patients
                                        and caregivers, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act (P.A.101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time to time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        directly incorporate cannabis or
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION cannabis concentrate into a product
OR INFUSER:                             formulation to produce a cannabis-
                                        infused product, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act (P.A.101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time to time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        either extract constituent chemicals or
                                        compounds to produce cannabis
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING           concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:              cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis
                                        product, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act (P.A.101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time to time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        An organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Agriculture to transport cannabis on
                                        behalf of a cannabis business
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING         establishment or a community college
ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER:            licensed under the Community College
                                        Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
                                        Program, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act (P.A.101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time to time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        Any person, firm, corporation,
                                        association, club, society or other
PERSON:                                 organization, including any owner,
                                        manager, proprietor, employee,
                                        volunteer or agent. (Ord. 2019-5, 9-24-
                                        2019)
 
3-4-2: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
The following adult-use cannabis business establishments are prohibited in the
Village of St. Joseph. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to
be operated or aide, abet or assist in the operation within the Village of St.
Joseph of any of the following:
   (A)   Adult-use cannabis craft grower;
   (B)   Adult-use cannabis cultivation center;
   (C)   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization;
   (D)   Adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser;
   (E)   Adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor; and/or
   (F)   Adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter. (Ord.
2019-5, 9-24-2019)
3-4-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
Operation of any prohibited cannabis business establishment within the Village
in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. (Ord. 2019-5,
9-24-2019)
3-4-4: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter may be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
title 1, chapter 4, and title 6, chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 2019-5, 9-24-
2019)
3-4-5: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this
chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall
not affect other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that can be
given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2019-
5, 9-24-2019)
CHAPTER 5
MOBILE FOOD TRUCKS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Mobile Food Trucks/Vendors
3-5-2: Definition
3-5-3: Exemptions
3-5-4: Program Provisions
3-5-5: Mobile Food Vendors On Public Property
3-5-6: Mobile Food Vendors On Private Residential/Commercial Property
3-5-7: Mobile Food Vendor Permit Requirements
3-5-8: Violations
Appendix A: Maps
3-5-1: MOBILE FOOD TRUCKS/VENDORS:
   (A)   Any mobile food vendor (i.e. mobile food truck) is allowed to apply
for a permit to operate within the Village of St. Joseph, and if the permit is
approved, shall abide by the requirements of this chapter, or otherwise the
Village of St. Joseph may revoke said permit.
   (B)   Mobile food trucks catering private events, and food trucks at Village
events or festivals shall be allowed, provided they obtain a permit, as
required herein, and abide by the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-8,
8-11-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-03, 5-11-2021)
3-5-2: DEFINITION:
MOBILE FOOD TRUCK/VENDOR: A self-contained food service operation, located in a
readily movable motorized wheeled or towed vehicle, used to store, prepare,
display or serve food intended for individual portion service. (Ord. 2020-8, 8-
11-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-03, 5-11-2021)
3-5-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The following vendors/groups/persons shall be exempt from the provisions of
this chapter:
   (A)   Persons selling agricultural food products on commercial or private
property with written permission of the property owner. At no time shall the
sale be operated on a public street or right-of-way without written approval of
the Village President.
   (B)   Vendors of prepared foods who are invited to sell their products as a
part of a private or public special event or festival sponsored by a nonprofit
or public organization.
   (C)   Non-Profit groups selling prepared foods who are invited to sell their
products by a commercial or private property owner for a temporary fundraising
event. At no time shall they operate on a public street or right-of-way without
written approval of the Village President. (Ord. 2020-8, 8-11-2020; amd. Ord.
2021-03, 5-11-2021)
3-5-4: PROGRAM PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Below are the general provisions and requirements of the program:
      1.   The Mobile Food Vendor program is effective beginning May 1, 2021.
      2.   The program is only available for mobile food vendors, as defined
above.
      3.   No mobile food vendor shall operate within the Village of St. Joseph
without first obtaining a Mobile Food Vendor permit, unless otherwise exempt in
these requirements. Once a permit is issued, it must be placed in the vehicle
and be visible to the public at all times.
      4.   Mobile food vendor permits are non-transferable.
      5.   Mobile food vendor permits may be obtained at any time during the
year, provided that separate special events shall require separate permits.
      6.   Hours of operation, including setup and clean-up, for all mobile
food vendors shall be limited to operate on Saturdays, Sundays, and Mondays
between 7:00 AM and 10:00 PM, unless otherwise stated in these requirements.
      7.   No vendor shall sell at locations other than those approved by the
Village, identified in
Appendix A. Approved locations are subject to site inspection without notice.
      8.   All mobile food vendor sales must pay sales tax as required by
Illinois State statute. Vendors must show proof of a state IBT number, unless
exempt.
      9.   The Village of St. Joseph reserves the right to revoke any issued
permit for the Mobile Food Vendor program for non-compliance with these
requirements.
      10.   The Village of St. Joseph reserves the right to change these
requirements at any time without notice. Application fees are non-refundable.
   (B)   Below are site specific requirements of the program:
      1.   All mobile food vendors must comply with state and local COVID-19
safety requirements.
      2.   Mobile food vendors may not set up tents, tables, chairs, or any
other displays. One "sandwich board" style sign limited to three feet (3') tall
when open and two feet (2') wide may be placed within three feet (3') of the
vehicle. Detachable menus that affix to the vehicle are permitted. No off-site
signage of any kind is permitted.
      3.   No onsite discharge of any substance (i.e. water, wastewater, oil)
by vendors.
      4.   All mobile food vendors selling food and/or beverages for immediate
consumption shall provide one (1) twenty (20)-gallon trash receptacle for
public use. The vendor is responsible for maintaining, picking up, removing,
and disposing of all trash or refuse within fifty feet (50') of the sales site
on a daily basis and prior to leaving a sales site. Village trash receptacles
may not be used for this purpose.
      5.   Mobile food vendor vehicles shall be located in existing parking
spaces and no less than five feet (5') from any fire hydrant, sidewalk, utility
box, handicap ramp and building entrance. With the exception of on street
public parking spaces, mobile food vendor vehicles may be parked across more
than one (1) parking space when needed for vehicle/trailer stacking or to allow
space for customer walk-up. Mobile food vendor vehicles may use no more than
three (3) parking spaces. No part of a mobile food vendor vehicle may be parked
on grass areas.
      6.   Mobile food vendor vehicles shall be located at least seventy-five
feet (75') from any residential property.
      7.   No service area from any mobile food vendor is permitted to block,
obstruct, or interfere with vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic flow. No
part of any vendor operation, including but not limited to signage and trash
receptacles, shall block the site visibility triangle on any public or private
throughway.
      8.   Noise from a vendor, including but not limited to generators, shall
not exceed seventy-five (75) decibels as measured from ten feet (10') away.
      9.   Any lighting on a mobile food vendor vehicle, used during vendor
sales, must be shielded so that the bulb is not visible from any roadway or any
adjacent property.
      10.   No vendor shall be allowed to hookup to a private water source.
      11.   No on-site commercial deliveries to the vendor shall be allowed.
(Ord. 2020-8, 8-11-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-03, 5-11-2021)
3-5-5: MOBILE FOOD VENDORS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Mobile food vendors shall be allowed to operate in the parking lots of approved
public properties and approved public on street parking areas (see
Appendix A for locations). When located at said locations, mobile food vendors
are subject to the following:
   (A)   All mobile food vendors operating in approved Public Parking Areas
must serve food from the sidewalk or curb side of the vehicle.
   (B)   All public vendor spaces are available on a first come first served
basis. "Blocking" of public vendors spaces prior to the arrival of the mobile
food vendor vehicle is prohibited and could result in permit forfeiture.
   (C)   No mobile food vendor vehicle shall be left unattended for more than
30 minutes or parked on any public site overnight.
   (D)   Through completion of a special events form with the Village, vendors
may request permission for clustering of mobile food vendors on designated
public properties.
   (E)   Mobile food vendors may operate in on street public parking spaces
(street spaces with painted lines) when said public parking spaces are adjacent
to an existing restaurant, bar, or tavern. Food must only be served through the
adjacent restaurant, bar, or tavern to establishment patrons. Any mobile food
vendor utilizing an adjacent on street public parking space must provide, on a
form provided by the Village, signed approval from the adjacent restaurant,
bar, or tavern owner(s) for use of said public parking space. Vendor must also
file a special event form with the Village. (Ord. 2020-8, 8-11-2020; amd. Ord.
2021-03, 5-11-2021)
3-5-6: MOBILE FOOD VENDORS ON PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL PROPERTY:
Mobile food vendors shall be allowed to operate on residential properties
(during special events only) or improved private commercial properties, and
when located on said properties are subject to the following:
   (A)   On commercial properties, mobile food trucks shall not occupy parking
spaces required to fulfill the minimum parking requirements of the principal
use, unless the hours of operation of the principal use do not coincide with
those of the mobile food vendor.
   (B)   On residential properties (during special events only), mobile food
trucks shall not park on public property, unless approved by the Village
President.
   (C)   Mobile food vendors shall provide, on a form provided by the Village,
signed approval from private property owner(s) for each location at which the
mobile food vehicle intends to operate.
   (D)   Mobile food vendor vehicles may be parked overnight on a private
property site only when vendor sales occur the day of and the day after
overnight parking, but must not exceed three (3) consecutive days. (Ord. 2020-
8, 8-11-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-03, 5-11-2021)
3-5-7: MOBILE FOOD VENDOR PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
The following must be provided when applying for a mobile food vendor permit:
   (A)   Applicant must submit a completed application, as provided by the
Village of St. Joseph.
   (B)   Mobile food vendor applicants must pay a $25 application fee annually
(valid from May 1st through April 30th); a permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
(valid from May 1st through April 30th); and a twenty dollars ($20.00) fee per
day upon request of usage of the Village's electricity. Applications and
permits may be requested at any time, but all permit renewals will begin on May
l't. Vendors must submit a special request for each use of the Village's
electricity. Fees will be waived for local school fundraising events held on
school property.
   (C)   Applicants must provide locations for which the proposed mobile food
vendor intends to operate. For any private property site, the applicant must
provide a detailed site plan showing the proposed location of the vendor.
   (D)   Vendors must provide a permit from the Champaign County Public Health
Department. Permit must be visible to the public at all times.
   (E)   Mobile food vendors shall provide, on a form provided by the Village,
signed approval from private property owner(s) for each location at which the
mobile food vehicle intends to operate.
   (F)   Mobile food vendor applicants must provide proof of insurance. A
general liability insurance policy meeting the Village minimum required of
vendors which names the Village as additional insured is required for all
mobile food vendors.
   (G)   Applicant must provide a State of Illinois IBT number or proof of
application to the state, unless exempt. All mobile food vendors must pay sales
tax to the Village of St. Joseph as required by Illinois State statute.
   (H)   Applicant must provide an illustration of any proposed signage, which
includes dimensions. (Ord. 2020-8, 8-11-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-03, 5-11-2021)
3-4-8: VIOLATIONS:
Operation of a Mobile Food Truck in the Village of St. Joseph, Illinois without
a Mobile Food Vendor Permit shall constitute a violation resulting in a fine of
five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a Mobile Food Truck is operated
in violation of the ordinance shall constitute a separate violation."
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
approval and publication, as required by law and shall be published in pamphlet
form. To the extent that the within chapter conflicts with any portion of any
other Village ordinance, the terms of this chapter shall prevail. All other
terms of Village ordinances not otherwise in conflict shall remain in full
force and effect. The Village Board President, all other Village officers, and
Village employees are further authorized and charged to carry out the terms and
intent of this chapter.
Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of St. Joseph, Illinois, at a
regular meeting on the 11th day of May, 2021. (Ord. 2021-03, 5-11-2021)
APPENDIX A: MAPS
St. Joseph Food Truck Parking Locations 2021 - BJ Hackler Park
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/52d40f3c138f489d461830a4ef4b15efc27d210a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1225.jpg]
St. Joseph Food Truck Parking Locations 2021 - Community Sports Complex/Woodard
Family Park
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/52d40f3c138f489d461830a4ef4b15efc27d210a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1227.jpg]
St. Joseph Food Truck Parking Locations 2021 - Kolb Park
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/52d40f3c138f489d461830a4ef4b15efc27d210a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1229.jpg]
(Ord. 2021-03, 5-11-2021)
CHAPTER 6
SIDEWALK CAFÉ/PARKLET
SECTION:
3-6-1: Permitted
3-6-2: Operating Requirements
3-6-3: Parklet Design
3-6-4: Insurance
3-6-5: License Required
3-6-6: Application
3-6-7: Fee
3-6-8: Expiration
3-6-9: Display
3-6-10: Transfer
3-6-11: Suspension Or Revocation
3-6-12: Application Form
3-6-1: PERMITTED:
The owner or occupant of property adjoining any Village sidewalk may place
tables, chairs and other equipment commonly used in connection with on-site
consumption of food and beverages on the Village sidewalk and/or, in limited
areas, street immediately adjacent to such property for the sale and
consumption of food and beverages only upon obtaining a license in accordance
with this division. The use of sidewalks as set forth herein shall be referred
to in this section as a “sidewalk café”. The use of streets as set forth herein
shall be referred to as a “parklet”. (Ord. 2022-10, 4-26-2022)
3-6-2: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
Any operator of a sidewalk café and/or parklet shall comply with the following
requirements:
   (A)   Sidewalk cafes and/or parklets shall be located only in the area
bounded by the owner’s building, the adjacent street and the side lot lines of
the owner’s property.
   (B)   No portion of any umbrella in a sidewalk café and/or parklet or
anything attached thereto shall be less than six and one-half feet above ground
level. All umbrellas must have a mobile base. Umbrellas shall be retracted
during all non-operating hours.
   (C)   Where exigent circumstances exist and a police officer or other
authorized officer or employee of the Village gives notice to the operator to
temporarily move from a location or suspend sidewalk café and/or parklet
operations, the operator shall comply with the notice. For purposes of this
paragraph, exigent circumstances shall include, but not be limited to,
unusually heavy pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the existence of any
obstructions in the public space at or near such location, a parade, a
demonstration or any other similar event or occurrence at or near such
location.
   (D)   Food and beverage sales/service in the sidewalk café and/or parklet
area may begin no earlier than 6:00 a.m.
   (E)   Food and beverage sales/service in the sidewalk café and/or parklet
area must end no later than 12:00 a.m.
   (F)   There shall be no amplified or live music after 10:00 p.m.
   (G)   All food and beverages may be served only in/on a container/dish made
of material that does not easily shatter or break. Any broken container/dish or
other property shall be immediately removed.
   (H)   Tables shall be cleared of all moveable items such as dishes,
condiments, and other service items when not occupied.
   (I)   The operator shall be responsible for any items placed upon the
sidewalk and/or street. The Village is not responsible for any items placed
outside of the business premises.
   (J)   Any refuse or trash containers placed upon the sidewalk and/or street
by the operator must be emptied daily. Unemptied refuse or trash containers
shall not be allowed to remain on the sidewalk and/or street after the time
listed above for clearing the sidewalk café and/or parklet area. The operator’s
refuse or trash shall not be placed into a Village sidewalk refuse or trash
container.
   (K)   Any litter deposited on, in, or adjoining the vicinity of the sidewalk
café shall be removed immediately.
   (L)   The operator shall at all times conduct such activity or activities in
the sidewalk café and/or parklet area in an orderly fashion and in such a
manner as to protect the public health and safety.
   (M)   The operator shall comply with all health and sanitation regulations
applicable to food service establishments or otherwise.
   (N)   The operator shall indemnify, defend, and hold the Village, its
officers, agents, and employees harmless from any loss that results directly or
indirectly from the use of the sidewalk and/or street and shall maintain and
keep in effect liability insurance in a form appropriate for the operator’s
business.
   (O)   All tables, chairs and other equipment shall be removed during winter
months or any other time required by the Village.
   (P)   The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in the sidewalk café
and/or parklet shall be governed by the liquor license governing the restaurant
and no such beverages may be permitted to leave the sidewalk café and/or
parklet permitted space.
   (Q)   The sidewalk café and/or parklet shall not be detrimental to the
health, safety, morals or general welfare of persons residing or working in the
vicinity.
   (R)   No food may be stored, cooked or otherwise prepared in the sidewalk
café and/or parklet area.
   (S)   No soiled food service equipment, utensils or tableware may be kept in
the sidewalk café and/or parklet area.
   (T)   All clean food service equipment, utensils or tableware must be
covered at all times.
   (U)   The sidewalk café and/or parklet shall be accessible to the disabled,
and the operator shall at all times comply with all applicable federal, state
and village laws, ordinances and regulations concerning accessibility and
nondiscrimination in the providing of service.
   (V)   The sidewalk café and/or parklet shall not obstruct any fire exit,
fire escape or other required means of ingress and egress of any building.
   (W)   In no event shall the operation of the sidewalk café and/or parklet
unreasonably interfere with the passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
reduce the open portion of the public sidewalk to less than three feet, clear
of all obstructions, measured from edge of the sidewalk closest to the curb,
lampposts or parking meters.
   (X)   In no event shall the operation of, or placement of equipment or
furnishings for, the sidewalk café and/or parklet obstruct access to any
crosswalk, mailbox, curb cut, parking space or any other public property. The
furnishings or equipment shall not obstruct access to any fire hydrant, fire
escape or fire door, or obstruct the clear view of any traffic signal,
regulatory sign or street sign.
   (Y)   Outdoor furnishing materials and finishes shall be durable, smooth and
easily cleanable and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
   (Z)   Confirm and demonstrate that applicant has no other viable
alternatives to providing services without either a sidewalk café and/or
parklet. (Ord. 2022-10, 4-26-2022)
3-6-3: PARKLET DESIGN:
To the extent that applicants request a license for a parklet, applicant must
submit a plan sufficient to minimize the impact on traffic flow, confirm that
it is not placed within 5 feet of a pedestrian walk, shall not block designated
ingress, egress or fire exits, and have adequate safety elements including, but
not limited to, wheel stops, planters, and/or other edging reasonably
appropriate to protect its occupants. (Ord. 2022-10, 4-26-2022)
3-6-4: INSURANCE:
Every person making application for a sidewalk café/parklet license shall, with
the application, provide to the Village evidence of insurance coverage covering
the use of Village sidewalks and/or streets in form and substance acceptable to
the Village and shall include the Village as an additional insured. (Ord. 2022-
10, 4-26-2022)
3-6-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sidewalk café and/or parklet
on any Village sidewalk and/or street unless a valid license issued under this
division for the sidewalk café and/or parklet is in effect. (Ord. 2022-10, 4-
26-2022)
3-6-6: APPLICATION:
Applications for the license required by this division shall be filed with the
Village Administrator and shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the owner and operator of the establishment
where the sidewalk café and/or parklet shall be located.
   (B)   The area of Village sidewalk and/or street where the sidewalk café
and/or parklet is proposed to be located.
   (C)   A description of the sidewalk café and/or parklet to be covered by the
license.
   (D)   Evidence that insurance as required by Village Ordinances. (Ord. 2022-
10, 4-26-2022)
3-6-7: FEE:
The annual fee for the license shall be $25.00. (Ord. 2022-10, 4-26-2022)
3-6-8: EXPIRATION:
Licenses issued pursuant to this division shall terminate on the fourth Tuesday
of May the next year following issuance. There shall be no proration of the
license fee. (Ord. 2022-10, 4-26-2022)
3-6-9: DISPLAY:
The license required by this division shall be prominently displayed next to
the sidewalk café and/or parklet. (Ord. 2022-10, 4-26-2022)
3-6-10: TRANSFER:
No license issued pursuant to this division may be transferred, sold or
assigned to another person, except upon the sale or lease of the premises for
which the license is issued. (Ord. 2022-10, 4-26-2022)
3-6-11: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The President, at any time, may notify any licensee under this division within
five business days of any charge of a violation of any of the provisions of
this article in connection with the operation of any sidewalk café and/or
parklet. After a hearing provided by the President may order the suspension or
revocation of the license upon a finding that the violation has occurred and
the license shall thereupon be suspended or terminated. (Ord. 2022-10, 4-26-
2022)
3-6-12: APPLICATION FORM:
All applications for a sidewalk café/parklet license shall be in substantially
similar form as follows:
(Ord. 2022-10, 4-26-2022)
Sidewalk Café/Parklet Application Form St. Joseph, Illinois.
APPLICANT INFORMATION
 
Business Name
 
Business Address
 
Name of License Applicant
 
Telephone & Fax
 
E-mail
 
CHECK ONE OF THE FOLLOWING:
_______ Applicant is the Owner of the subject property and is the signer of this
application.
_______ Applicant is the Owner/Manager of business located at the above address
and is the signer of this application.
 
REQUIRED INFORMATION
1.   Describe the types of food and/or beverages to be sold, served, and consumed
in the sidewalk café/Parklet:
 
2.   What are the proposed hours of operation for the sidewalk café/Parklet/dining
area?
 
3.   Attached a copy of the establishment’s business license and, if applicable,
the liquor license.
 
4.   Attach a copy of a Certificate of Insurance (only if applicant will be using
any part of any public sidewalk or public property).
 
5.   Attach a site plan depicting the sidewalk café/Parklet/outdoor dining and
drinking area. The plan should include: (i) locations of all seating and tables;
(ii)ingress and egress points to the building and through any barricades or
enclosures; (iii) the distance that the building is setback from the property
line; (iv) a scale or distance between all features of the sidewalk café/Parklet
or outdoor dining and drinking area.
 
6.   Submit payment of $25.00 Application Fee.
 
INDEMNIFICATION
I, the undersigned, applicant for the sidewalk café/Parklet/ outdoor dining
license, indemnify and hold harmless the Village of St. Joseph, Illinois, its
officers, agents and employees against loss or expense including attorney’s fees,
by reason of liability imposed by law upon the Village, for damage because of
bodily injury, including death, at any time resulting therefrom, sustained by any
person or persons, or on account of damage to property arising out of or in
consequences of the granting of a license, operation of a sidewalk café, parklet
or outdoor dining or drinking area or otherwise occupying public property pursuant
to any license issued by the Village.
 
Signature            Printed Name            Date
 
CHAPTER 7
RAFFLES AND RAFFLE LICENSE
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: Classification Of Licenses
3-7-3: License Required
3-7-4: Raffle License Application
3-7-5: Village Of St. Joseph Special Event Application
3-7-6: Licensee Qualifications
3-7-7: License Issuance
3-7-8: Licensing Fees
3-7-9: Conduct Of Raffles
3-7-10: Raffles Manager—Fidelity Bond
3-7-11: Records To Be Kept
3-7-12: Penalty
3-7-13: Indemnification
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Code shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and/or businesses
who have joined together to advance commercial, financial, industrial, and/or
civic interests of a community.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated
to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit upon the public. Village of
St. Joseph special event application means an application which must be
submitted and approved by certain applicants for a raffle license, as defined
herein, for purposes of establishing public safety and coordinating needs
between the licensee, raffle event, and village, as authorized by village code.
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated
to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their
scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported
schools.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is both to promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those who otherwise would be cared for by
the government.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit in
the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
LICENSEE: An organization which has been issued a license to operate a raffle.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable
sums expended for prizes, local license fees, and other reasonable operating
expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: Organized, operated, and conducted on a not-for-profit basis with no
personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of said operation.
PERSON: An individual, firm, organization, public, or private corporation,
government, partnership, or unincorporated association.
PINS: The number of individuals permitted to participate in any raffle event.
For a Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license, only individuals who have
obtained a pin may purchase chances for the raffle event. The number of pins
for any given raffle event will be determined on a case-by-case basis by the
raffle administrator through a defined process stated herein.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-2(b), conducted by an
organization licensed under this Code in which:
   (A)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other means, one or more of which chances is to be designated as a winning
chance; and
   (B)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of the publicly exhibited
sporting contest.
RAFFLE ADMINISTRATOR(S): The Village Administrator or the Village
Administrator's designee.
RAFFLE EVENT: An event at which at least one raffle is conducted by an
organization that holds a raffle license issued under this Code.
RAFFLE EVENT LIMITATION: The aggregate retail value of all prizes, merchandise,
or cash payouts that may be awarded by a licensee in connection with a single
raffle event.
RAFFLE LICENSE APPLICATION: Village license application that must be submitted
and approved prior to obtaining a license for a raffle event within the
village.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: Any church, congregation, society, or organization
founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERAN'S ORGANIZATION: An organization or association comprised of members of
which substantially all are individuals who are veteran's, spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 2024-09 11-26-2024)
3-7-2: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
   (A)   Class A: General raffle license. A Class A raffle license shall permit
an organization the ability to conduct a raffle that may include multiple
drawings to award prizes, but all drawings must occur on the same day and at
the same location and within the confines of the same raffle event.
      The following limitations shall apply as to prizes, merchandise and
chances in connection with any Class A raffle event conducted within the
village:
      1.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in connection with a single raffle shall not exceed fifty-thousand
dollars ($50,000.00).
      2.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) unless
special board of trustees permission is obtained.
      3.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      4.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or
sold shall not exceed one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days.
      5.   No raffle tickets shall be sold on village-owned property without
board of trustees approval to do so.
      6.   A raffle license application must be submitted to village and
approved by the raffle administrator, but a Class A general raffle license
shall not require a Village of St. Joseph special event application, and may be
issued by the raffle administrator.
   (B)   Class B: Financial hardship raffle license. A Class B raffle license
allows a not-for-profit fund raising organization or group, organized for the
sole purpose of providing financial hardship assistance to an identified
individual or group of individuals suffering severe financial hardship as a
result of an injury, disability, accident, or disaster, to conduct one raffle
event for that purpose.
      The following limitations shall apply as to prizes, merchandise and
chances in connection with any Class B raffle event conducted within the
village:
      1.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in connection with a single raffle shall not exceed fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00).
      2.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) unless
special village council permission is obtained.
      3.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      4.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or
sold shall not exceed one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days.
      5.   No raffle tickets shall be sold on village-owned property without
special board of trustees approval to do so.
      6.   A raffle license application must be submitted to village and
approved by the raffle administrator, but a Class B financial hardship raffle
license shall not require a Village of St. Joseph special event application and
may be issued by the raffle administrator.
   (C)   Class C: Fifty-two week (52) raffle license. A Class C fifty-two (52)
week raffle license permits an organization to regularly conduct raffles as
defined herein within a maximum of fifty-two (52) consecutive calendar weeks.
Such license shall permit no more than fifty-two (52) raffle events, and the
raffle event must conclude no later than week fifty-two (52).
      The following limitations shall apply as to prizes, merchandise and
chances in connection with any Class C raffle event conducted within the
village:
      1.   The maximum number of pins permitted for a Class C fifty-two (52)
week raffle license shall not exceed five thousand (5,000).
      2.   For raffle events with three thousand (3,000) pins or less, the
aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in
connection with a single raffle event shall not exceed five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00).
      3.   For raffle events with three thousand and one (3,001) through five
thousand (5,000) pins, the aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise
awarded by a licensee in connection with a single raffle event shall not exceed
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
      4.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      5.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or
sold shall not exceed fifty-two (52) consecutive calendar weeks.
      6.   No raffle tickets shall be sold on village-owned property without
special board of trustees approval to do so.
      7.   No raffle tickets shall be sold in any location other than the
location where the drawing(s) for the raffle event(s) or conclusion of the
raffle event(s) will take place according to the raffle license application
and/or Village of St. Joseph special event application.
      8.   A Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license with three thousand
(3,000) pins or less shall require a raffle license application, but shall not
require a Village of St. Joseph special event application, and may be issued by
the raffle administrator.
      9.   A Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license with three thousand and
one (3,001) through five thousand (5,000) pins shall require a raffle license
application and a Village of St. Joseph special event application, both of
which must be approved by board of trustees.
      10.   The maximum number of pins permitted for a Class C fifty-two (52)
week raffle license with three thousand and one (3,001) through five thousand
(5,000) pins will be determined by the raffle administrator and recommended to
board of trustees for approval according to an approved raffle license
application and Village of St. Joseph special event application.
      11.   A determination of how many pins may be permitted by the raffle
administrator for any raffle event may be based in part on how many vehicles
can be safely parked at the location of the raffle event, as well as other
health and safety factors to be considered by the raffle administrator.
      12.   All Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle licenses with three thousand
and one (3,001) through five thousand (5,000) pins must be approved by board of
trustees, and both the raffle license application and Village of St. Joseph
special event application must be approved.
      13.   No licensee has any property right to any license issued by
village, and all Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle licenses expire at the end
of the raffle event, or on week fifty-two (52) of the license, whichever occurs
first.
      14.   There are no automatic Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license
renewals, and village reserves the right to refuse to renew a Class C fifty-two
(52) week raffle license.
      15.   For raffle events with three thousand (3,000) pins or less, "roll-
over" proceeds from a raffle event are permitted according to the rules of
licensee's raffle event, and "roll-over" proceed allocation and/or distribution
is to be determined by the licensee only.
      16.   For raffle events with three thousand and one (3,001) through five
thousand (5,000) pins, no "roll-over" proceeds from a raffle event are
permitted.
      17.   For raffle events with three thousand (3,000) pins or less, as long
as no information on the raffle license application changes in any way, and
with consent of the raffle administrator:
         (a)   Licensee shall have five (5) days to renew an expired Class C
fifty-two (52) week raffle license. If licensee fails to renew the expired
Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license within five (5) days, this
subsection (q) is inapplicable, and licensee will be required to submit a new
raffle license application for consideration by the raffle administrator.
         (b)   During the five day interim between the expiration of licensee's
Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license and the anticipated renewal of
licensee's Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license, licensee may sell raffle
event tickets for the anticipated next raffle event.
         (c)   Raffle administrator may refuse to allow renewal of Class C
fifty-two (52) week raffle licenses based on health, safety, economic welfare
and/or general welfare of village.
         (d)   If for any reason licensee's Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle
license is not renewed, village bears no responsibility for any raffle event
proceeds, and it will be licensee's sole responsibility to return said proceeds
as licensee sees fit.
         (e)   Licensee shall be responsible for showing proof of a fidelity
bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and paying a license
fee to village for each Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license obtained.
      18.   A Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license fee shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 2024-09 11-26-2024)
3-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a raffle, or to sell,
offer for sale, convey, issue, or otherwise transfer for value a chance on a
raffle, unless conducted pursuant to a license duly issued by village and in
accordance with the provisions of this Code. Only village residents, village
businesses, or village organizations located within village limits shall be
considered for any village raffle license. Such license, when issued, is
effective for all areas within the village. Such license is not effective
outside the village. (Ord. 2024-09 11-26-2024)
3-7-4: RAFFLE LICENSE APPLICATION:
Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle shall file an application
therefore with the raffle administrator(s) on forms provided by village.
Pursuant to the Illinois Raffles and Poker Runs Act, such application shall
contain the following information:
   (A)   The name, address, and type of organization;
   (B)   The length of existence of the organization and, if incorporated, the
date and state of incorporation;
   (C)   The name, address, telephone number, and date of birth of the
organization's presiding officer, secretary, raffles manager, and any other
members responsible for the conduct and operation of the raffle;
   (D)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded in the raffle;
   (E)   The maximum retail value of each prize to be awarded in the raffle;
   (F)   The maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued or sold;
   (G)   The maximum number of raffle chances to be issued;
   (H)   The area in which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
   (I)   The time period during which raffle chances will be issued or sold;
   (J)   The date, time, and location at which winning chances will be
determined;
   (K)   A sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the
applicant organization, signed by its presiding officer and secretary;
   (L)   A certificate signed by the presiding officer of the applicant
organization attesting to the fact that the information contained in the
application is true and correct;
   (M)   A fidelity bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00);
and
   (N)   Purpose for which net proceeds will be used of each raffle. (Ord.
2024-09 11-26-2024)
3-7-5: VILLAGE OF ST. JOSEPH SPECIAL EVENT APPLICATION:
Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle may be required to file a
Village of St. Joseph special event application therefore with the raffle
administrator(s) on forms provided by village. Such application shall contain
the following information:
   (A)   Availability of applications. Applications shall be available during
normal business hours at the Municipal Building or online via the village
website.
   (B)   Application completion. The sponsor must submit a fully complete
application to the Village Administrator at least 60 days prior to the event.
The sponsor will be contacted if there is an incomplete application and the
application will have to be completed prior to any request for approval. If the
sponsor does not respond or fails to provide the required information, then the
application will be denied. The sponsor shall be required to sign the
application and, if they do not, then the application will be considered
incomplete.
   (C)   Application information. The application shall be in the form as
approved by the Village Administrator. At a minimum the application shall
require the following information:
      1.   The name, residence and mailing address of the sponsor. If the
sponsor is a partnership, corporation, association or organization, this
information shall be provided for the responsible parties of that organization
that is sponsoring the event. The sponsor, or responsible party, must be at
least eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   A statement of the kind, character, and type of proposed special
event.
      3.   The address, or legal description and ownership of the site at which
the proposed special event is to be conducted.
      4.   The date or dales and hours during which the proposed special event
is to be conducted.
      5.   An estimate of the maximum number of attendees expected at the
special event for each day it is conducted.
      6.   A detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where
applicable, of the sponsor's plans to provide for the following items, except
for any of the specific items which may be waived by the village manager:
         (a)   Police and fire protection (including emergency evacuation
plans);
         (b)   Food and water supply and facilities;
         (c)   Medical facilities and services including emergency vehicles and
equipment;
         (d)   Health and sanitation facilities;
         (e)   Vehicle access and parking facilities;
         (f)   Lighting facilities;
         (g)   Noise control and abatement;
         (h)   Facilities for clean-up and waste disposal; and
         (i)   Specific requests of the village if any.
   (D)   Application process. The Village Administrator shall forward fully
completed applications to all village departments that have responsibilities
relating to the special event application. The sponsor may be required to
attend a committee meeting to discuss the special event so that any concerns or
specific needs may be addressed. The sponsor must contact the Village
Administrator to request the special event permit be placed on a Board of
Trustees agenda. The Village Administrator shall make a final determination on
whether to approve or deny the special event permit and any services requested.
The village board of trustees may announce the special event to the public.
   (E)   Transferability. Special event permits are not transferable and are
only valid for the specific properties as to which they were approved. (Ord.
2024-09 11-26-2024)
3-7-6: LICENSEE QUALIFICATIONS:
Raffle licenses shall be issued only to a bona fide religious, charitable,
labor, business, fraternal, educational, or veterans' organizations that
operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence
continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making
application for a license and which have had, during that entire five (5)-year
period, a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives, or to
a nonprofit fund raising organization that the village board of trustees
determines, in each specific case, is organized for the sole purpose of
providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of
individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness,
disability, accident, or disaster. The following are ineligible for any raffle
license:
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   (C)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A. or B. of
this section has a proprietary, equitable, or credit interest or in which such
person is active or employed;
   (D)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A. or B. of
this section is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not;
and
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A. or B. of
this section is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as
defined in this section. (Ord. 2024-09 11-26-2024)
3-7-7: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
   (A)   A raffle license shall contain the following:
      1.   The area in which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
      2.   The period of time during which raffle chances will be sold or
issued;
      3.   The date, time, and location on or at which the winning chances will
be determined.
   (B)   Such license shall be prominently displayed at the time and location
of the determination of the winning chances.
   (C)   A license may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this Code.
   (D)   The raffle administrator shall receive all raffle license applications
and Village of St. Joseph Special event applications.
   (E)   Class A and Class B raffle licenses shall be valid for a period up to
and including one hundred eighty (180) days from and after issuance, and may be
issued by the raffle administrator.
   (F)   In no event shall a Class C License be authorized for a period longer
than fifty-two (52) weeks.
   (G)   Raffle administrator must approve all raffle license applications for
all Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle licenses with three thousand (3,000) or
less pins.
   (H)   Village council must approve all raffle license applications and
Village of St. Joseph special event applications for all Class C fifty-two (52)
week raffle licenses with three thousand and one (3,001) through five thousand
(5,000) pins.
   (I)   When applying for a Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license with
three thousand and one (3,001) through five thousand (5,000) pins, the process
shall be as follows:
      1.   Prior to submitting a raffle license application, licensees shall
submit a Village of St. Joseph special event application to the raffle
administrator.
      2.   After the raffle administrator has determined that all requisite
information has been submitted for the Village of St. Joseph special event
application, the raffle administrator will accept the raffle license
application.
      3.   After the raffle administrator has determined that all requisite
information has been submitted for the raffle license application, the raffle
administrator shall deem the license application completed.
      4.   Once deemed completed by the raffle administrator, the raffle
license application and Village of St. Joseph special event application for all
Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle licenses with three thousand and one (3,001)
through five thousand (5,000) pins shall be submitted to village council for
approval at a regularly scheduled open meeting.
      5.   The Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license with three thousand
and one (3,001) through five thousand (5,000) pins must be approved by village
board of trustees within thirty (30) days of being deemed completed by the
raffle administrator. (Ord. 2024-09 11-26-2024)
3-7-8: LICENSING FEES:
   (A)   Class A: General raffle license. A license fee of five dollars ($5.00)
shall be payable to "Village of St. Joseph" upon application for a Class A
license.
   (B)   Class B: Financial hardship raffle license. A license fee of five
dollars ($5.00) shall be payable to "Village of St. Joseph" upon application
for a Class B license.
   (C)   Class C: Fifty-two (52) week raffle license. A license fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be payable to "Village of St. Joseph" upon
application for a Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license. When an
application for a raffle license is filed, such application fee is
nonrefundable, even if the application is denied or in the event the raffle is
canceled for any reason. Each raffle license expires when each raffle event has
concluded, and a new license fee will be required for subsequent raffle event
applications. (Ord. 2024-09 11-26-2024)
3-7-9: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The operation and conduct of raffles are subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purpose of the licensee.
   (B)   No person, except a bona fide member of the licensee may participate
in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (C)   No person may receive remuneration or profit for participating in the
management or operation of the raffle.
   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises in which to determine the winning
chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under this
section.
   (E)   A licensee may determine the winning chances in a raffle only at the
location specified on the raffle license.
   (F)   A licensee may not determine the winning chances in a raffle at any
location other than the location that has been approved by the raffle
administrator and/or board of trustees.
   (G)   Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license chances may be sold,
offered for sale, conveyed, issued, or otherwise transferred for value only
within the area specified on the license and where the winning chances for the
raffle event(s) or conclusion of the raffle event(s) may be determined.
   (H)   Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license chances may not be sold,
offered for sale, conveyed, issued, or otherwise transferred for value al any
location other than the location where the winning chances for the raffle event
(s) may be determined or the conclusion of the raffle event(s) may be
determined, and the location that has been approved by the raffle administrator
and/or board of trustees.
   (I)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
   (J)   Where a Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license with three thousand
(3,000) pins or less has been issued, the aggregate retail value of all prizes
awarded in a single raffle shall not exceed five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) and the retail value of any one prize awarded in a single raffle
shall not exceed five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
   (K)   Where a Class C fifty-two (52) week raffle license with three thousand
and one (3,001) through five thousand (5,000) pins has been issued, the
aggregate retail value of all prizes awarded in a single raffle shall not
exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and the retail value of any one
prize awarded in a single raffle shall not exceed one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
   (L)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance sold,
offered for sale, conveyed, issued, or otherwise transferred for value shall
not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 2024-09 11-26-2024)
3-7-10: RAFFLES MANAGER-FIDELITY BOND:
The operation and conduct of a raffle shall be under the supervision of at
least one raffle manager designated by the licensee. As a condition of
obtaining a village raffle license, the following shall be required:
   (A)   The manager(s) shall give a fidelity bond in the amount of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00), and the bond shall be conditioned upon honesty in
the performance of his or her duties. The terms of the bond shall provide that
notice shall be given in writing to the village not less than thirty (30) days
prior to its cancellation. (Ord. 2024-09 11-26-2024)
3-7-11: RECORDS TO BE KEPT:
   (A)    Each licensee shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses, a
list of names of prize winners, and net proceeds for each raffle event at which
winning chances are determined. All deductions or other records indicating the
amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the
deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be
itemized as to payee, purpose, amount, and date of payment.
   (B)   Each licensee shall file its records and report with the Village
within thirty (30) days following the conclusion of the raffle.
   (C)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles shall be segregated from
other revenues of the licensee including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games
are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license
therefore issued by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois, and
placed in a separate account. Each licensee shall keep separate records of its
raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds
from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for the
other revenues of the licensee.
   (D)   Each licensee shall report to its membership and to the village its
gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from the raffle and the distribution
of net proceeds itemized as required herein. If a license is valid for more
than thirty (30) days, the report shall be made monthly.
   (E)   Raffle records shall be preserved by each licensee for three years,
and organizations shall make their records available relating to the operation
of raffles for public inspection at the reasonable times and places. (Ord.
2024-09 11-26-2024)
3-7-12: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this Code shall constitute a
violation, and any person shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than seven hundred and fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. Each day in which a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. (Ord. 2024-09 11-26-2024)
3-7-13: INDEMNIFICATION:
Licensee shall indemnify and hold harmless village, its agents, officers and
employees against all injuries, deaths, losses, damages, claims, suits,
liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses (including any liabilities,
judgments, costs and expenses and reasonable attorney's fees) which may arise
directly or indirectly from licensee's raffle and/or raffle event within
village. Licensee understands and agrees that in no way does a raffle license
issued by village create any liability of any kind for village regarding
licensee's raffle and/or raffle event within village. licensee shall, at its
own cost and expense, appear, defend and pay all charges of attorneys, costs
and other expenses arising therefrom or incurred in connection therewith with
licensee's raffle and/or raffle event. If any judgment shall be rendered
against village, its agents, officers, officials or employees in any such
action, licensee shall, at its own expense, satisfy and discharge the same.
(Ord. 2024-09 11-26-2024)
CHAPTER 8
MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-8-1: Findings Of Fact
3-8-2: Definitions
3-8-3: Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer Both Taxes
3-8-4: Clerk To File Ordinance With Illinois Department Of Revenue
3-8-5: Effective Date
3-8-6: Repeal Of Conflicting Provisions
3-8-7: Severability
3-8-1: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   (A)   The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, provides that the
corporate authorities of each municipality may pass all ordinances and make all
rules and regulations proper or necessary, to carry into effect the powers
granted to municipalities, with such fines or penalties as may be deemed
proper; and,
   (B)   The Village of St. Joseph is a non-home rule Illinois municipality
pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, as amended;
   (C)   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
provides that, beginning on January 1, 2026, all Illinois municipalities may
impose a tax "upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at
retail in the municipality" (the "Municipal Grocery Tax") (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   (D)   The Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax may be imposed "at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from these sales" (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24);
   (E)   Any Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   (F)   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
requires any municipality imposing a Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation
Tax under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24) to
also impose a Service Occupation Tax at the same rate, "upon all persons
engaged, in the municipality, in the business of making sales of service, who,
as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer groceries" as "an
incident to a sale of service" (the "Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax")
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   (G)   Any Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   (H)   The Board of Trustees and President believe that it is appropriate,
necessary and in the best interests of the Village and its residents, that the
Village levy a Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax as permitted by
Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24); and
   (I)   The Board of Trustees and President believe that it is appropriate,
necessary and in the best interests of the Village and its residents, that the
Village levy a Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax as permitted by Section
8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24). (Ord. 2025-O-012,
6-10-2025)
3-8-2: TAX DEFINITIONS:
GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail in this municipality at
the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the
course of such business while this chapter is in effect. The imposition of this
tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of service, who,
as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer groceries as an
incident to a sale of service. The rate of this tax shall be the same rate
identified in the tax defined, above. The imposition of this tax is in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24). (Ord. 2025-O-012, 6-10-2025)
3-8-3: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-O-
012, 6-10-2025)
3-8-4: CLERK TO FILE ORDINANCE WITH ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE:
As required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this chapter
with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before October 1, 2025. (Ord.
2025-O-012, 6-10-2025)
3-8-5: EFFECTIVE DATE:
   (A)   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall take effect on the first day
of January next following the adoption and filing of this chapter with the
Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding October 1.
   (B)   Publication. The Clerk is directed by the corporate authorities to
publish this chapter in pamphlet form. This chapter shall be in full force and
effect after its passage and publication in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4.
(Ord. 2025-O-012, 6-10-2025)
3-8-6: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
All ordinances, resolutions and policies or parts thereof, in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter are, to the extent of the conflict, expressly
repealed on the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-O-012, 6-10-2025)
3-8-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter that can be
given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid
provision or invalid application of this chapter is severable. (Ord. 2025-O-
012, 6-10-2025)
CHAPTER 9
NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-9-1: Findings Of Fact
3-9-2: Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax Imposed
3-9-3: Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax Imposed
3-9-4: Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer Both Taxes
3-9-5: Clerk To File Ordinance With Illinois Department Of Revenue
3-9-6: Effective Date
3-9-7: Limitation On Use Of Proceeds
3-9-8: Qualified Exemption Of Aviation Fuel From Both Taxes
3-9-9: Repeal Of Conflicting Provisions
3-9-10: Severability
3-9-1: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   (A)   The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, provides that the
corporate authorities of each municipality may pass all ordinances and make all
rules and regulations proper or necessary, to carry into effect the powers
granted to municipalities, with such fines or penalties as may be deemed
proper;
   (B)   The Village of St. Joseph is a non-home rule Illinois municipality
pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, as amended;
   (C)   Section 8-11-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code ( 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.1)
empowers non-home rule Illinois municipalities to impose certain Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Taxes as outlined at Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3) (the "Non-Horne Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax");
   (D)   Section 8-11-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code ( 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.1)
empowers non-home rule Illinois municipalities to impose certain Municipal
Service Occupation Taxes as outlined at Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4) ( the "Non-Horne Rule Municipal Service
Occupation Tax");
   (E)   Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code ( 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3)
empowers a non-home rule municipality to "impose a tax upon all persons engaged
in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than on an item of
tangible personal property which is titled and registered by an agency of this
State's Government, at retail in the municipality" based upon the "gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business" for "expenditure
on public infrastructure or for property tax relief or both" as defined in
Section 8-11-1.2 (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.2);
   (F)   Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 .4)
empowers a non-home rule municipality to "impose a tax upon all persons
engaged, in such municipality, in the business of making sales of service ...
of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such
servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to a sale of service;"
   (G)   Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3)
and Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4)
empower the Village to impose the Non-Horne Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax and the Non-Horne Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax in 1/4%
increments up to one percent (1%);
   (H)   Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3)
requires any municipality imposing a Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax under Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-l.3) to impose a Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax under
Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code ( 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4) at "the
same rate" as the rate imposed as the Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax being imposed;
   (I)   Any Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax imposed by the
Village under Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
1.3) shall be administered, collected and enforced by the Illinois Department
of Revenue;
   (J)   Any Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax imposed by the
Village under Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code ( 65 ILCS 5/8-11-
1.4) shall be administered, collected and enforced by the Illinois Department
of Revenue;
   (K)   Proceeds generated from the imposition of any Non-Home Rule Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Tax or Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax by
the Village must be used for "public infrastructure" or "property tax relief,"
as those terms are defined at Section 8-11-l.2 of the Illinois Municipal Code
( 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.2); and
   (L)   The President and Board of Trustees believe that it is appropriate,
necessary, and in the best interests of the Village and its residents, that the
Village levy a Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax pursuant to
Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3) and a Non-
Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax pursuant to Section 8-11-1.4 of the
Illinois Municipal Code ( 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4) so that the Village can provide
property tax relief and invest in public infrastructure, as those terms are
defined at Section 8-11-1.2 of the Illinois Municipal Code ( 65 ILCS 5/8-11-
1.2). (Ord. 2025-15, 9-9-2025)
3-9-2: NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail in
this municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business while this Ordinance is in
effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
1.3). (Ord. 2025-15, 9-9-2025)
3-9-3: NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, of the selling price of all tangible
personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of
service. The rate of this tax shall be the same rate identified in Section
3-9-2, above. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-1.4). (Ord. 2025-15, 9-9-2025)
3-9-4: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-15, 9-9-2025)
3-9-5: CLERK TO FILE ORDINANCE WITH ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE:
As required under Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code 65 ILCS 5/8-
11-1.3), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this chapter
with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before October 1, 2025. (Ord.
2025-15, 9-9-2025)
3-9-6: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall take effect on:
   (A)   The first day of July next following the adoption and filing of this
Ordinance with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
April 1; or
   (B)   The first day of January next following the adoption and filing of
this chapter with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the
preceding October 1.
   (C)   Publication. The Clerk is directed by the corporate authorities to
publish this chapter in pamphlet form. This chapter shall be in full force and
effect after its passage and publication in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/ 1-2-4.
(Ord. 2025-15, 9-9-2025)
3-9-7: LIMITATION ON USE OF PROCEEDS:
The Village shall only expend the proceeds generated from any tax imposed by
virtue of this chapter on:
   (A)   Expenditures related to "municipal roads and streets, access roads,
bridges, and sidewalks; waste disposal systems; and water and sewer line
extensions, water distribution and purification facilities, storm water
drainage and retention facilities, and sewage treatment facilities[;]"
   (B)   Efforts to "reduce the levy for real estate taxes or avoid an increase
in the levy for real estate taxes that would otherwise have been required" by
the Village; or
   (C)   Any other or further permitted uses under Section 8-11-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1) as may now or hereafter be
authorized therein. (Ord. 2025-15, 9-9-2025)
3-9-8: QUALIFIED EXEMPTION OF AVIATION FUEL FROM BOTH TAXES:
No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted to impose any tax on aviation
fuel, as defined in Section 3-9-3 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS
120/3), unless the proceeds of said tax are expended for airport-related
purposes, as that term is defined in Section 6z-20.2 of the State Finance Act
(30 ILCS 105/6z-20.2), and said expenditures are made in compliance with the
certification requirements for airport-related purposes under Section 2-22 of
the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/2-22). (Ord. 2025-15, 9-9-2025)
3-9-9: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
All ordinances, resolutions and policies or parts thereof, in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter are, to the extent of the conflict, expressly
repealed on the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-15, 9-9-2025)
3-9-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter that can be
given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid
provision or invalid application of this chapter is severable. (Ord. 2025-15,
9-9-2025)
TITLE 4
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PERMITS AND FEES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Zoning And Subdivision Fees
4-1-2: Violation
4-1-1: ZONING AND SUBDIVISION FEES:
   (A)   Zoning Permit Fees: The following zoning permit fees shall apply to
applications for a zoning permit:
 
Garage                                     $ 75.00
House, single-family residential           300.00
Multiple-family residential, commercial or $1.50 per thousand dollar cost of
other                                      structure (minimum of $300.00)
Room addition                              $75.00
Shed/auxiliary structure:                   
120 square feet or less                    25.00
More than 120 square feet                  75.00
 
(2005 Code)
   (B)   Application Fees; Zoning: The following application fees shall apply
to applications for change of zoning classification, variance, or special use
permit (including such requests made as part of a petition for annexation or
annexation agreement):
 
1. Change of zoning classification $300.00
2. Special use permit              300.00
3. Variance                        300.00
 
In addition to the aforesaid fee, petitioner shall, prior to any required
public hearing, reimburse the village for the cost of publishing notice of the
public hearing.
   (C)   Application Fees; Subdivision, Stormwater Management, And Annexation:
The following application fees shall apply to applications for subdivision
approval, approval of stormwater management plan and/or petitions for
annexation:
1. Minor subdivision                     $50.00 per acre with $500.00 minimum
                                         in village
                                       $150.00 per acre with $1,500.00
                                         minimum out of village
2. Stormwater management (in addition to  
   subdivision fee):
  Lot site (0 to 1 acre)                $ 250.00
  Small site (1+ to 5 acres)            500.00
  Medium site (6+ to 24 acres)          1,000.00
  Large site (25+ acres)                2,000.00
3. Subdivision area general plan         n/c
4. Subdivision final plat                $50.00 per acre with $500.00 minimum
                                         in village
                                       $150.00 per acre with $1,500.00
                                         minimum out of village
5. Subdivision preliminary plat          $50.00 per acre with $500.00 minimum
                                         in village
                                       $150.00 per acre with $1,500.00
                                         minimum out of village
6. Petition for annexation:               
  Less than 6 acres                     $1,000.00
  6 acres or more                       3,000.00
 
In addition to the aforesaid fee, petitioner shall, prior to any required
public hearing, reimburse the village for the cost of publishing notice of the
public hearing. (Ord. 2008-15, 10-14-2008)
4-1-2: VIOLATION:
Any person who begins construction or work on any building or improvement
requiring a zoning permit from the village without first obtaining a zoning
permit shall be fined for such offense an amount not to exceed ten (10) times
the cost of the zoning permit. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 2
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 2013-8, 9-24-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2A of this title.
CHAPTER 2A
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
4-2A-1: Purpose
4-2A-2: Definitions
4-2A-3: Base Flood Elevation
4-2A-4: Duties Of The Zoning Administrator
4-2A-5: Development Permit
4-2A-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
4-2A-7: Protecting Buildings
4-2A-8: Subdivision Requirements
4-2A-9: Public Health And Other Standards
4-2A-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
4-2A-11: Variances
4-2A-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
4-2A-13: Penalty
4-2A-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
4-2A-15: Severability
4-2A-16: Effective Date
4-2A-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this Village
by the Illinois Municipal Code 1  in order to accomplish the following
purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   To make Federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3,
3-28-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
4-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
               The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in
BASE FLOOD:    any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The base
               flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
               4-2A-3 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD
ELEVATION      The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood.
(BFE):
BASEMENT:      That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all
               sides.
               A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank that is
BUILDING:      principally above ground including manufactured homes and prefabricated
               buildings. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers
               installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
               Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the population and,
               if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster. Damage to these
               critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services, can cause greater
               damage to other sectors of the community, or can put special populations at risk.
CRITICAL       Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
FACILITY:      include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
               schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads and
               bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
               transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
               petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
               Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily limited to:
               (A)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a building,
               or any structural alteration to a building;
               (B)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
               (C)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
               manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
               hundred eighty (180) days per year;
               (D)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
DEVELOPMENT:   similar projects;
               (E)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
               (F)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
               alterations of the ground surface;
               (G)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
               tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
               direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
               “Development” does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
               facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices that
               do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
               A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
EXISTING       for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or
MANUFACTURED   buildings to be constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
HOME PARK OR   utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
SUBDIVISION:   pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the
               floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO   The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
AN EXISTING    servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including
MANUFACTURED   the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
HOME PARK OR   grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
SUBDIVISION:
FEMA:          Federal Emergency Management Agency.
               A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
FLOOD:         dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the
               runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE:  That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
FLOOD          A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that depicts the
INSURANCE RATE floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map
MAP:           includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict floodways and show base
               flood elevations.
FLOOD          An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
INSURANCE      appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
STUDY:
FLOOD
PROTECTION     The elevation of the base flood plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given
ELEVATION      location in the floodplain.
(FPE):
               These two (2) terms are synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the
               Village of St. Joseph, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of St.
               Joseph, or that may be annexed into the Village of St. Joseph, that are subject
               to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of the Salt Fork River are
FLOODPLAIN AND generally identified as such on panel number(s) 456 and 475 of the Countywide
SPECIAL FLOOD  Flood Insurance Rate Map of Champaign County prepared by the Federal Emergency
HAZARD AREA    Management Agency and dated October 2, 2013. Floodplain also includes those areas
(SFHA):        of known flooding as identified by the community.
               The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Champaign County that are within
               the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of St. Joseph or that may be
               annexed into the Village of St. Joseph are generally identified as such on the
               Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for Champaign County by the Federal Emergency
               Management Agency and dated October 2, 2013.
               Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments
FLOODPROOFING: to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate, property and
               their contents.
FLOODPROOFING  A form published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that is used to
CERTIFICATE:   certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
               floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
               That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base flood. The
FLOODWAY:      floodway shall be according to the best data available from Federal, State, or
               other sources.
               An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor
FREEBOARD:     of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development,
               unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as
               those caused by ice or debris jams.
               Any structure that is:
               (A)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
               preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
               requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
HISTORIC       (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
STRUCTURE:     contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
               the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
               (C)   Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the
               Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
               (D)   Individually listed on a Local Inventory of Historic Places that has been
               certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
IDNR/OWR:      Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water Resources.
               Illinois Department of Natural Resources Office of Water Resources has
               jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary area of six hundred forty (640)
               acres or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of any stream serving a
IDNR/OWR       tributary area of six thousand four hundred (6,400) acres or more in a rural
JURISDICTIONAL area. Construction on these streams requires a permit from the department. (Ill.
STREAM:        Adm. Code title 17, pt. 3700.30.) The department may grant approval for specific
               types of activities by issuance of a Statewide permit which meets the standards
               defined in section
               4-2A-6 of this chapter.
               The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
               or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
               access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
LOWEST FLOOR:  building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
               render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
               requirements of section
               4-2A-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED   A structure transportable in one or more sections that is built on a permanent
HOME:          chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when
               connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED   A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more lots for
HOME PARK OR   rent or sale.
SUBDIVISION:
NFIP:          National Flood Insurance Program.
NEW            Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
CONSTRUCTION:  effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and
               includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
               A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
NEW            for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or
MANUFACTURED   buildings to be constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
HOME PARK OR   utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
SUBDIVISION:   pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
               floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
               A vehicle which is:
RECREATIONAL   (A)   Built on a single chassis;
VEHICLE OR     (B)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
TRAVEL         (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck
TRAILER:       and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
               living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
               Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions
REPETITIVE     during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such
LOSS:          flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the
               market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SFHA:          See definition of floodplain and special flood hazard area (SFHA).
               Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
               issued. This, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
               rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement, was within one hundred
               eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
START OF       placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring
CONSTRUCTION:  of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or
               any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a
               foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the
               first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
               building whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
               building.
STRUCTURE:     See definition of building.
               Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cumulative percentage
               of damage during the life of the building equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%)
SUBSTANTIAL    of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of
DAMAGE:        actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in
               this determination. The term includes “repetitive loss” buildings as defined in
               this section.
               Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a structure taking
               place during the life of the building in which the cumulative percentage of
               improvements:
               (A)   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
               before the improvement or repair is started, or
               (B)   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
               “Substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any
SUBSTANTIAL    wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether
IMPROVEMENT:   or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This
               term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial
               damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
               The term does not include:
               (A)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or
               local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which are solely necessary
               to assure safe living conditions, or
               (B)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
               Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
               The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
               community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development
VIOLATION:     without the required Federal, State, and/or local permits and elevation
               certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as the documentation
               is provided. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
 
4-2A-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Salt Fork River
shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Countywide flood
insurance study of Champaign County prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated October 2, 2013.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH
Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the
Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Champaign County.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an “A Zone” on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of
Champaign County shall be according to the best data available from Federal,
State or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must
be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Champaign County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Village of St. Joseph, or that may be annexed into the
Village of St. Joseph, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in
the flood insurance study of Champaign County prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated October 2, 2013. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd.
Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
4-2A-4: DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the general administration of
this chapter and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains
under the jurisdiction of the Village of St. Joseph meet the requirements of
this chapter. Specifically, the Zoning Administrator shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with section
4-2A-5 of this chapter;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
4-2A-6 of this chapter;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
4-2A-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the “as built”
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
4-2A-8 of this chapter;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
4-2A-9 of this chapter;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
4-2A-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
4-2A-13 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, State, and Federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with State and Federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of State and Federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3, 3-
28-2017)
4-2A-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator
shall not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet
the requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
4-2A-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the Zoning
Administrator shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land that is shown by survey elevation to
be below the current base flood elevation is subject to the provisions of this
chapter. In addition, any development located on land shown to be below the
base flood elevation and hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not
identified as floodplain on the current flood insurance rate map, is subject to
the provisions of this chapter. Any development located on land that can be
shown by survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and
which has not been filled after the date of the site’s first flood insurance
rate map is not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site’s first flood insurance rate map
identification.
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other Federal, State, and local permits, approvals or permit not
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The Zoning
Administrator shall not issue a permit unless all other Federal, State, and
local permits have been obtained. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3,
3-28-2017)
4-2A-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the Countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 2;
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit number 3;
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit number 4;
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit
number 5;
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities such as underground utility lines,
light poles, signposts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet and
raising buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any
other activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 6;
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 7;
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 8;
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit number 9;
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 10;
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 11;
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 12;
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide permit number 13;
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in subsection (A) of this
section may be permitted only if:
      1.   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
4-2A-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   (A)   In addition to the State permit and damage prevention requirements of
section
4-2A-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
building prior to the improvement. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively
during the life of the building. If substantially improved, the existing
structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards of this
section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially
damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this
section within twenty four (24) months of the date the damage occurred.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   “Repetitive loss” to an existing building as defined in section
4-2A-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         (e)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters.
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation.
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
         (e)   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
         (f)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
         (g)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
         (h)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with
these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.
         (d)   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the
interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed
four feet (4') at any point.
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event.
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection (B) of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile
Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois Administrative Code section
870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection (D) of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      5.   The vehicle’s largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      6.   The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement out of the floodplain.
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect.
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and
      10.   Must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate State and/or Federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred seventy six (576) square feet (24 feet x 24 feet).
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd.
Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
4-2A-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The Village of St. Joseph shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent
that they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protection standards
of sections
4-2A-6 and
4-2A-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain. Where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act 1 .
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
4-2A-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
4-2A-6 and
4-2A-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
4-2A-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-
24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
4-2A-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, the Village of St. Joseph shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3,
3-28-2017)
4-2A-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for a variance. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the
applicant’s request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the
Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may attach such conditions to granting
of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
   (A)   Conditions: No variance shall be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      6.   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
      7.   All other State and Federal permits have been obtained.
   (B)   Notification: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall notify an
applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of the building
protection standards of section
4-2A-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Historic Structures:
      1.   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
4-2A-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or “historic structure” as defined
herein, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of
sections
4-2A-6 and
4-2A-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
         (a)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
         (b)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure
being removed as a certified historic structure.
   (D)   Agriculture: Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall
be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building’s
unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as
well as those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter.
In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to
public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any
variance issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at grade and
wet floodproofed:
      1.   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farm houses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
      2.   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in Zone A only as identified on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM).
      3.   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall
framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood
elevation, must be built with flood resistant materials in accordance with
section
4-2A-7 of this chapter.
      4.   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with
section
4-2A-7 of this chapter. All of the building’s structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
      5.   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with section
4-2A-7 of this chapter.
      6.   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters in accordance with subsection
4-2A-7(B) this chapter.
      7.   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of section
4-2A-6 of this chapter. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures
within any designated floodway.
      8.   Wet floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator and a registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for
construction. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
4-2A-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the Village of St. Joseph or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3,
3-28-2017)
4-2A-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Village President may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The
Village President shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days’ notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The Village of St. Joseph shall make application to the Circuit
Court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such
other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this
chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      4.   The Village of St. Joseph shall record a notice of violation on the
title of the property.
   (B)   The Village President shall inform the owner that any such violation
is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
The Village President is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension
of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing, indicate
the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to
resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Written notice of such
hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Village of St. Joseph from taking
such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord.
2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
4-2A-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Board of
Trustees to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
However, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance
adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this chapter repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
Where this chapter and other ordinance easements, covenants or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-
2017)
4-2A-15: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed separable and the
invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the
remainder. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
4-2A-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, and publication as required by law and shall be published in pamphlet
form. (Ord. 2013-08, 9-24-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
CHAPTER 3
DISH TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL RECEIVING ANTENNAS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Permit Required
4-3-3: Application For Permit
4-3-4: Location Of Earth Station
4-3-5: Penalty
4-3-6: Appeals
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
DISH: That part of a satellite signal receiving antenna characteristically
shaped like a saucer or dish.
DISH TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL RECEIVING ANTENNAS OR EARTH STATIONS OR GROUND
STATIONS: Shall mean one, or a combination of two (2) or more of the following:
   (A)   A signal receiving device (antenna, dish antenna or dish type
antenna), the purpose of which is to receive communication or other signals
from satellites in earth orbit and other extraterrestrial sources.
   (B)   A low noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point of
the receiving component and the purpose of which is to magnify, store, transfer
and/or transmit electronic or light signals.
   (C)   A coaxial cable the purpose of which is to carry or transmit said
signals to a receiver.
GROUNDING ROD: A metal pole permanently positioned in the earth to serve as an
electrical conductor through which electrical current may safely pass and
dissipate.
RECEIVER: A television set or radio receiver.
For purposes of this chapter, a "dish type satellite signal receiving antenna"
shall be considered to be a structure under the definitions of the Zoning Code
for the Village of St. Joseph (title 10, chapter 2 of this Code). (Ord. 2017-3,
3-28-2017)
4-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person, firm, partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity shall
construct an earth station without a permit, nor shall construction commence
before a permit is issued. (Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
4-3-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The owner, or occupant with written permission from the owner, of any lot,
premises or parcel of land within the Village, who desires to construct an
earth station on said lot, premises or land parcel, must first obtain a permit
to do so from the Village Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator shall issue such permit, provided the applicant
submits a written application upon forms provided and approved by the Zoning
Administrator, along with a plot plan of the lot, and provided all the
requirements of this chapter are satisfied. (Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
4-3-4: LOCATION OF EARTH STATION:
   (A)   Ground Mounted:
      1.   No earth station shall be constructed in any front or side yard,
but, shall be constructed to the rear of the residence or main structure.
      2.   No earth station, including its concrete base slab or other
structure, shall be constructed less than five feet (5') from any property line
or easement.
      3.   No earth station shall be linked, physically or electronically, to a
receiver which is not located on the same lot, premises or parcel of land as is
the earth station.
      4.   An earth station shall not exceed a grade height of fifteen feet
(15').
      5.   No ground mount earth station shall be constructed upon the rooftop
of any garage, residential dwelling, church, school, apartment building,
hospital or any other commercial building or structure.
   (B)   Roof Mounted:
      1.   Roof mount earth stations shall be mounted directly upon the roof,
where permitted hereby, or a primary or accessory building, as defined in the
Zoning Code, and shall not be mounted upon appurtenances such as chimneys,
towers, trees, poles or spires, except by variance.
      2.   A roof mount earth station shall not exceed a height of more than
six feet (6') in diameter.
      3.   A roof mount earth station "dish" shall not exceed six feet (6') in
diameter. (Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
4-3-5: PENALTY:
Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined in
accordance with section
1-4-1 of this Code. The Board of Trustees shall provide regulations concerning
possible variance from the enforcement of this chapter upon good cause shown
that placement of the "dish type satellite signal receiving antenna" in
compliance with this chapter is not feasible due to inability to receive an
existing signal. (Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
4-3-6: APPEALS:
Appeals from decisions by the Zoning Administrator shall be made to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, and then, if requested, to the Board of
Trustees. Requests for appeal shall be made to the Planning and Zoning
Commission or the Board of Trustees respectively within thirty (30) days after
receiving the written decision of the Zoning Administrator or Planning and
Zoning Commission respectively. (Ord. 2017-3, 3-28-2017)
CHAPTER 4
FENCES
SECTION:
4-4-1: General Provisions
4-4-2: Height And Construction
4-4-3: Construction With Sharp Material
4-4-4: Variances
4-4-5: Enforcement
4-4-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Before installing a fence, a permit must be applied for and received
from the Village Zoning Administrator. The permit fee shall be fifty dollars
($50.00).
   (B)   Fences may be erected along property lines but shall not encroach
within six inches (6") of existing public sidewalks or public rights-of-way.
   (C)   Fences built on or within a public easement may be removed by the
Village or at the direction of the Village at the owner's expense in the event
repairs, maintenance, replacements or improvements are deemed necessary by the
Village in such easements.
   (D)   The property owner shall be responsible for calling JULIE to locate
utilities in accordance with JULIE requirements.
   (E)   Fences shall not obstruct any swale or watercourse.
   (F)   Fence height shall be measured from the ground at a point directly
beneath the fence. Where the ground at a point directly beneath the fence has
been increased in elevation from its original elevation at the time of
subdivision development through berming, retaining walls, fill or other
measures and where such increased ground elevation has resulted in an increase
in ground elevation above an adjoining lot, the height of the fence shall be
measured from the original ground elevation before installation of berming,
retaining walls, fill or other measures as determined by the board of trustees.
The Zoning Administrator shall consult U.S. geological survey contour maps,
Village base map contours, recorded subdivision plat information and other
available information in making such a determination. (Ord. 98-10, 10-13-1998;
amd. Ord. 2020-6, 6-23-2020)
4-4-2: HEIGHT AND CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   Rear And Side Yard (Noncorner Lots): Except as provided in section
4-4-3 of this chapter, no person shall place, install, construct or maintain
any fence on a lot or area to a height greater than six feet (6') of solid
construction and two (2) additional feet of open construction, above the
original grade, between the rear lot line and the front of the main building or
any projections thereof other than projections of uncovered steps, uncovered
balconies, terraces or uncovered porches. The term "open construction" as used
herein shall mean that the fence is less than fifty percent (50%) solid
construction when viewed at right angle to the fence. (Ord. 98-10, 10-13-1998)
   (B)   Front Yard (Noncorner Lots):
      1.   Chainlink fencing shall not be allowed in front yards.
      2.   Fences of not more than four feet (4') and not more than fifty
percent (50%) solid construction, may be erected between the front building
line and the front property line.
      3.   Fences in the front yard shall maintain a fifteen foot (15')
visibility triangle of which two (2) legs shall be measured as follows: along
both sides of the driveway inward from the front property line a distance of
fifteen feet (15') from the intersection of the front property line and the
driveway; and along the right of way measured in the direction away from the
driveway a distance of fifteen feet (15'). The third leg of such triangle shall
be the connection of such two (2) previously described lines. This area as
defined shall be free from any fence creating a visual obstruction for traffic
on street or sidewalk. This visibility triangle shall be maintained on
properties adjacent to the lot on which the driveway is located for that part
of the adjacent property on which the visibility triangle applies. (Ord. 2010-
10, 9-14-2010)
   (C)   Corner Lots:
      1.   For corner lots, fences in the front yard and side yard adjacent to
the side street, shall be as provided in subsection (B) of this section.
      2.   Fences in the rear yard and side yard which are not adjacent to a
street shall be as provided in subsection (A) of this section.
      3.   A thirty foot (30') visibility triangle shall be maintained at
street intersections. This "visibility triangle" is defined as an isosceles
triangle of which two (2) legs shall be measured as follows: along the street
curb/edge in both directions from the intersection a distance of thirty feet
(30'). The third leg of such triangle shall be the connection of such two (2)
previously described lines. No fence shall be installed or maintained in this
defined area. (Ord. 98-10, 10-13-1998)
4-4-3: CONSTRUCTION WITH SHARP MATERIAL:
   (A)   Barbed Wire: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain
a fence equipped with barbed wired, razor wire or any similar or other sharp or
sharp pointed material. However, this section shall not prohibit the use of
such material when:
      1.   Located in commercial or industrial zoning districts, or for
government use;
      2.   Used to provide security for a bona fide business operation; and
      3.   Approved by the board of trustees, after review of the documentation
indicating the need for security and bona fide operation of a business;
provided no more than two feet (2') of such barbed wire or other such similar
device is securely affixed to the top of and above a soundly constructed fence
or structural barrier which is at least eight feet (8') in height.
   (B)   Electric Fence: No person shall erect or maintain anywhere in the
village an electrically charged fence. (Ord. 98-10, 10-13-1998)
4-4-4: VARIANCES:
The board of trustees upon application made by the property owner or
representative thereof, may grant approval for the construction of a fence
which does not conform to the requirements set forth in this chapter if the
trustees find that the deviation from those requirements is necessary to
address unusual lot configuration or location or safety concerns. (Ord. 98-10,
10-13-1998)
4-4-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   Notice To Remove Violation: The village president shall notify in
writing by certified mail the person who owns or controls any property, whereon
a violation of this chapter is occurring, of his/her determination that a
violation is occurring, and require in writing that the violation be
eliminated, at the expense of such person, within thirty (30) calendar days of
the date such notice is sent. The village president may, for purposes of this
section, appoint a village official, employee or committee member to act in his
place.
   (B)   Appeal: The person who owns or controls any property, after being
notified by the village president that a violation exists on his/her property,
may appeal that determination in the manner set forth herein. Appeal of such
determination shall be taken by filing a written appeal not more than fifteen
(15) days following the date of mailing of the notice of the violation provided
for in subsection (A) of this section. The appeal shall be addressed to the
board of trustees, through the office of the village clerk. The board of
trustees shall schedule a hearing date for not less than ten (10) days and not
more than thirty (30) days after receiving such notice of appeal, and shall
notify the person appealing of the date and time of their consideration of the
appeal and such person may appear and be heard by the board of trustees.
If the determination of the village president is not reversed as provided for
herein, then the village president shall require in writing by certified mail
that the violation be removed within fifteen (15) calendar days from such date
of notice.
   (C)   Removal Of Violation By Village: If the violation is not removed
within thirty (30) days, as provided in subsection (A) of this section, or in
the event of appeal, within fifteen (15) days following notice from the village
president that the board of trustees failed to reverse the determination, the
village president may cause the removal of the violation and the cost of such
removal shall be charged against the property on which the obstruction
occurred. The owner or person in charge of the property shall pay said cost of
removal within thirty (30) days of receipt of a statement of said cost. The
failure of the person notified to eliminate the violation as required by a
notice to do so from the village president or to pay the said cost of removal
within the time allowed therein shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Noncompliance: Any fence lawfully existing on August 26, 1998, which
is not in compliance with this chapter, may continue to lawfully exist, and
normal repairs to such fences are permissible where such repairs do not
constitute a total fence replacement. (Ord. 98-10, 10-13-1998)
TITLE 5
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Open Burning
5-1-2: Emergency Burning Ban
5-1-3: Fire Within Building
5-1-4: Tear Down, Remove Buildings
5-1-5: Exceptions
5-1-1: OPEN BURNING:
   (A)   Garbage; Organic Refuse: It shall be unlawful to burn any garbage or
other organic refuse outside of any building at any time in the village.
   (B)   Papers And Building Materials: It shall be unlawful to burn papers,
building materials, or other similar material outside of any building at any
time in the village.
   (C)   Grass, Leaves, Brush: It shall be unlawful to burn grass, leaves or
brush at any time in the village.
   (D)   Other Material: It shall be unlawful to burn any other material of any
kind or nature outside of any building at any time in the village, unless
expressly allowed in this section.
   (E)   Recreational Fires: Recreational fires are permitted on property only
under the following conditions:
      1.   The fire shall be contained in a metal container not exceeding
twenty (20) square feet in plane surface area and not elevated more than ten
inches (10") above the grade level or on cleared earth in a pit enclosed on the
sides by masonry or rock material and not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in
area, or a ceramic container designed for such purpose; e.g., chimenea.
      2.   All trees, fences, decks and other structures shall be at least ten
feet (10') from the fire enclosure or pit; provided that a fire enclosure may
be used on a deck when it can be safely so used and is used in compliance with
manufacturer's instruction.
      3.   Any fuel used shall be confined to dry logs or branches that are
untreated or commercially available charcoal briquettes. No other fuels are
permissible except a starter fuel designed for use on recreational fires.
      4.   A responsible adult of at least eighteen (18) years of age shall be
in attendance at all times that the fire is burning. When adult supervision
ceases, the fire shall be extinguished with water and the coals spread out in
the enclosure.
      5.   The owner of the property upon which the fire is burning shall have
consented to such fire.
      6.   Fires are not permitted in or on village streets, alleys, sidewalks,
or public rights of way.
      7.   Fires shall be extinguished by the property owner or resident if, in
the opinion of the responding fire department personnel, village personnel or
law enforcement officers, there is danger that smoke or fire will inflict
injury upon someone or will cause damage to property.
      8.   The village board of trustees may prohibit all open fires whenever
it determines in its absolute discretion that drought, winds, weather, smoke,
odors, public health and safety, or any other conditions or factors justify
cessation of such open fires.
      9.   The fire department or village personnel may extinguish any open
fires in violation of this section and may extinguish any fire determined by
the fire department officer in charge, village personnel or law enforcement
officer to pose public health hazards to persons or property.
   (F)   Outdoor Cooking Fires: Fires in gas grills and charcoal or small wood
fires for cooking purposes are permitted in containers designed for cooking
over such fires. These containers shall be placed as recommended by the
manufacturer and so as not to cause fire or smoke damage to property or injury
to any person.
   (G)   Special Recreational Fires: With the written permission of the village
board of trustees and in accordance with any conditions which may be prescribed
by the fire chief, special recreational fires shall be permitted at special
events such as high school pep rallies. The village board of trustees shall
have sole discretion to issue a letter of permission for such fires based upon
the potential for danger to persons or property. The board may prescribe such
mandatory conditions as are necessary or desirable for the safety of persons
and property.
   (H)   Penalty; Violations: Any person violating the provisions of this
section shall be fined in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the
first offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second offense, and not
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each subsequent offense. (Ord. 2001-10, 9-4-2001)
5-1-2: EMERGENCY BURNING BAN:
In the event of extreme weather conditions or other necessary circumstances,
the board of trustees may, by resolution, temporarily ban all outdoor burning
until such time as the board of trustees passes a resolution canceling such ban
except for supervised outdoor cooking. (Ord., 6-27-1988)
5-1-3: FIRE WITHIN BUILDING:
No person shall start, make or maintain any fire in any building, outbuilding,
shed or other structure, except within a safe and secure fireplace, stove,
oven, furnace, heater or other fireproof structure made for that purpose and
except for candles, oil lamps or other such items commonly intended for use
with a flame. All such indoor fires and flames shall be used and maintained in
a safe manner and location so as not to create a risk of such fire escaping its
source. (Ord., 9-25-1989)
5-1-4: TEAR DOWN, REMOVE BUILDINGS:
The president and trustees, at any time may direct the tearing down, removal or
destruction by any proper means of any building, fence or erection when they
shall deem it necessary for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire.
(Ord., 6-4-1888)
5-1-5: EXCEPTIONS:
The regulations and prohibitions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Land owned and operated by a duly created government conservation
district, including the Champaign County soil and water conservation district
with regard to burning materials described in subsections
5-1-1(C) and (D) of this chapter, provided that burning materials described in
subsections
5-1-1(C) and (D) more than two (2) times in any one calendar year must be
approved by the village board of trustees and provided further that the village
clerk shall be notified prior to any burning.
   (B)   Land owned and operated by the village of St. Joseph for burning brush
collected by the village from village residents. (Ord. 2009-8, 4-28-2009)
TITLE 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-1-1: Disorderly Assemblies
6-1-2: Disturbing The Peace
6-1-3: Encroachments
6-1-4: Firearms; Fireworks
6-1-5: Injury To Property
6-1-6: Loud Noises
6-1-7: Throwing Stones; Casting Devices
6-1-8: Criminal Trespass To Village Supported Land
6-1-9: Disorderly Conduct
6-1-1: DISORDERLY ASSEMBLIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts
regarding assemblages:
   (A)   Any two (2) or more persons to assemble for the purpose of disturbing
the peace or of committing any unlawful act, and who shall not disperse when
commanded or requested to do so by any officer of the village.
   (B)   Knowingly suffer or permit any assemblage for the purpose of
disturbing the peace or of committing any unlawful act or any breach of the
peace or any riotous, tumultuous, offensive or disorderly conduct, or make any
loud or unusual noise or disturbance, or use any obscene, offensive, profane or
unseemly language to the annoyance, disturbance or vexations of others. (Ord.,
6-6-1881)
6-1-2: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace or to be guilty of any
violent, tumultuous, offensive or disorderly conduct or to use any obscene,
offensive, profane or unseemly language to the annoyance, disturbance or
vexation of others. (Ord., 6-6-1881)
6-1-3: ENCROACHMENTS:
The owner of any erection or structure already erected or placed and
encroaching upon any street or alley within the village shall remove the same
within thirty (30) days of receipt of written notice from the president or a
trustee requiring such removal. (2005 Code)
6-1-4: FIREARMS; FIREWORKS:
   (A)   Except as authorized by state law, it shall be unlawful for any person
to discharge or fire any type of gun which discharges a projectile in the
village regardless of whether the charge be propelled by compressed air, gas,
powder, spring or any other means.
   (B)   It shall further be unlawful for any person to set off or explode any
torpedo, firecracker, fireball or rocket or other fireworks whatever or to make
or kindle any bonfire; provided that the discharge of firearms by any military
company when on parade and in accordance with the command of the commanding
officers or by the village officers or persons in discharge of any legal duty
or lawful act shall not be deemed a violation hereof. Provided further that the
president or any trustee may grant permission in writing to the public to fire
or discharge any cannon, gun, or pistol with a blank cartridge or fireworks as
aforesaid upon national holidays and the celebration of other public and
general events in any common or other place where the same may be done so as
not to endanger life or injure property, and when such permission is granted,
the writing shall state the place to discharge such cannon, gun or fireworks.
This section shall not apply to a blank starting gun used by an authorized
person at a school sporting event or practice, or other school event. (2005
Code)
   (C)   This section shall not apply to use of paintball guns or airsoft guns
used to project a paintball or airsoft pellet when used on a commercial
paintball/airsoft recreation facility which has a special use permit issued by
the board of trustees for the village of St. Joseph and as restricted by said
special use permit. (Ord. 2012-7, 5-22-2012)
   (D)   This section shall not apply to use of a firearm used to eliminate
nuisance birds by written permission of the board of trustees for the village
of St. Joseph and as restricted by said written permission to specific days and
location, and provided that the discharge of said firearms is performed in a
manner not to endanger people or property, and in accordance with all state and
federal laws and regulations. (Ord. 2013-1, 1-8-2013)
6-1-5: INJURY TO PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously or negligently
break, deface, destroy or otherwise injure any public property of the village.
(2005 Code)
6-1-6: LOUD NOISES:
Noise discernible by a person of average sensibility within any dwelling or
lodging unit between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. when the noise is of an intensity, tone, characteristic, frequency
of occurrence, duration or volume as not to be customarily associated with uses
permitted in the zoning district in which such dwelling or lodging unit is
located including, but not limited to, noise generated by any of the following
activities:
   (A)   Construction;
   (B)   Operation of powered tools or equipment;
   (C)   Operation of motor vehicles or related equipment on private property;
   (D)   Operation of any bell, siren, whistle, horn or similar device except
for noncommercial use of unamplified bells or chimes;
   (E)   Operation of any sound amplification device;
   (F)   Keeping any domestic animal;
   (G)   Loud voices. (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
6-1-7: THROWING STONES; CASTING DEVICES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any
sling or other implement or device whatsoever for the casting or throwing of
stones, bullets or anything whatsoever.
   (B)   No person shall purposely or heedlessly cast or throw any stone or
missile from or into any public place or at any person, or at, upon, against or
into any building, premises, tree or other property. (2005 Code; amd. Ord.
2005-8, 5-24-2005)
   (C)   This section shall not apply to use of paintball guns or airsoft guns
used to project a paintball or airsoft pellet when used on a commercial
paintball/airsoft recreation facility which has a special use permit issued by
the board of trustees for the village of St. Joseph and as restricted by said
special use permit. (Ord. 2012-7, 5-22-2012)
   (D)   This section shall not apply to use of a firearm used to eliminate
nuisance birds by written permission of the board of trustees for the village
of St. Joseph and as restricted by said written permission to specific days and
location, and provided that the discharge of said firearms is performed in a
manner not to endanger people or property, and in accordance with all state and
federal laws and regulations. (Ord. 2013-1, 1-8-2013)
6-1-8: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO VILLAGE SUPPORTED LAND:
   (A)   Any person who enters upon land supported in whole or in part with
village funds, or federal or state funds administered or granted through the
village or any of its agencies, or any building on such land, after receiving,
immediately prior to such entry, notice from the village or its representative
that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon such land or in such building
after receiving notice from the village or its representative to depart, and
who thereby interferes with another person's lawful use or enjoyment of such
building or land, shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
   (B)   A person has received notice from the village within the meaning of
this section if notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a
printed or written notice forbidding such entry to such person or a group of
which such person is a part, has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the
main entrance to such land or the forbidden part thereof. (2005 Code; amd. Ord.
2005-8, 5-24-2005)
6-1-9: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
No person shall commit disorderly conduct. A person commits disorderly conduct
when such person knowingly:
   (A)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace.
   (B)   In a public or private place, engages in violent, abusive, indecent,
profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud, or otherwise disorderly conduct under
circumstances in which such conduct tends to cause or provoke a disturbance.
(2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2005-8, 5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Animals Unlawful In Village
6-2-2: Cruelty To Animals
6-2-3: Dogs And Cats
6-2-4: Nondomestic Animals
6-2-1: ANIMALS UNLAWFUL IN VILLAGE:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to keep or allow to run at large, within the
corporate limits of the village of St. Joseph, any of the following animals:
horse, mare, mule, gelding, colt, filly, jack, jennet, bull, bullock, steer,
heifer, cow, calf, swine, geese, chickens, turkeys, guineas, sheep, goats,
beehives or rabbits; provided however, that a family unit is hereby permitted
to keep one male rabbit as a pet within the village. (2005 Code)
6-2-2: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to inhumanely, cruelly or unnecessarily
beat, abuse or otherwise maltreat any animal. (2005 Code)
6-2-3: DOGS AND CATS:
   (A)   Definitions: The following words and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them:
    AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner and not under the control by leash
or otherwise by the owner, a member of the owner's family or an authorized
person. For the purposes of this chapter, voice control shall not be considered
as control. Secure confinement of a dog or cat within a vehicle of the owner
shall not be considered being "at large". A dog on its owner's property is at
large if it is not contained on the property by means of a fence, secure chain,
leash, or other visible means of restraint sufficient to protect pedestrians on
village property, including sidewalks and parkways, or on adjacent properties.
   CAT: All members of the family Felidea.
   DOG: All members of the family Canidea.
   FERAL CAT: A cat that: 1) is born in the wild or is offspring of an owned or
feral cat and is not socialized, or 2) is a formerly owned cat that has been
abandoned and is no longer socialized or a cat not socialized living on a farm.
   IMPOUNDED: Taken into custody of the public animal control facility in the
village, town, or county where the animal is found.
   INOCULATED AGAINST RABIES: The injection of an antirabies vaccine approved
by the department of agriculture for the state of Illinois.
   LEASH: A cord, rope, strap or chain securely fastened to the collar or
harness of a dog and of sufficient strength and security to keep such dog under
control.
   OWNER: Any person having a right of property in an animal who keeps or
harbors an animal, or who has an animal in his/her care, or acts as its
custodian, exerts control over it, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain
on or about any premises owned by such person.
   POUND OR ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY: May be used interchangeably and mean any
facility approved by the village board for the purpose of enforcing this
section and used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or
unwanted animals.
   TAG: A serially numbered medallion approved by the animal control department
to be issued, as evidence of inoculation against rabies.
   (B)   Disturbing The Peace:
      1.   (a) If a warning in substantially the manner required in subsection
(B)1(b) of this section is first provided, then it shall be unlawful for any
person to own, possess, or keep any animal which makes noise with such
frequency, volume, character, or duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of
the neighborhood.
         (b)   A "warning" shall mean to make known to the person(s)
responsible that one or more person(s) is annoyed or disturbed by the said
noise being created. A written warning shall be given to any person(s) whom the
person issuing the warning reasonably believes to be the owner, possessor, or
keeper of the animal. Such warning may be given by either a village official or
a private citizen and shall be given not more than ninety (90) days prior to
the continuation or reoccurrence of the noise which results in the violation
charged.
      2.   No person owning any dog, or having custody of any dog, shall permit
such dog, without reasonable provocation, to seriously or viciously frighten,
annoy, scratch, push, growl at, bark at, jump at or bite any person who is
peaceably conducting himself or herself in a place where he or she may lawfully
be; nor to permit said dog to damage property not belonging to the owner of the
dog.
   (C)   Dogs Running At Large; Impoundment:
      1.   (a) No owner of any dog shall permit such dog to run at large or to
be on any public property or property other than that of the dog's owner
without being securely restricted by a leash or other secure means.
         (b)   Tethered dogs must be secured with a substantial and adequate
collar, chain, stake or other components to reasonably ensure that the dog
cannot break free or otherwise escape the said restraint, and said dog cannot
go beyond the owner's or keeper's property while tethered. The animal control
officer may inspect said restraints and if found to be inadequate, in said
animal control officer's judgement, then the owner of said dog shall replace
the restraints with restraints deemed adequate by said animal control officer.
      2.   Every owner of a dog shall prevent said dog from running at large
within the village limits. Any dog found to be running at large shall be deemed
a nuisance and impounded.
      3.   Any person found to be in violation of this subsection shall be
fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense and one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each subsequent offense. If an owner owns more than one dog found
to be in violation of this subsection, it shall constitute a separate offense
for each dog.
   (D)   Cats Running At Large:
      1.   Every owner of a cat shall prevent said cat from running at large
within the village limits. Any cat found to be at large within the village
limits shall be deemed a nuisance and impounded.
      2.   Any owner of a cat found to be in violation of this subsection shall
be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense and one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each subsequent offense. If an owner owns more than one cat found
to be in violation of this subsection, it shall constitute a separate offense
for each cat.
   (E)   Vicious And Dangerous Dogs: No dog, which has been declared dangerous
or vicious by a judge, animal control officer or other authorized government
official or authorized governmental body or entity pursuant to state statute or
county or municipal ordinance, is permitted within the village limits. All
dangerous or vicious dogs are hereby declared a nuisance, and shall be removed
from the village. Each day that a vicious or dangerous dog remains in the
village after the owner or keeper receives a written notice from the village to
remove said dog, shall be a separate offense with a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each offense.
   (F)   Inoculation Of Dogs And Cats:
      1.   Every owner of a dog or cat four (4) or more months of age shall
cause such dog or cat to be inoculated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian annually or at such intervals as hereafter may be promulgated by
the department of agriculture and register said dog or cat with the county
animal control department.
      2.   All dogs and cats residing within the village limits shall wear at
all times the inoculation tag procured from the county animal control
department. The tag shall be securely attached to the collar or harness of that
dog or cat for which the tag was obtained.
      3.   Any person in violation of this subsection shall be fined fifty
dollars ($50.00). A warning may be issued on the first offense if the following
criteria are met: the dog or cat is spayed or neutered, the dog or cat is
microchipped, and the dog or cat is currently vaccinated and registered.
   (G)   Removal Of Excrement:
      1.   No owner or person in control of a dog shall permit the dog to
deposit fecal matter on any public right of way or property, other than that of
the owner or person in control, without providing a means of disposing of the
fecal matter. The owner or person in control of the dog shall promptly remove
any fecal matter deposited on any property, other than that belonging to the
owner or person in control of the dog. This subsection (G) shall not apply to
support dogs or guide dogs for the blind, visually handicapped, hearing
impaired or otherwise physically disabled persons.
      2.   No owner or person in control of a dog shall permit said dog's fecal
matter to accumulate on the premises of said owner or person in control of said
dog to the extent that the odor from said fecal matter is reasonably noticeable
on adjacent properties.
   (H)   Nuisances: Any dog or cat found in the village without proper rabies
tags is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be impounded as provided in
this section.
   (I)   Offenses: The offenses specified in this section shall be absolute
liability offenses.
   (J)   Impoundment:
      1.   The village board may provide a pound or animal control facility for
the impoundment of dogs and cats or the president may contract with other
agencies for impoundment services.
      2.   Dogs and cats impounded for violations of this section shall be held
for a five (5) business day period. Feral cats impounded shall be held for a
three (3) day period. After the said holding period has expired and expiration
of the notice period provided in subsection (K)2 of this section, any such
impounded dog or cat which has not been redeemed is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and shall be disposed of in accordance with state law.
   (K)   Notice Of Impoundment:
      1.   Upon taking or receiving any dog or cat for impounding, it shall be
the duty of the dogcatcher to enter upon his records the date of impounding, a
description of the dog or cat impounded and a record as to whether or not such
dog or cat has been inoculated and tagged with a proper rabies tag as required
by this section.
      2.   If any such impounded dog or cat has tags or microchip or other
means of identifying the owner thereof, the dogcatcher shall make a reasonable
attempt to notify such owner as soon as possible of the impoundment of the dog
or cat by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address
of said owner at least seven (7) business days prior to disposal of said
animal. The testimony of the dogcatcher or his/her authorized agent, who mails
such notice, shall be evidence of the receipt of such notice by the owner of
the animal.
   (L)   Redemption:
      1.   The owner of any impounded dog or cat may redeem said animal within
above said holding period by paying an impoundment fee of fifty dollars
($50.00), together with an additional fee for the current boarding charges of
the facility where the dog or cat is impounded for each day or any part of a
day, and any veterinary costs and microchipping fees, and any other necessary
or reasonable charges incurred in maintaining such animal. When the fees are
paid and the owner has given reasonable and satisfactory proof of ownership of
the dog or cat, the dog or cat shall be released to the owner.
      2.   If any impounded dog or cat does not have a current rabies
inoculation or registration tag, the owner redeeming such dog or cat shall in
addition to the charges stated in subsection (L)1 of this section, pay the
necessary fee for inoculation and/or the necessary fee for the registration tag
for the current year.
      3.   In the event a dog or cat is not redeemed by its owner and is
disposed of in accordance with provisions provided herein, the owner of said
dog or cat shall be responsible for all fees, fines and charges pursuant to
this section, and shall pay said amount within thirty (30) days of receipt of
an invoice for the same from the village.
   (M)   Animal Control Officer: The village board is authorized to hire or
contract such person or persons as it deems necessary as animal control
officers for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section and any
person so employed or contracted shall have the authority to pick up and
impound dogs and cats that are in violation of this section.
   (N)   Intergovernmental Agreement: The village of St. Joseph and county of
Champaign have entered into an intergovernmental agreement for animal control
services. The Champaign County animal control officer has concurrent authority
with the village of St. Joseph to enforce this section. So long as said
intergovernmental agreement is in effect, the Champaign County animal control
officer shall have the authority to:
      1.   Impound animals, to investigate reported complaints and suspected
violations and conduct such inspections of property as are necessary to
determine whether violations of this section exist.
      2.   To issue citations.
      3.   To contract with a qualified individual or business to provide any
veterinary care necessary to vaccinate the animal or make a determination of
the animal's medical status, to humanely eliminate any immediate suffering of
an animal, or to euthanize any animal where necessary for either the comfort of
the animal or safety of the public at the cost and expense therefor to be paid
by the owner, possessor, or keeper.
      4.   To issue notices of violations of this section to the responsible
persons whenever he or she shall determine that a violation constituting a
nuisance has occurred. Notices shall be in writing, shall indicate the nature
of the violation and, when appropriate, state the action necessary to correct
the violation. The notice of a violation shall allow a reasonable period of
time to correct the violation. If the notice is sent by U.S. mail, delivery
shall be presumed to have occurred on the second day after mailing.
   (O)   Appeals: A person who believes that they have been aggrieved by any
decision, notice or action taken under this section may appeal his or her
decision to the board of trustees of the village of St. Joseph, Champaign
County, Illinois. Appeals shall be taken as follows:
      1.   Notice of appeal must be made to the village clerk no less than ten
(10) days prior to the next village board meeting.
      2.   A notice of appeal shall state the following information: the name,
address, and telephone number of the person appealing; the date of the
decision, notice or action in question; description of the decision, notice or
action being questioned; and the reason the said decision, notice, or action
should be reversed or modified.
      3.   The village clerk shall note the appeal as an item on the village
board agenda. The appellant shall be notified by U.S. mail of the date of the
appeal hearing no later than five (5) days prior to the board meeting date.
Delivery shall be presumed to have occurred on the second day after mailing.
      4.   An appeal stays all proceedings to enforce the action appealed
unless the agent of the village or county from whom the appeal is taken
certified to the board of trustees after the notice of appeal has been filed
with him or her that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate a stay could
in his or her opinion cause imminent peril to the health, welfare, or property
of any person; in which case proceeding shall not be stayed except by an order
from a court of competent jurisdiction.
      5.   The board of trustees, may, so long as such action is in conformity
with the terms of this section, reverse, modify, or affirm, wholly or in part,
the decision, notice or other action of the agent of the village or the county
from which the appeal is taken and may make such order requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made.
      6.   The decision of the board shall be put in writing in the minutes of
the village board meeting and a copy shall be mailed to the appellant within
ten (10) days of the approval of those minutes. If the board shall find against
an appellant, the board shall establish a prompt but reasonable period of time
for the appellant to correct the violation before prosecutions may be
instituted.
   (P)   Penalties: Any person responsible for a nuisance as proscribed by this
section must abate the nuisance within the period of time allowed by the agent
of the village or county from whom the appeal is taken or appeal the decision
of the agent of the village or county to the board of trustees. Unless
otherwise provided herein, any owner or keeper of an animal found to be in
violation of this section shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the
first offense and each subsequent offense. Each day the nuisance or violation
is permitted to exist after the time permitted for abatement expires shall be a
separate offense. If a person appeals the decision of the agent of the village
or county to the board of trustees, and the board orders abatement of the
nuisance, the person must abate the nuisance within the time fixed by the
board. If the appellant fails to abate the nuisance or violation as ordered,
he/she shall be guilty of an offense of this section and upon conviction shall
be fined the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day of violation. Each
day the nuisance or violation is permitted to exist after the time permitted by
the board for abatement expires shall be a separate offense. All court or
administrative hearing costs and costs incurred as a result of veterinary care,
impoundment of the animal, or euthanasia of the animal shall be paid by a
person violating this section. (Ord. 2012-11, 7-24-2012)
6-2-4: NONDOMESTIC ANIMALS:
   (A)   Definitions: For purposes of this section, "prohibited nondomestic
animals" shall include: African rock python (Python sebae), reticulate python
(Python reticulatus), Indian python (Python molurus), Burma python (Python
molurus bivittatus), anaconda boa constrictor (Eunectes murinus), all other
pythons and boa constrictor snakes (henphidias), all crocodilians (including
alligators, crocodiles, and caimans), kimono lizards and snapping turtles.
   (B)   Prohibition: No person may keep or release any prohibited nondomestic
animals within the village.
   (C)   Liability For Expenses; Prohibited Animal: Any person who wilfully,
negligently or in violation of the provisions of this section is keeping,
maintaining or releasing a prohibited nondomestic animal shall be liable for
any expenses incurred by the village in searching for, containing, impounding,
returning or disposing of the animal.
   (D)   Impoundment; Prohibited Animals: Any prohibited nondomestic animal
found loose in the village, or kept in the village shall be surrendered to the
village or other authority or person authorized by the president and shall
thereupon be impounded. Such impounded animal or animals shall be released to
the owner or keeper upon written certification that such animal shall not be
returned to or kept within the village. If after ten (10) days from the date
such animal was first impounded, such animal has not been claimed, it shall be
humanely dispatched or disposed of by sale to or placement with a zoo,
education or research institution or euthanized. In addition to the preceding
requirements of this subsection, the owner or keeper shall pay to the village
the daily cost of impoundment, which shall be the daily cost to the village of
contracting for impoundment.
   (E)   Penalty: Any person who violates this section shall upon conviction
thereof be fined in accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code.
   (F)   Exemption: Licensed veterinary clinics and hospitals temporarily
treating and housing a prohibited nondomestic animal and bona fide circuses
appearing in the village for a period of less than two (2) weeks shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC NUISANCE
SECTION:
6-3-1: Public Nuisance Prohibited
6-3-2: Activities And Conditions Constituting Public Nuisances
6-3-3: Notice To Abate Public Nuisance
6-3-4: Request To Appeal Notice To Abate A Public Nuisance
6-3-5: Village's Authority To Abate A Public Nuisance/Collect Cost Of Abatement
6-3-6: Collection Of Costs/Lien
6-3-7: Processing A Lien For Costs Of Abatement
6-3-8: Search Warrant Or Access Warrant
6-3-9: Penalty
6-3-1: PUBLIC NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
   (A)   The activities or conditions described in section
6-3-2 of this chapter are declared to be public nuisances and are expressly and
absolutely prohibited when they exist upon public or private property or public
rights-of-way located in the Village except in those instances where expressly
permitted under the provisions of the Village zoning ordinance or State law or
exempted herein.
   (B)   No person shall engage in the activities or create or continue the
conditions described in section
6-3-2 of this chapter upon public or private property or public right-of-way.
   (C)   No person shall allow others to engage in the activities or create or
continue the conditions described in section
6-3-2 of this chapter on premises which they own, possess or control.
   (D)   No person shall allow their personal property to be used for the
activities or to create or continue the conditions described in section
6-3-2 of this chapter.
   (E)   No person shall require or allow their agents or employees as part of
their employment, to engage in the activities or to create or continue the
conditions, described in section
6-3-2 of this chapter. (2005 Code)
6-3-2: ACTIVITIES AND CONDITIONS CONSTITUTING PUBLIC NUISANCES:
   (A)   Loitering: No person shall loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle
either alone and/or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so
as to:
      1.   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians;
      2.   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk
or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction
or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any
business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any
such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place
or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress,
and regress, therein, thereon, and thereto.
      3.   When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated
in subsection (A)1 or (A)2 of this section, a law enforcement officer shall
order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on
or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be
guilty of a violation of this section.
   (B)   Other: All other activities and conditions that are declared in this
Code to be public nuisances. (Ord. 2018-10, 8-28-2018)
6-3-3: NOTICE TO ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   (A)   General: Whenever the Village President or his/her designee determines
that a condition regarding real property or structures thereon constitutes a
public nuisance, that official may cause a written notice to abate to be served
upon the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such
public nuisance, provided that if that official determines that the public
nuisance constitutes a great and immediate danger to the public health, safety
or welfare, then the official may take immediate action to abate said public
nuisance without prior written notice and instead shall serve the party
described above with a notice of abatement action taken.
   (B)   Content Of Notice To Abate Or Notice Of Abatement Action Taken: Such
notice to abate or of abatement action taken shall include the following:
      1.   A description of the condition or conditions constituting the public
nuisance;
      2.   For a notice to abate, an order directing the owner or the occupant
of the private property where the public nuisance exists or the person
otherwise causing, permitting or maintaining such public nuisance to abate or
remove such public nuisance within a specified time period from the time of
service or the posting of the notice, in accordance with the following
schedule:
         (a)   Within twenty four (24) hours if the public nuisance constitutes
a great and immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare;
         (b)   Within ten (10) days in all instances other than those described
in subsection (B)2(a) of this section.
      3.   For a notice to abate, a warning that unless such public nuisance is
so abated or removed that the owner thereby consents to the entry onto the
property where the public nuisance exists and that the Village will cause it to
be abated or removed and that the costs of said abatement shall be charged to
the owner and shall constitute a lien on the property.
      4.   For a notice of abatement action taken, a description of the
abatement action taken and notice that the costs of said abatement shall be
charged to that individual and shall constitute a lien on the property.
   (C)   Method/Date Of Service Of Notice To Abate Or Notice Of Abatement
Action Taken:
      1.   The notice to abate shall be deemed properly served if it is:
         (a)   Delivered personally; or
         (b)   Posted in a conspicuous location on the property where the
public nuisance is located; or
         (c)   Mailed by first class mail, provided that if the mailed notice
is returned showing that it was not delivered, then the notice shall be served
by another method permitted herein.
      2.   Notice served by other than personal delivery shall be deemed served
on the following date:
         (a)   For posting the property, the date the notice is posted.
         (b)   For first class mail, four (4) days after said notice is
deposited in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid.
         (c)   If more than one method of service is used, notice shall be
deemed served on the earliest of the dates provided herein. (Ord. 2018-10, 8-
28-2018)
6-3-4: REQUEST TO APPEAL NOTICE TO ABATE A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   (A)   General: The person upon whom a notice to abate a public nuisance or
notice of abatement action taken is served, the property owner, tenant or other
affected person may submit a written application to appeal the notice to abate
or waive liability for abatement action already taken, hereinafter referred to
in this section as an "appeal", based upon one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   The condition described in the notice does not or did not exist on
the property;
      2.   The condition described in the notice does not or did not constitute
a public nuisance as defined in this chapter;
      3.   The deadline in the notice for abating the public nuisance is not
reasonable;
      4.   The applicant does not or did not have the legal authority to abate
or remove the public nuisance.
   (B)   Form/Content Of Application: The application for an appeal shall be in
writing, and shall at a minimum include the following information:
      1.   The name, address and business and phone number of the applicant;
and
      2.   The address of the property where the public nuisance is located;
and
      3.   The date of the notice to abate; and
      4.   The reason or reasons for the appeal; and
      5.   A recitation of facts in support of the reason or reasons for the
appeal.
   (C)   Method Of Submitting Application: The application for an appeal shall
be personally delivered to the Office of the Village Clerk, 207 E. Lincoln St.,
St. Joseph, IL during business hours, or mailed by first-class mail, postage
prepaid to Village President, Village of St. Joseph, P.O. Box 716, St. Joseph,
IL 61873.
   (D)   Time Within Which An Application For An Appeal Must Be Submitted: The
application for an appeal must be submitted within the time period set forth
below:
      1.   An application for an appeal from a notice to abate within ten (10)
days must be submitted within the time period allowed for the abatement.
      2.   An application for an appeal from a notice to abate within twenty
four (24) hours or from a notice of abatement action must be submitted within
ten (10) days of the date of the notice.
      3.   Any application for appeal that is sent by first class mail shall be
deemed to have been submitted three (3) days after said application is
deposited (postmarked) in the U.S. mail.
   (E)   Review Of Application/Scheduling Of Meeting: Upon receipt of an
application for an appeal submitted within the time provided herein, the
Village President or his/her designee, hereinafter referred to as the
"President" shall schedule a meeting with the person making the application
within ten (10) days of receipt of the request for appeal, to permit the
applicant to provide additional information pertinent to the appeal.
   (F)   Decision Of The President: The President, at the conclusion of the
consideration of the application for an appeal, and additional information
provided, shall make one of the following determinations:
      1.   Determine that the public nuisance does not or no longer exists and
void the notice to abate; or
      2.   If the public nuisance was already abated as an emergency or
otherwise prior to the opportunity for a review:
         (a)   Determine that the applicant shall be liable for the costs of
said abatement as provided herein and that a lien shall be filed against the
property; or
         (b)   Determine for good cause shown that the applicant shall not be
liable for the abatement and that no lien shall be filed for the costs of said
abatement.
      3.   Extend the deadline for abating the public nuisance; or
      4.   Deny the request and direct that the public nuisance be abated by
the date set forth in the notice to abate, or within five (5) days of the
decision, whichever date is later.
   (G)   Notice Of Decision Of President: Any decision of the President or
President's designee shall be in writing, and shall include findings of fact
derived from a review of the application and any additional documentation or
other evidence presented in support of the application that support the
decision. The decision shall be delivered to the applicant in person or mailed
by first class mail within two (2) working days of said decision. (Ord. 2018-
10, 8-28-2018)
6-3-5: VILLAGE'S AUTHORITY TO ABATE A PUBLIC NUISANCE/COLLECT COST OF
ABATEMENT:
   (A)   General: The owner or occupant of private property who fails to abate
a public nuisance on said property as required by this chapter or who owns or
occupies private property upon which a public nuisance constituting a great and
immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare exists thereby
consents to allow the Village to enter upon the property where the public
nuisance is located to abate or remove said public nuisance, subject to any
State and Federal constitutional restrictions against unreasonable searches and
seizures.
   (B)   Implied Contract To Pay Costs Of Abatement: A person served with a
notice to abate a public nuisance as provided herein or a person upon whose
property a public nuisance which constitutes an imminent danger to persons or
the property of another shall be deemed to have entered into an implied
contract with the Village to pay the Village for any costs incurred by the
Village to abate or remove said public nuisance pursuant to authority set forth
in subsection (A) of this section. Said costs shall include but not be limited
to the following:
      1.   The actual costs and expenses in time of Village employees or
Village authorized contractors and in materials concerning the abatement of the
public nuisance and necessary actions to protect the public way in proximity to
said public nuisance;
      2.   Any transportation to and from the property;
      3.   Title searches or certifications; and
      4.   Court costs and attorney's fees incurred for any attempt to collect
said costs or foreclose any liens related thereto. (Ord. 2018-10, 8-28-2018)
6-3-6: COLLECTION OF COSTS/LIEN:
   (A)   Any costs incurred by the Village to abate a public nuisance as
provided in this chapter shall be a lien against the property where the public
nuisance was located.
   (B)   The President shall send a bill for the costs incurred by the Village
for abating any public nuisance as provided herein by first class mail.
   (C)   Whenever a bill for the costs incurred by the Village to abate a
public nuisance remains unpaid for twenty eight (28) days after the date of
mailing, the President may record a notice of said lien for said costs in the
Champaign County Recorder of Deeds Office and refer the matter to the Village
Attorney, who may institute proceedings in the name of the Village in any court
having jurisdiction in such matters to obtain a judgment for the amount of said
costs and/or a judgment of foreclosure and sale in the manner provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 2018-10, 8-28-2018)
6-3-7: PROCESSING A LIEN FOR COSTS OF ABATEMENT:
Unless otherwise provided in this Code or by State Statute, whenever a lien is
created by this Code, State Statute or by a court of competent jurisdiction for
the costs incurred by the Village to abate a public nuisance or other condition
regarding real property or any structures thereon or to make the public ways
safe due to a public nuisance or other condition on property adjacent to the
public ways, the following procedures shall apply:
   (A)   Any notice of lien pursuant to this chapter shall be filed within one
hundred twenty (120) days after the full cost and expense of abatement or
removal of public nuisance has been incurred by the Village. The time of filing
of the lien shall not affect the validity of the lien.
   (B)   Any purchaser whose rights in such real estate have arisen and been
recorded with the Champaign County Recorder subsequent to removal of the public
nuisance or other condition and prior to the filing of such notice of lien
shall not be liable for the costs of abatement or removal, and the lien of the
Village shall not have priority as to any mortgage, judgment creditor or other
lien or whose rights in and to such real estate and the records thereof arise
prior to the filing of such notice.
   (C)   A copy of the notice of lien shall be mailed by the Village President
by first class mail to the owner of the property, or to the person or persons
in whose name such real estate was last billed for Property Tax purposes,
provided however that failure of the Village President to mail the notice of
lien shall not affect the validity of the lien.
   (D)   Upon payment of the costs and expenses, plus interest from the date
thirty (30) days after the bill was sent, after notice of lien has been filed,
the President or designee shall provide the person paying said costs and
expenses with a release of the lien.
   (E)   The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in the case of
mortgage foreclosures under article XV of the Code of Civil Procedure, 735
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-1101 et seq., or any amendment thereto or as in
the case of mechanics lien foreclosures as provided in the Mechanics Lien Act,
770 Illinois Compiled Statutes 60/1 et seq., or any amendment thereto. (Ord.
2018-10, 8-28-2018)
6-3-8: SEARCH WARRANT OR ACCESS WARRANT:
   (A)   Any officer designated by the Village to inspect a premises may, upon
affidavit, apply to the Judge of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant
setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a
reasonable basis for believing that a public nuisance or violation of any
ordinance of the Village or statute may exist, including but not limited to one
or more of the following:
      1.   That the premises or records require inspection according to the
cycle established by the Board of Trustees of the Village of St. Joseph for
periodic or systematic inspections of records, buildings or premises of the
type involved;
      2.   That observation of external conditions of the premises and its
public areas has resulted in the belief that violations of any ordinance of the
Village or statute exist.
   (B)   If the Judge of competent jurisdiction is satisfied as to the matters
set forth in the affidavit, the Judge shall authorize the issuance of a search
warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises on
which the public nuisance or violation may exist, and abatement of any such
public nuisance or violation. (Ord. 2018-10, 8-28-2018)
6-3-9: PENALTY:
Any person who causes, permits, or continues any public nuisance shall be fined
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Every public nuisance, when a conviction therefor is had,
may, by order of the court, before which conviction is had, be abated by the
Village at the expense of the defendant. (Ord. 2018-10, 8-28-2018)
CHAPTER 4
CURFEW
SECTION:
6-4-1: Age; Hours
6-4-1: AGE; HOURS:
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person sixteen (16) or seventeen (17) years of
age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or
highway at the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent,
legal guardian or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of
age approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or
occupation which the laws of the state authorize a person less than eighteen
(18) years of age to perform:
      1.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) midnight and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. Saturday;
      2.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) midnight and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. Sunday; and
      3.   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a person under sixteen (16) years of age to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of age approved by a parent
or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws
of the state authorize a person less than sixteen (16) years of age to perform.
   (C)   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate subsection (A)
or (B) of this section.
   (D)   Any minor violating subsection (A) or (B) of this section shall be
fined not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more than twenty five dollars
($25.00) for the first offense, not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second offense, and not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a
third offense and all subsequent offenses.
   (E)   Any parent, guardian or other person having legal custody or control
of any minor who shall permit or allow the minor to be upon any street, alley
or any other public place in the village in violation of subsection (A) or (B)
of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than twenty five dollars
($25.00). If any such minor is held to be in violation of the curfew
restrictions of subsection (A) or (B) of this section a second time within a
twelve (12) month period, then such parent, guardian or person responsible for
the care and custody of the minor violator shall be fined not more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) and if a minor is found to be in violation of the curfew
restrictions a third time and all subsequent times during a twelve (12) month
period, then the parent, guardian or person responsible for the minor violator
shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord., 3-12-1996)
CHAPTER 5
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definitions
6-5-2: Inoperable Motor Vehicle Declared Nuisance
6-5-3: Duty To Dispose Of Inoperable Motor Vehicle
6-5-4: Notice
6-5-5: Hearing
6-5-6: Towing
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING: Any structure larger than twelve by twenty (12'x20') or two hundred
and forty square feet (240 sq. ft.).
HISTORIC VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or other vehicle twenty five (25) years of
age or older.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least fourteen (14) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed,
or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or
otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
own motor power.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title of a vehicle or in the event a vehicle is
the subject of an agreement for conditional sale or lease thereof with the
right of purchase upon the performance of the conditions stated in the
agreement and with the immediate right of possession vested in the conditional
vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is entitled to
possession, then such conditional vendee, lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed
the owner for the purposes of this chapter.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
TOWING:
   (A)   In the event the notice provided for in subsection
6-5-4 A. of this Chapter is not complied with, and except as provided in
subsection B. of this section, the Champaign County Sheriff Department shall
cause the towing or removal of the inoperable motor vehicle:
      1.   From private property, seven (7) days or thereafter following said
notice to the owner of the vehicle and the owner or occupant of the premises
where the vehicle is located; or
      2.   From public property, seven (7) days or thereafter following notice
to the owner of said vehicle.
   (B)   In the event a request for hearing before the Board of Trustees was
properly made and the board of trustees determined by majority vote that the
said vehicle is an inoperable motor vehicle for purposes of this Chapter, then
the Board of Trustees shall set a reasonable date by which said vehicle shall
be disposed of or enclosed within a building. Said date shall be no less than
seven (7) days after the date of hearing. In the event said vehicle is not
disposed of or enclosed within a building by the said date set by the Board of
Trustees, then the Champaign County Sheriff or a Deputy Sheriff shall cause the
towing or removal of the inoperable motor vehicle without further, prior notice
thereof. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of said vehicle to deliver
a written notice to the Village and to provide documentation and/or
demonstration of operability if said vehicle has been put into operable
condition prior to towing or removal of said vehicle. In the event no such
written notice is received by the Village prior to towing or removal, it shall
be presumed that said vehicle remains inoperable and may be towed or removed in
accordance herewith.
   (C)   Whenever an inoperable motor vehicle is towed or removed by a towing
service pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the owner of the inoperable
motor vehicle and the owner or occupant of the property upon which such
inoperable motor vehicle is located shall be jointly and severally responsible
for all towing and storage charges unless otherwise determined by the Board of
Trustees pursuant to hearing as provided in section
6-5-5 of this Chapter.
   (D)   Within forty-eight (48) hours of the removal of such vehicle, the
Village shall send notice to the registered owner of the vehicle and lien
holder, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property
from which the vehicle was removed that said vehicle(s), has been impounded and
stored for violation of this Chapter. The notice shall give the location of
where the vehicle(s) is towed and the costs incurred by the Village for
removal.
   (E)   Any inoperable motor vehicle towed or removed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be stored and claimed or disposed of in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Illinois vehicle code, as
amended, entitled "Abandoned, Lost, Stolen or Unclaimed Vehicles".
VEHICLE: Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street or highway, whether subject to or exempt
from registration, excepting, however, bicycles, snowmobiles and devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord., 10-9-1990; amd. Ord. 99-
11A, 10-12-1999; Ord. 2025-02 4-8-2025)
6-5-2: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE DECLARED NUISANCE:
   (A)   The president and board of trustees of the village find and declare
that inoperable motor vehicles: constitute a safety hazard and a public
nuisance; are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the general
public by harboring disease, providing breeding places for vermin, inviting
plundering, creating fire hazards, and presenting physical dangers to children
and others; and produce scenic blights which degrade the environment and
adversely affect land values and the proper maintenance and continuing
development of the village.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to the following motor vehicles:
      1.   A motor vehicle which is kept within a building when not in use; or
(Ord., 10-9-1990)
      2.   An operable historical vehicle over twenty five (25) years of age;
or (Ord. 99-11A, 10-12-1999)
      3.   A motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in
the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles, or on the premises of a place of
business engaged in the sale of new or used automobiles; or
      4.   A motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of
being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or
repair operations for a period of not more than fourteen (14) days from the
date said vehicle became inoperable. (Ord., 10-9-1990)
6-5-3: DUTY TO DISPOSE OF INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE:
Any person not exempted under subsection
6-5-2(B) of this chapter shall dispose of any inoperable motor vehicle owned by
him or under his control or located upon property owned or occupied by him upon
written notice received from the village clerk commanding the disposition of
the inoperable motor vehicle. (Ord., 10-9-1990)
6-5-4: NOTICE:
   (A)   If the inoperable motor vehicle displays current license or
registration plates or decals from which the last known owner may be determined
in a reasonable expeditious manner, notice as set forth above shall be sent to
the last registered owner of such inoperable motor vehicle and to the owner or
occupant of the property upon which such inoperable motor vehicle is located.
   (B)   All notices provided by this section shall be sent by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid. Notice to one owner
of said vehicle or one owner or occupant of said property shall be considered
notice to al l owners or occupants. Refusal to accept delivery of said notice
shall be deemed acceptance for purposes of this section. The date of notice for
purposes of this section, shall be the day after the date said notice was
deposited with the United States Postal Service. Instead of notice by mail,
notice provided herein may be personally served by the Champaign County Sheriff
or a Deputy Sheriff upon said person or an occupant of the same household above
the age of fourteen (14) years old, in which case the date of notice shall be
the date of said service.
   (C)   Such notice by the Village to remove said inoperable motor vehicle
shall be substantially in the form set forth below:
 
NOTICE TO REMOVE INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE
TO: (NAME) DATE:
ADDRESS:
An Inoperable Motor Vehicle described as:
   MAKE:
   YEAR:
   COLOR:
 
with registration plates number is registered in the name(s) of
                             the State of                              . This
vehicle is located                                           at with outside of
an enclosed building and is deemed to be an Inoperable Motor Vehicle under an
Ordinance of the Village of St. Joseph. You are hereby notified that such
Inoperable Motor Vehicle must be removed, disposed of, or placed in an enclosed
building within seven (7) days after the date of this notice as indicated
above. You may request a hearing on the matter of whether the above described
vehicle is an Inoperable Motor Vehicle in violation of the Ordinance by
submitting a written request for such a hearing to the Board of Trustees of the
Village of St. Joseph, addressed as set forth below, within seven (7) days of
the date of this notice. In the event that you submit such a request for a
hearing, a hearing date will be set and you will be advised of the time, date
and place of such hearing at least three (3) days in advance of the date of
such hearing. Pursuant to the Ordinance, you may request an extension period at
any such hearing. The Board of Trustees shall, upon good cause being shown,
grant an extension of not more than thirty (30) days if the owner of the
vehicle or the owner or occupant of the property upon which such Inoperable
Motor Vehicle is located submits to the Board of Trustees an affidavit that the
Inoperable Motor Vehicle is being held for sale or expeditious repair as
defined by subsection
6-5-S(B) of the Ordinance. To request a hearing, deliver or mail by registered
mail-return receipt requested, a request for such a hearing in writing to the
Village of St. Joseph, 207 E. Lincoln, P.O. Box 716, St. Joseph, Illinois
61873. If you fail to request a hearing within seven (7) days of the date of
this notice, and you do not remove, dispose of, or place the Inoperable Motor
Vehicle in an enclosed building within the specified period, or within any
extension granted by the Board of Trustees after a hearing, such Inoperable
Motor Vehicle is subject to being towed and impounded and you may be charged
with a violation of the Ordinance and subject to a fine of not more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for such violation. In addition, the costs of towing
and storage will be assessed against you.
(Ord., 10-9-1990; amd. Ord. 99-11A, 10-12-1999; Ord. 2025-02, 4-8-2025)
6-5-5: HEARING:
   (A)   The person or persons, or the designated agent thereof, to whom the
notice as specified by this chapter is directed, shall have the right to a
hearing before the board of trustees of the village on the matter of whether
the motor vehicle cited in such notice is an inoperable motor vehicle in
violation of this chapter. To obtain such a hearing, any such person must first
submit a written request for such a hearing, by hand delivery or by registered
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the Village of St. Joseph, 207 E.
Lincoln, P.O. Box 716, St. Joseph, IL 61873, within seven (7) days of the date
of any such notice. In the event that a hearing is so requested, the village
clerk shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, set a time, date and place for
the hearing before the board of trustees and shall cause the person or persons
so requesting the hearing to be provided with written notice of the time, date
and place for the hearing at least three (3) days in advance of the date
thereof. All enforcement of this chapter shall be stayed pending said hearing
and determination by the board of trustees.
   (B)   The owner of the vehicle or the owner or occupant of the property
where the vehicle is located may apply for an extension of time by making a
written request for a hearing as provided in subsection (A) of this section.
Upon receipt of any such application for an extension of time, the board of
trustees shall, upon good cause being shown, grant an extension of not more
than thirty (30) days, if such person submits to the board of trustees an
affidavit that the inoperable motor vehicle is being held for sale or
expeditious repair. As used in this section, "expeditious repair" shall mean:
1) that the necessary parts for repair have been ordered but are not available
for installation in the inoperable motor vehicle for reasons not within the
control of the owner of said inoperable motor vehicle; or 2) that the
inoperable motor vehicle is scheduled to be repaired by a person whose regular
course of business includes the repair of vehicles and the scheduled repair
date is within thirty (30) days; or 3) that the inoperable motor vehicle is in
such condition of being inoperable as a result of a vehicular accident, and the
owner of such inoperable motor vehicle or any third party to whom or from whom
a claim for damages sustained in such accident is anticipated is investigating
or preparing a claim for such damages, but in no event shall any such extension
period exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord., 10-9-1990)
6-5-6: TOWING:
   (A)   In the event the notice provided for in subsection
6-5-4(A) of this chapter is not complied with, and except as provided in
subsection (B) of this section, the Champaign County sheriff or a deputy
sheriff shall cause the towing or removal of the inoperable motor vehicle: 1)
from private property, seven (7) days or thereafter following said notice to
the owner of the vehicle and the owner or occupant of the premises where the
vehicle is located, or 2) from public property, seven (7) days or thereafter
following notice to the owner of said vehicle. (Ord., 10-9-1990)
   (B)   In the event a request for hearing before the board of trustees was
properly made and the board of trustees determined by majority vote that the
said vehicle is an inoperable motor vehicle for purposes of this chapter, then
the board of trustees shall set a reasonable date by which said vehicle shall
be disposed of or enclosed within a building. Said date shall be no less than
seven (7) days after the date of hearing. In the event said vehicle is not
disposed of or enclosed within a building by the said date set by the board of
trustees, then the Champaign County sheriff or a deputy sheriff shall cause the
towing or removal of the inoperable motor vehicle without further, prior notice
thereof. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of said vehicle to deliver
a written notice to the village clerk and to provide documentation and/or
demonstration of operability if said vehicle has been put into operable
condition prior to towing or removal of said vehicle. In the event no such
written notice is received by the village clerk prior to towing or removal, it
shall be presumed that said vehicle remains inoperable and may be towed or
removed in accordance herewith. (Ord. 99-11A, 10-12-1999)
   (C)   Whenever an inoperable motor vehicle is towed or removed by a towing
service pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the owner of the inoperable
motor vehicle and the owner or occupant of the property upon which such
inoperable motor vehicle is located shall be jointly and severally responsible
for all towing and storage charges unless otherwise determined by the board of
trustees pursuant to hearing as provided in section
6-5-5 of this chapter.
   (D)   Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of such vehicle, the
village clerk shall send notice to the registered owner of the vehicle and lien
holder, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property
from which the vehicle was removed that said vehicle(s), has been impounded and
stored for violation of this chapter. The notice shall give the location of
where the vehicle(s) is towed and the costs incurred by the village for
removal. (Ord., 10-9-1990)
   (E)   Any inoperable motor vehicle towed or removed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be stored and claimed or disposed of in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Illinois vehicle code, as
amended, entitled "Abandoned, Lost, Stolen or Unclaimed Vehicles" 1 . (Ord. 99-
11A, 10-12-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.
CHAPTER 6
WEEDS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Weeds; Declared A Nuisance
6-6-2: Height
6-6-3: Removal; Notice
6-6-4: Abatement
6-6-5: Hearing; Village To Abate
6-6-6: Cost Of Abatement
6-6-7: Exceptions
6-6-1: WEEDS; DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, wild lettuce or
other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the
village are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to
permit any such weeds to grow or remain in any such place. (Ord., 4-6-1971)
6-6-2: HEIGHT:
It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to permit any weed,
grass or plant, other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plant to
grow to a height exceeding eight inches (8") on property owned or occupied by
them within the village. Owners and occupants shall all be fully responsible
for compliance with this section. Any such plant or weed exceeding such height
is hereby declared to be a nuisance; provided that in agricultural zoning
districts, customary and bona fide agricultural row crops shall be allowed, and
grass or other plantings in excess of eight inches (8") high may be permitted
by approval of the board of trustees; and that in recently annexed property in
a residential zoning district bona fide agricultural row crops, grass or other
plantings in excess of eight inches (8") high may be permitted by approval of
the board of trustees. (Ord. 2005-5, 5-24-2005)
6-6-3: REMOVAL; NOTICE:
It shall be the duty of the village clerk to serve or cause to be served, by
certified mail, personal delivery or posting on the front entry of the
premises, a notice upon the owner and occupant of any premises on which weeds
or plants are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this chapter
and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10) days. Notice to the
owner shall be served on or sent to the person to whom was sent the tax bill
for the general taxes on the property for the last preceding year. (2005 Code)
6-6-4: ABATEMENT:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within ten (10) days of the
date of mailing of said notice, or deliver to the Village Clerk, within said
ten (1) days, a written objection and request for a hearing before the Board of
Trustees, the Village may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of
the expense of the abatement, and such expenses shall be charged and paid by
such owners and/or occupants for each calendar year follows:
   (A)   First Abatement: Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per hour with Fifty Dollars
($50.00) minimum.
   (B)   Second Abatement: One Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($150.00) per hour
with One Hundred and Fifty Dollar ($150.00) minimum.
   (C)   Third (or more) Abatement: Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00) per
hour with Two Hundred and Fifty Dollar ($250.00) minimum. (2005 Code; amd. Ord.
2022-11, 5-24-2022)
6-6-5: HEARING; VILLAGE TO ABATE:
In the event the owner and/or occupant requests a hearing as provided in
section
6-6-4 of this chapter, the board of trustees shall schedule a hearing and
notify the party requesting the hearing no less than seven (7) days prior to
the hearing. If the board of trustees determines at said hearing that the
owner/occupant of said premises is in violation of this chapter, the board may
allow up to ten (10) days for the owner/occupant to abate the nuisance, after
which, if not abated, the village may proceed to abate the nuisance as provided
in section
6-6-4 of this chapter. (2005 Code)
6-6-6: COST OF ABATEMENT:
The cost of abatement of such nuisance by the village shall be a lien on the
real estate, superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances, except taxes.
Whenever a bill for such abatement remains unpaid thirty (30) days after it has
been rendered to the property owner, the clerk shall file within sixty (60)
days after the cost and expense of such abatement is incurred, with the
recorder of deeds of Champaign County, a notice of lien. The notice shall
consist of a sworn statement setting out:
   (A)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
   (B)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service;
   (C)   The date or dates when such cost or expense was incurred by the
village;
   (D)   The date on which notice was served upon the property owner demanding
the abatement of said nuisance.
A copy of such notice shall be mailed by the clerk to the owner of the premises
after the abatement has been completed.
The village attorney is authorized and directed to institute such proceedings
in the name of the village, in any court having jurisdiction over such matter,
against any property for which such bill has remained unpaid thirty (30) days
after it has been rendered.
Property subject to a lien for such unpaid bills shall be sold for nonpayment
of such bill, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges,
after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens.
Such a foreclosure shall be in equity in the name of the village. (2005 Code)
6-6-7: EXCEPTIONS:
The regulations and prohibitions of this chapter shall not apply to land owned
and operated by a duly created government conservation district, including the
Champaign County soil and water conservation district. (Ord. 2009-8, 4-28-2009)
CHAPTER 7
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
6-7-1: Definitions
6-7-2: Disposal Of Litter; Receptacles; Removal By Licensed Commercial Hauler
6-7-3: Disposal On Public Ways And Upon Property Of Another Prohibited
6-7-4: Prohibited Accumulations
6-7-5: Dumpsters And Other Trash Containers On Public Way Restricted
6-7-6: Obstruction And Encroachments Prohibited
6-7-7: Storage Of Personal Property On Right-Of-Way
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ASHES: Shall mean the residue from the burning of wood or other combustible
materials.
DEBRIS: Means the remains of something broken down and/or apparently abandoned
to the elements, or destroyed.
DUMPSTER: Means a metal refuse container of one cubic yard or more in volume
with an attached lid designed for handling by mechanical means.
GARBAGE: Means wastes resulting from the handling, processing, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food, and wastes from the handling, processing, and
storage of produce.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Means all accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings,
leaves, tree limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the care of
lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees. Landscape waste that has been chipped,
shredded or composted, or otherwise processed so as to be converted from raw
landscape waste shall not be considered as landscape waste for the purposes of
this chapter.
LITTER: Means garbage, refuse and rubbish and all other waste material, which,
if thrown or deposited, tends to create a danger or harm to public health,
safety and welfare.
OCCUPANT: Means a person(s) that has the legal right to possession of a
dwelling unit as a result of being an owner- occupant of the premises, or a
tenant or other resident named in a lease or other agreement with the owner of
the premises.
OWNER: Means the owner of record of the real estate parcel.
REFUSE: Means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes including
garbage, rubbish and debris.
RUBBISH: Means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and
non-combustible trash, including but not limited to paper products, cardboard,
glass, plastic or metal containers, discarded furniture, furnishings and
similar materials.
VILLAGE: Means the Village of St. Joseph, Illinois. (Ord. 2018-10, 8-28-2018)
6-7-2: DISPOSAL OF LITTER; RECEPTACLES; REMOVAL BY LICENSED COMMERCIAL HAULER:
   (A)   Each owner, each owner's agent and each occupant of any structure
shall provide for the daily disposal of litter resulting from the use of said
structure in receptacles of galvanized iron, impact resistant plastic, painted
steel or aluminum and of a minimum size of six (6) gallons. Each receptacle
shall be equipped with a close fitting cover, watertight and capable of keeping
out flies, shall be rodent- proof and shall be kept closed except when being
filled, emptied or cleaned.
   (B)   Each owner, each owner's agent and each occupant leasing or otherwise
utilizing one or more receptacles owned by a licensed commercial garbage
collector shall insure that said receptacle(s) is (are) labeled with the name,
principal local business address and phone number of the commercial garbage
collector owning or leasing the receptacle.
   (C)   Each owner, each owner's agent and each occupant shall be responsible
for removing or causing to be removed the contents of receptacles used to store
litter as required herein at least once each week, or more often if needed.
Each owner or owners' agent or occupant of a residential land use shall be
required to use the services of a commercial hauler for the removal of the
contents of receptacles as provided herein. (Ord. 2018-10, 8-28-2018)
6-7-3: DISPOSAL ON PUBLIC WAYS AND UPON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No person shall dump or deposit refuse or cause refuse to be dumped or
deposited upon any property or within the trash receptacles of another without
the permission of the owner.
   (B)   No person shall dump or deposit refuse or cause refuse to be dumped,
deposited or accumulated upon any Village right-of-way or other Village
property except in a container provided by the Village and intended for such
deposit. Any such dumping or deposit is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and a violation of this Code.
   (C)   All persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of their premises free from refuse.
   (D)   No person shall dump or deposit leaves or other landscape wastes or
cause leaves or other landscape waste to be dumped or deposited onto any street
except as provided by the Board of Trustees for the Village. (Ord. 2018-10, 8-
28-2018)
6-7-4: PROHIBITED ACCUMULATIONS:
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided for or authorized by this Code, no person
shall cause, allow or permit the accumulation of ashes, garbage, refuse,
rubbish or debris on property under the person's ownership or control, or in
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Any accumulation of ashes, garbage, refuse, rubbish, litter or debris
on private property which is visible from any public right-of-way or neighbor
property is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be a violation of this
Code. (Ord. 2018-10, 8-28-2018)
6-7-5: DUMPSTERS AND OTHER TRASH CONTAINERS ON PUBLIC WAY RESTRICTED:
Except in accordance with written permission of the Village, no person shall
allow or permit a dumpster or other trash container to be located on any public
right-of-way or Village-owned or leased property except while the dumpster or
other trash container is actually in the process of being emptied. (Ord. 2018-
10, 8-28-2018)
6-7-6: OBSTRUCTION AND ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Obstruction Prohibited: No person shall cause, create or maintain any
obstruction of, encroachment on or accumulation of unauthorized materials on
any public right-of-way, unless specifically authorized pursuant to this Code
or the Board of Trustees for the Village. Any such obstruction, encroachment or
accumulation of unauthorized materials is hereby declared a public nuisance and
a violation of this Code.
   (B)   Removal Required: Upon notice by the Village, a person who maintains
an obstruction, encroachment, or accumulation of unauthorized materials,
including buildings, building materials and structures, on any public right-of-
way or other public property, must remove the obstruction, encroachment or said
materials from the public way within a reasonable time period, of no less than
five (5) days, set by the Village President. A person who fails to remove the
obstruction, encroachment or said materials is liable for the cost of repair or
removal and for fines imposed pursuant to this Code.
   (C)   Costs Imposed: If, after receiving notice from the Village President,
any person fails to remove the obstruction, encroachment or unauthorized
materials from the public way or public property within the time period set by
the Village President, the Village may remove or cause the removal of the
obstruction, encroachment or unauthorized materials and charge the cost of such
removal and any storage costs for materials removed to the person responsible
for the obstruction, encroachment or accumulation of unauthorized materials.
Such costs shall include, but not be limited to, an overhead charge based on
the personnel involved in administering this section as determined in writing
by the Village President. The amount so charged shall be billed to the person
responsible for removing the obstruction, encroachment or unauthorized
materials. The amount shall be paid to the Village within twenty eight (28)
days after the date of the bill. (Ord. 2018-10, 8-28-2018)
6-7-7: STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY ON RIGHT-OF-WAY:
   (A)   The presence of unattended personal property in the public right-of-
way is declared to be a public nuisance and a violation of this Code.
   (B)   Except as otherwise authorized by this Code, no person shall use any
public right-of-way for the placement or storage of unattended personal
property unless such person has obtained a permit from the Village President.
Unauthorized unattended personal property on the right-of-way shall be presumed
abandoned, and may be disposed of or salvaged by the Village.
   (C)   If the unattended personal property belongs to the tenant, or former
tenant, of the real estate immediately adjacent to the location of the
unattended personal property, the owner of such adjacent real estate shall,
upon notice from the Village, immediately cause removal of the unattended
personal property and upon failure to do, the Village shall remove the
unattended personal property and file a lien against said property for the
reasonable costs of the removal. Such costs shall include, but not be limited
to, an overhead charge based on the personnel involved in administering this
section as determined in writing by the Village President. The amount shall be
paid to the Village within twenty eight (28) days after the date of the bill.
(Ord. 2018-10, 8-28-2018)
CHAPTER 8
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
6-8-1: Fireworks Defined
6-8-2: Fireworks Prohibited
6-8-3: Fireworks Display Permit Application
6-8-4: Bond
6-8-5: Permit Issuance
6-8-6: Smoking By Operators At Fireworks Display Prohibited
6-8-7: Disposal Of Unfired Fireworks
6-8-1: FIREWORKS DEFINED:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, "fireworks"
shall mean and include any explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or an audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include the following:
      1.   Blank cartridges;
      2.   Toy cannons in which explosives are used;
      3.   The type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the
same;
      4.   Firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, bombs or other
devices of similar construction;
      5.   Any fireworks containing any explosive compound;
      6.   Any tablets or other devices containing any explosive substance, or
containing combustible substances producing visual effects.
   (B)   The term "fireworks" shall not include the following:
      1.   Auto flares;
      2.   Snake or glow worm pellets;
      3.   Smoke devices;
      4.   Trick noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby traps",
"snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads", and "auto burglar alarms";
      5.   Sparklers. The term "sparklers" means a wire or stick coated with
pyrotechnic composition which may not exceed one hundred grams (100 g) per
item, that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition. The term "sparklers"
shall not include other sparkling devices including, but not limited to, items
commonly known as "fountains", "spinners", "wheels", or similar devices, the
sale and use of which is expressly prohibited;
      6.   Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or
plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths (0.25) grains or less of
explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion;
      7.   Toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than twenty five
hundredths (0.25) grains of explosive mixture. (Ord. 2009-12, 7-14-2009)
6-8-2: FIREWORKS PROHIBITED:
No person shall possess, store, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at
retail, use or explode any fireworks except as provided in rules and
regulations issued by the village president and only if the person has a
current permit for supervised public displays of fireworks. (Ord. 2009-12, 7-
14-2009)
6-8-3: FIREWORKS DISPLAY PERMIT APPLICATION:
   (A)   The applicant for a fireworks display permit shall submit an
application to the village president at least fifteen (15) days in advance of
the date of the proposed fireworks display.
   (B)   Only persons or entities which operate fairs, amusement parks, outdoor
recreational facilities, governmental entities or persons or entities
authorized to use governmental property for a fireworks display may apply for a
fireworks display permit.
   (C)   The application shall state the date or dates of the fireworks
display, the location of the fireworks display and provide information about
the method of explosion, number, type and size of the fireworks to be displayed
as reasonably requested by the village president to determine the fire safety
precautions minimally necessary to protect the public and the safety measures
to be used to protect the public. The applicant shall state the name of the
fireworks display operator. (Ord. 2009-12, 7-14-2009)
6-8-4: BOND:
The applicant shall furnish a bond secured by a surety company in the amount of
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for the payment of all damages which may be
caused either to a person or persons or to property by reason of the permittee,
the permittee's agents, employees or subcontractors. (Ord. 2009-12, 7-14-2009)
6-8-5: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
The village president shall approve and issue a fireworks display permit to a
person or entity if the applicant meets the conditions of this chapter for a
permit and the village president determines that the location and character of
the proposed display is not in violation of any federal, state, or village law
or ordinance or rule or regulation and is not a hazard to property and will not
endanger any person and the operator of the fireworks display is competent to
handle the display based upon the operator's experience and reputation for
safety. The village president shall approve an application within twenty one
(21) days of receipt of the application or it shall be deemed denied. (Ord.
2009-12, 7-14-2009)
6-8-6: SMOKING BY OPERATORS AT FIREWORKS DISPLAY PROHIBITED:
No person in charge of or working in connection with any public display of
fireworks shall smoke at any time during which such public display is going on
or in the vicinity of materials to be used for such display. (Ord. 2009-12, 7-
14-2009)
6-8-7: DISPOSAL OF UNFIRED FIREWORKS:
Unfired fireworks and trash remaining after a public display of fireworks for
which a permit is issued shall be immediately disposed of in an approved, safe
manner. (Ord. 2009-12, 7-14-2009)
CHAPTER 9
LANDSCAPE WASTE COLLECTION PROGRAMS
SECTION:
6-9-1: Purpose
6-9-2: Definitions
6-9-3: Materials Allowed For Brush And Limb Collection Program
6-9-4: General Regulations For Brush And Limb Collection
6-9-5: General Regulations For Leaf Collection Program
6-9-6: Administration And Enforcement
6-9-7: Fine
6-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is the establish standards for the use of the
Village of St. Joseph landscape waste collection programs. The programs are
intended to provide appropriate alternative to open burning of seasonally
generated landscape waste materials in the Village and are not intended for
collection of landscape waste materials generated from mowing or the complete
removal of shrubs and trees. (Ord. 2019-3, 8-13-2019)
6-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
BRUSH:                Cut or broken branches from woody shrubs and trees.
DRIED PLANT MATERIAL: Dried leaves and stems from annual and/or perennial
                      plants.
GRASS:                Slender leaved lawn grasses, not including ornamental
                      grasses.
LEAVES:               Foliage from woody shrubs and trees free from limbs or
                      other debris.
                      Branches of trees or bushes no longer than six feet (6')
TREE LIMBS:           in length and no more than four inches (4") in diameter.
                      No trunks or stumps allowed.
                      Vegetative or organic material produced from the care and
YARD WASTE:           maintenance of landscaped areas, gardens and lawns, such
                      as weeds, leaves, dead flowers, plants and shrub
                      trimmings. (Ord. 2019-3, 8-13-2019)
 
6-9-3: MATERIALS ALLOWED FOR BRUSH AND LIMB COLLECTION PROGRAM:
   (A)   Materials allowed for pickup shall be brush, tree limbs, yard waste,
and dried plant material, as defined above.
   (B)   No grass clippings, dirt, rocks, mulch, stump grindings, or fruit or
similar materials produced from trees shall be allowed.
   (C)   No materials shall be more than six feet (6') in length or greater
than four inches (4") in diameter.
   (D)   Yard waste and twigs may only be placed in paper bags. No plastic bags
allowed. (Ord. 2019-3, 8-13-2019)
6-9-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR BRUSH AND LIMB COLLECTION:
   (A)   Collection days shall be determined, and announced by the Village
Board of Trustees on the Village website and posting at the municipal building,
conditions permitting.
   (B)   Materials for pick up are to be placed prior to seven o’clock (7:00)
A.M. on the scheduled and announced collection week.
   (C)   Materials for pick up are not to be placed for pick up more than seven
(7) days prior to the scheduled and announced collection week.
   (D)   Brush and/or paper yard bags are to be placed in distinct piles within
three feet (3') of the curb prior to scheduled and announced collection week.
   (E)   Brush piles need to have at least eighteen inches (18") between piles.
   (F)   Materials are not to be placed around mail boxes, trees, poles, or
fire hydrants.
   (G)   Brush/yard waste is not to be placed on or block public street
surfaces, public sidewalk surfaces, gutters, public drainage facilities, or on
property belonging to someone else without that owner's permission.
   (H)   Vehicles shall be relocated on the scheduled and announced collection
week to provide access for collection of material.
   (I)   The Village reserves the right to deny collection of brush/tree limbs/
yard bags due to the lack of access to or within the piles, excessive volume of
materials, late placement of materials or restricted material, or other
violation of the regulations herein.
   (J)   It shall be a violation of this chapter to place materials for
collection through the Village of St. Joseph landscape waste collection
programs, which were not grown and gathered from property within the Village of
St. Joseph.
   (K)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for the use of the Village of
St. Joseph brush and tree limb collection program by landscapers, arborists and
similar professions for property maintenance services conducted on behalf of
residents or owners of property within the Village of St. Joseph. (Ord. 2019-3,
8-13-2019)
6-9-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR LEAF COLLECTION PROGRAM:
   (A)   Collection days shall be determined and announced by the Village Board
of Trustees on the Village website and posting at the municipal building.
   (B)   Leaf piles should be in a row no more than three feet (3') from the
curb or street edge.
   (C)   No bagged or containerized leaves are allowed.
   (D)   Leaves shall not be placed out for collection more than seven (7) days
prior to an announced collection month.
   (E)   Leaves will not be collected after the last announced collection
month.
   (F)   Leaves shall not be placed on or block public street surfaces, public
sidewalk surfaces, gutters, public drainage facilities, or on property
belonging to someone else without that owner's permission.
   (G)   Vehicles shall be relocated on the scheduled and announced collection
weeks so as to provide access for collection.
   (H)   The Village reserves the right to deny collection of leaves due to the
lack of access to or within the piles, late placement of materials or
restricted material, or other violations of these regulations. (Ord. 2019-3, 8-
13-2019)
6-9-6: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Village President or his/her designee to administer
and enforce the regulations contained herein. (Ord. 2019-3, 8-13-2019)
6-9-7: FINE:
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of
not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Any day on which any violation occurs
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2019-3, 8-13-2019)
CHAPTER 10
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
6-10-1: Purpose
6-10-2: Definitions
6-10-3: Permit Required
6-10-4: Application
6-10-5: Action On Permit
6-10-6: Prohibited Conduct
6-10-7: Consideration For Issuance; Denial
6-10-8: Sales Tax Collection
6-10-9: Insurance Required
6-10-10: Fees For Permit
6-10-11: Payment Of Costs
6-10-12: Penalty
6-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of a special event permit is to establish a single point of contact
with the Village by an applicant for a special event for coordination of the
activities of the special event and the various separate Village approvals for
any related activities. (Ord. 2022-02, 1-25-2022)
6-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
        Any event in the Village that: occurs partially or completely within the
        jurisdiction of the Village, is excepted to or could disrupt normal daily
        functions within the Village including, but not limited to, traffic congestion
        and excess noise; or could create a public health/safety concern without
        proper precautions or prior planning, uses Village Park or other Village owned
        property, temporarily provides food service, will use a public address or
        sound system, will use portable toilets, will conduct a raffle, will require
        additional refuse receptacles, will require safety or special fencing, will
        require special street lighting or electrical service, will require special
SPECIAL water service, will use stages or temporary structures, will require the
EVENTS: closing of a Village street, will require the closing of an off street parking
        facility, will require the use of Village barricades, will require the service
        of police department, fire department, ESDA, and/or public works, will require
        an emergency evacuation plan, will sell or serve alcoholic beverages, will
        display fireworks, will need the services of Village maintenance workers or
        other employees, or will require an additional Village license of permit.
        Activities protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution
        or by any of Sections 3, 4, and 5 of Article 1 of the Constitution of 1970 of
        the State of Illinois are excluded from the definition of “special event,”
        except where such activities impede traffic, requires road closures, etc.
        (Ord. 2022-02, 1-25-2022)
 
6-10-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the activity of a special event
without a permit issued under the provisions of this article. The permit shall
not authorize any activity that is also required to have a separate license or
permit as required by the Village of St. Joseph Code of Ordinances. Failure to
acquire a permit is considered a violation and subject to a fine of $300.00 for
each violation with each day of such activity constituting a separate
violation. (Ord. 2022-02, 1-25-2022)
6-10-4: APPLICATION:
A person seeking a special event permit shall file an application with the
Village Clerk no less than thirty (30) days prior to the special event. The
application shall include the name and contact of the person in charge, and an
alternate, on the day of the event. Applications filed less that thirty (30)
days before the event may be accepted by the Village if the Village still has
sufficient time to review said application.
Applicants shall agree in writing, prior to the issuance of a special event
permit, to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the Village, its
representatives, officers, trustees, agents, attorneys, and employees from and
against any and all claims, actions, suits, damages, costs, expenses, and
liabilities, including reasonable fees and expenses of their attorneys, expert
witnesses and consultants, court costs and fines, asserted against them or
sought to be imposed upon them, individually or jointly or severally, and which
arise directly or indirectly out of or in connection in any way the special
event applied for.
Prior to the final approval of the application and issuance of a permit, the
Village may include, as an addendum to any special event permit, reasonable
requirements not specifically outlined in the original permit application.
(Ord. 2022-02, 1-25-2022)
6-10-5: ACTION ON PERMIT:
Applications may be denied on the basis of incompleteness or as not being in
compliance with this article or in compliance with any other ordinance, rule or
regulation for a related permit or license. The reason(s) for the denial shall
be made known to the applicant in writing at the time of denial. The applicant
shall be allowed to correct or complete the application and resubmit it to the
Clerk or appeal to the Village Administrator.
   (A)   The Village Administrator is hereby authorized to promulgate rules
and/or regulations, not in conflict with this Chapter, to supplement and
specify in more detail requirements relating to special events. Failure to
observe any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter shall
constitute an ordinance violation.
   (B)   No special event shall begin before seven o’clock a.m. nor continue
after ten o’clock p.m. In cases where the desired hours of the special event
are outside the limits as described herein, upon application, the Village
Administrator shall have the authority to vary the permitted hours to
accommodate the activities of such special event, taking into consideration the
impact of such special event on the Villages resources and property. (Ord.
2022-02, 1-25-2022)
6-10-6: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   (A)   No person shall knowingly participate in a special event for which a
permit application has been falsified or has bot been obtained.
   (B)   No person shall continue to organize, or participate in the further
planning or organizing of a special event that is conducted without a permit
after a permit has been denied.
   (C)   No person in a position of influence or control over a special event
shall allow the conduct of a special event without a permit.
   (D)   No person shall violate any condition of a special event permit.
   (E)   No person shall violate any ordinance, rule or regulation of the
Village during the planning, operation or conclusion of a special event. (Ord.
2022-02, 1-25-2022)
6-10-7: CONSIDERATION FOR ISSUANCE; DENIAL:
In determining whether to approve a special event permit, the Village
Administrator shall consider the following factors relevant to the proposed
special event and necessary to secure the public welfare:
   (A)   Whether Village resources or property will be affected, or are
reasonably expected to be affected;
   (B)   Whether the special event appears to be held for any unlawful purpose;
   (C)   Whether it appears the special event may be conducted in a manner so
as to cause a breach of peace;
   (D)   Whether the special event will unnecessarily interfere with the public
use of the streets, sidewalks, open and/or public areas;
   (E)   Whether the special event may have some special right or priority
under the law; and
   (F)   Whether the special event would, in any way, be detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare.
If the Village Administrator denies an application for a proposed special
event, the applicant may appeal that decision to the Village President and
Board of Trustees by filing a written appeal of the Village Administrator’s
decision with the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days of the Village
Administrator’s denial thereof. A majority of the Village President and Board
of Trustees may overturn the Village Administrator’s decision to deny an
application for a special event. (Ord. 2022-02, 1-25-2022)
6-10-8: SALES TAX COLLECTION:
Illinois Sales Tax Law requires that sales taxes must be paid on all goods sold
at the event. If prepared food or beverages will be sold at the event, the
selling organization must file a Village of St. Joseph Food and Beverage Tax
Return and pay the applicable sales taxes.
   (A)   Event Promoter will create a list of all the event vendors: name,
address, phone number, email address, and Illinois Department of Revenue (IDOR)
tax ID number (if available).
   (B)   Event Promoter will contact the Illinois Department of Revenue,
Special Event Unit to register the event with the state.
      1.   Provide a list of all vendors to the Illinois Department of Revenue.
      2.   IDOR will provide the event promoter with a coupon form with the
name, date, location of the special event and the appropriate sales tax rate
and filing instruction.
   (C)   Within ten (10) days of the event, each vendor needs to report and
remit sales tax to the IL Department of Revenue, Springfield, IL (address
listed on the coupon). (Ord. 2022-02, 1-25-2022)
6-10-9: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Events that use Village owned property, Villages parks, Village streets, or
rights-of-way may require a Certificate of Insurance upon approval of a special
event permit. An original Certificate of Insurance naming the Village of St.
Joseph as an additional insured must be submitted. The Certificate of Insurance
will be due prior to the event date and shall be issued by a company licensed
in the State of Illinois, approved by the Village, and covering any and all
liability. In addition, the special event must be named on the Certificate of
Insurance. The minimum coverage limit for an event $1,000,000.00 each
occurrence and $2,000,000.00 in the aggregate. The Village of St. Joseph
reserves the right to change insurance requirements or request additional
insurance for an event as deemed necessary by the Village. This requirement may
be waived as determined by the Village Administrator. (Ord. 2022-02, 1-25-2022)
6-10-10: FEES FOR PERMIT:
The fee for such a special event permit shall be Zero Dollars ($0.00). (Ord.
2022-02, 1-25-2022)
6-10-11: PAYMENT OF COSTS:
Depending on the scope and attendance of the event, the Village of St. Joseph
may require reimbursement of compensation for Police Department and Public
Works staffing to be present at the function pending staff availability. The
costs for police and public works services will be charged directly to the
event organization and/or agency. The number of personnel necessary to staff
the event will be based on the size and scope of the event. This determination
will be made prior to the event by the Village Administrator. The applicant
shall pay to the Village prior to the event all fees and costs that can be
determined prior to issuance of the permit and any balance within thirty (30)
days after the event. (Ord. 2022-02, 1-25-2022)
6-10-12: PENALTY:
Any special event permit issued under this Article shall be revoked or
suspended if the permit holder violates any terns of the license or any other
provisions of this Article. Any violation of this Article including failure to
acquire a permit, shall be subject to a fine up to Three Hundred Dollars
($300.00). Each day that a violation hereof exists shall be considered a
sperate offense. Each special event held in violation hereof shall be
considered a separate offense. (Ord. 2022-02, 1-25-2022)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SECTION:
7-1-1: Definitions
7-1-2: Connection; Use Restrictions
7-1-3: Private Sewage Disposal System
7-1-4: Permit Required; Specifications
7-1-5: Discharge Into Sewers Restricted
7-1-6: Damage To Sewage Works
7-1-7: Right Of Entry
7-1-8: Violation
7-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the sanitary building drains to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both storm runoff and sewage.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes,
trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INSPECTOR: The person or person duly authorized by the village board to inspect
and approve the installation of building sewers and their connection to the
public sewer system. Unless otherwise directed by the board of trustees, the
inspector on residential projects shall be the superintendent and on
commercial, industrial projects, shall be the village engineer.
MAY: Is permissive.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or ground water.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer which is on public property and is controlled by public
authority.
SANITARY BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of the
sanitary drainage system inside the walls of any building, which receives the
discharge from soil or waste stacks and conveys the same to a point three feet
(3') outside the building walls where it connects with its respective building
sewer.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: The water carried wastes from residences, businesses, buildings,
institutions and industrial establishments.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS: All of the facilities for collection, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage within the St. Joseph sanitary system.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL: Is mandatory.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average
twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
STORM SEWER: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but
excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of the municipal sewage works of the village
of St. Joseph.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-1-2: CONNECTION; USE RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner, on public or private property, within the
village of St. Joseph, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village,
any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, within the
village of St. Joseph or in any area under the jurisdiction of said village,
any sewage or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes in need of sanitary
services, situated within the village of St. Joseph and abutting on any street,
alley, or right of way in which there is or could be installed a public
sanitary sewer of the village of St. Joseph is hereby required at his/her
expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official
notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within three hundred feet
(300') of the property line. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-1-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM:
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, under the provision of
subsection
7-1-2(D) of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system, complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain approval by the board of trustees. An
application shall be filed with the clerk on a form furnished by the village,
which application shall be supplemented with any plans, specification, and any
other information as deemed necessary by the board of trustees. A permit and
inspection fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be paid to the village
of St. Joseph at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the board
of trustees. The inspector shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
inspector when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty
eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the inspector, but within regular
working hours.
   (D)   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all applicable requirements of the state of Illinois.
No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than
four thousand (4,000) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as public sewer becomes available to a property served by
a private sewage disposal system as provided in this section, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter.
The building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days and
any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities
shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank run gravel.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the village.
   (G)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the board of trustees.
(Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-1-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS:
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof,
without first obtaining a written permit signed by the inspector.
   (B)   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the federal act and more stringent state and local standards.
   (C)   There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 1) for
residential wastewater service and 2) for commercial, institutional and
governmental service and service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application to the village
clerk on a special form furnished by the village. The permit application shall
be supplemented with any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the inspector. The sewer service connection fee,
as provided in chapter 2 of this title, shall be paid to the village clerk at
the time the application is filed.
   (D)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   (E)   All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot, both buildings being owned by the same party, and no private
sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one
building sewer. In the event that a duplex building is owned by separate
parties, each living unit shall be considered a separate building and a
separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each unit.
   (G)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the inspector, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
   (H)   The materials and specifications listed here shall be considered as
minimum requirements. All materials used in building sanitary sewers shall meet
these minimum requirements:
 
       American National Standards Institute
ANSI  1430 Broadway
       New York, NY 10018
       American Standards Association
ASA   70 East 45th Street
       New York, New York
       American Society for Testing Materials
ASTM  1916 Race Street
       Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
       American Water Works Association
AWWA  6666 W. Quincy Avenue
       Denver, CO 80235
       Commercial Standards, U.S. Department of Commerce,
CS    Government Printing Office
       Washington, D.C.
FS    Federal Spec. General Services Administration
       Washington, D.C.
 
Each length of pipe, each fitting and piece shall have cast stamped or
otherwise indelibly marked on it, the maker's name or mark, weight, type and
class of the product, when such marking is necessary to properly identify the
material and is approved by the applicable standard.
The following is a list of approved materials and applicable standards,
followed by additional requirements to be met by all materials:
 
Building sanitary sewer material  ASTM
Clay sewer pipe                   C644, C428, and C500
Cast iron sewer pipe              C200, C301, C425, and A74
PVC                               D3034
 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, service laterals (from
building to riser) shall be constructed of extra strength clay sewer pipe and
fittings meeting the requirements of ASTM C-700 with joints meeting the
requirements of ASTM C-425; or poly (vinyl chloride) (PVC) plastic pipe and
fittings meeting the requirements of ASTM D-3034, SDR 35, with joints meetings
the requirements of ASTM D-3212 or poly (vinyl chloride) (PVC) plastic pipe and
fittings meeting the requirements of ASTM D-1785. Schedule 40, with joints
meeting the requirements of ASTM D-3212. If installed in filled or unstable
ground, the pipe shall be laid on a suitable improved bed or cradle as approved
by the inspector. All joints shall be made in strict accordance with
manufacturer's recommendations.
   (I)   All of the above pipe and any other pipe material that may be
considered henceforth shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Minimum crushing strength shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500)
pounds per linear foot.
      2.   The pipe and fittings shall be capable of withstanding the action of
a motor device sewer cleaner or roto rooter without damage.
      3.   No building sewer shall be less than four inches (4") inside
diameter and shall be continued undiminished in size from the building drain to
the street sewer.
      4.   Building sewers shall be set at the minimum grade outlined below:
Diameter Of Building Sewer  Percent Of Slope Per One Hundred Feet
Diameter Of Building Sewer   Percent Of Slope Per One Hundred Feet
      4 inches           1.00
      6 inches           1.00
      8 inches           0.40
      10 inches          0.28
      12 inches          0.22
      14 inches          0.17
      15 inches          0.15
 
      5.   Service connection tap into the public sanitary sewer shall not
protrude into the public sewer.
      6.   If a saddle type connection is used, it shall be compatible with
pipe materials to be joined and shall be corrosion proof.
      7.   Minimum cover shall not be less than three feet (3').
   (J)   Joints and connections shall be watertight and capable of meeting the
water or air tests specified in "Illinois's Recommended Standards For Sewage
Works", current edition.
      1.   Cast Iron Rubber Ring Joint: A rubber ring joint meeting ASA 21.11
for type II and type III pipe shall be permissible.
      2.   Clay Pipe Joints: All clay pipe joints shall meet the requirements
of ASTM C425.
      3.   PVC Pipe Joints: All PVC pipe joints shall meet the requirements of
ASTM D3212.
      4.   Impermissible Joints: Cold poured joints, taper fit joints, precast
bituminous joints (slip seal), hot poured joints, and cement mortar joints are
specifically prohibited, as are all other jointing methods not specifically
permitted above.
      5.   Adapters: Adapters shall all be lead poured and sealed as described
above or shall be made by means of rubber rings, or shall be rubber sleeves
clamped over the pipe. No other jointing systems (as described in
"impermissible joints") shall be permitted.
   (K)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (L)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground
water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (M)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the village, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, the
Water Pollution Control Federation manual of practice no. 9, and "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the inspector before
installation.
   (N)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the inspector
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the inspector or
his representative.
   (O)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village. (Ord.
2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-1-5: DISCHARGE INTO SEWERS RESTRICTED:
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling waters or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the inspector.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on
approval of the inspector, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes, if it appears likely in the
opinion of the inspector that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream,
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his/her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes,
the inspector will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, maximum limits established by regulatory agencies, and other
pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
      2.   Any water or waste containing toxic or poisonous materials; or fats,
wax, grease, oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred
milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0° and 65°C).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the inspector.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the inspector for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the inspector as necessary, after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentrations as may exceed limits established by the inspector in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
      8.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      9.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time except as permitted by the inspector in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations.
      10.   Any cyanide in excess of 1.2 mg/l at any time except as permitted
by the inspector in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
      11.   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues), or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
   (E)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   (F)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in this section, and which in the judgment of
the inspector may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the inspector may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
subsection (L) of this section.
If the inspector permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the inspector and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
   (G)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or
other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the inspector and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (H)   Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his/her/its expense.
   (I)   When required by the inspector, the owner of any property serviced by
a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the inspector.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his/her/its expense, and shall
be maintained by him/her/it so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (J)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type, and frequency of
laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the
village, but no less than once per year the industry must supply a complete
analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that
compliance with the federal, state, and local standards are being met. The
owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the
village at such times and in such a manner as prescribed by the village. The
owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting
required by the village. At such times as deemed necessary the village reserves
the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside
laboratory service.
   (K)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls, whereas
pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.
   (L)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment therefor by
the industrial concern. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-1-6: DAMAGE TO SEWAGE WORKS:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-
2006)
7-1-7: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
   (A)   The inspector and other duly authorized employees of the village, the
Illinois environmental protection agency, and U.S. environmental protection
agency, bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with provisions of this chapter. The
inspector or his/her representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection (A) of this section, the inspector or duly authorized employees
of the village, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the U.S.
environmental protection agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises established by the company.
   (C)   The inspector and other duly authorized employees of the village
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurements,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-1-8: VIOLATION:
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
section
7-1-6 of this chapter, shall be served by the village with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The village may
revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any
provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the
village by reason of such violation. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
CHAPTER 2
SEWERAGE SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-2-1: Sewerage Department Established
7-2-2: Rates, Charges
7-2-3: Liability For Payment
7-2-4: Appeals
7-2-5: Delinquent Payments
7-2-6: Discontinue Sewer/Water Service
7-2-7: Clerk To Render Bills
7-2-8: Funds Kept Separate
7-2-9: Sewerage Fund
7-2-10: Records, Accounts
7-2-11: Access To Records
7-2-12: Copy Filed With County
7-2-13: Validity
7-2-14: Credit Card Payment
7-2-1: SEWERAGE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established an executive department of the Village to be known
and designated as the Sewerage Department of the Village, and there shall be
placed in charge of the general management and control thereof a
Superintendent, who shall be appointed by the President and the Village Board
of Trustees, it being hereby determined and declared that the establishment of
said department and the appointment of a Superintendent thereof is necessary
and expedient for the best interests of the Village. Said Superintendent shall
qualify for office in the same manner as any elective official of the Village
and shall post such bond in such amount as may be determined by the President.
All necessary employees of said department shall likewise be appointed by the
President with the approval of the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-
8-2006)
7-2-2: RATES, CHARGES:
There shall be and there are hereby established rates and charges for the use
of and for the services supplied by the sewerage system of the Village as
follows:
   (A)   Sewer Charges (Per 1 Month Billing Cycle): As used herein, one unit of
use is one hundred (100) cubic feet (750 gallons) of water used. The unit
charge is based on domestic strength concentration of two hundred milligrams
per liter (200 mg/L) biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), two hundred fifty
milligrams per liter (250 mg/L) total suspended solids (TSS), twenty three
milligrams per liter (23 mg/L) ammonia (NH3-N), and four milligrams per liter
(4 mg/L) total phosphorous (TP).
      1.   Residential:
         (a)   Inside Village limits:
With metered water:
$15.00 minimum rate for up to 2 units used which shall be increased annually as
follows:
2020 $17.50
2021 20.00
2022 20.40
2023 20.80
2024 21.20
2025 21.60
2026 22.00
2027 22.40
2028 22.80
2029 23.30
2030 23.80
2031 24.30
2032 24.80
2033 25.30
 
$5.25 per unit (or part thereof) for all additional water used which shall be
increased annually as follows:
2020 $ 7.00
2021 9.00
2022 10.75
2023 12.50
2024 13.20
2025 13.90
2026 14.60
2027 15.40
2028 16.20
2029 17.10
2030 18.00
2031 18.90
2032 19.90
2033 20.90
 
Without metered water:
Flat charge of $54.00 per month for billing years 2019 through 2025 and $75.00
per month for billing years 2026 through 2033.
   (b) Outside Village limits:
With metered water:
Minimum rate for up to 2 units used shall be 150 percent of the metered water
rates inside of Village limits.
Rate per unit (or part thereof) for all additional water used shall be 150
percent of the metered water rates inside Village limits.
Without metered water:
Flat charge of $200.00 per month
      2.   Surcharge For Industrial And Other Nondomestic Strength Usage: All
rates for industrial and other nondomestic strength users will be established
by the Superintendent based on concentration and quantity of sewage. The bill
for flow will be the same as for domestic users. Nondomestic users with
wastewater discharged to the sewer system at concentrations greater than
domestic concentrations, as described above, in addition to charges for flow
will have additional surcharges based on strength (mass load). The user shall
be required to provide analysis and sampling as determined necessary by the
Superintendent in order to establish the concentration and amount of discharge
into the Village sewer system.
A surcharge for nondomestic strength discharge shall be charged on the
following basis:
 
BOD      $0.40 per pound
   TSS0.75 per pound
   NH30.80 per pound
   TP 7.50 per pound
 
      3.   Water Meters: Water usage shall be based upon meter readings
provided to the Village by the current water utility company. Users may receive
adjustments to their user charge bills for metered water not entering the
Village's sewer collection system by installing appropriate sewer or water
meters or negotiation with the Board of Trustees for a straight percentage
credit. Responsibility for initiating negotiations and studies for such a
credit rests entirely with the user.
      4.   Users Without Meters: All users not having a water meter or other
acceptable device for determining usage shall be subject to a fixed base user
charge in an amount determined by the Village. The Village shall consider
charges imposed on users having similar water use and wastewater
characteristics in determining said base user charge. The Village, at its
direction and discretion, may require a user receiving all or part of its water
from a private well or other source not metered by the current water utility
company or other public or private supplier of potable water to install at the
user's expense an appropriate metering device for the purpose of determining
usage.
   (B)   Multiple Occupancy: Provided further, in addition to the minimum and
flat charges stated above, an additional monthly charge of thirty dollars
($30.00) shall be made for each apartment, flat, place of business or family
unit exceeding one, in all buildings with only one meter, but containing two
(2) or more apartments, flats, places of business or family units, provided
that no additional charge shall be made for any vacant apartment, flat or place
of business which is vacant during an entire two (2) month period.
   (C)   Application For Service: No sewer connection shall be made to any
premises until an application therefor in writing has been made for that
purpose and filed with the Sewer Superintendent of the Village, stating the
purpose for which the services are to be used.
   (D)   Connection Fee: There is hereby established a sewer service connection
fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for residential users and
six hundred seven dollars ($607.00) per PE (population equivalent) for
commercial and industrial (nondomestic) users.
For a proposed connection that will generate one thousand five hundred (1,500)
gallons per day or more of wastewater, a connection permit from the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) must be issued before the Village of St.
Joseph can issue a connection permit.
The fee for any connection that requires an IEPA connection permit shall be the
calculated population equivalence stated in the IEPA permit application times
the connection fee per PE.
For nonresidential buildings, the connection fee shall be the highest of the
calculated population equivalence for design average flow (based upon 100
gallons of sewage per day), five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand (based upon
0.17 pounds per day) or suspended solids (based upon 0.20 pounds per day),
times the connection fee per PE. The minimum connection fee for nonresidential
buildings shall be based upon 2.5 PE.
The sewer connection fee shall be due prior to connection, and in the case of
new building construction, the fee shall be due and payable at the time the
application for building permit is filed, and said sewer connection must be
completed within twelve (12) months of payment of the fee or any additional
time approved for applicable building permit.
   (E)   Payment: All charges must be paid on or before the date due, to the
Village Clerk at the St. Joseph Municipal Building.
   (F)   Review Of Rates: Rates shall be reviewed annually by the Board of
Trustees and as otherwise deemed appropriate to determine if the rates will
provide sufficient funds to pay future costs of operation, maintenance and
replacement, and to determine that the rates charged users are in proportion to
the costs of the services provided. If the funds are not sufficient or the rate
does not maintain proportionality as determined by the review, revised rates to
accomplish the same shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees by ordinance and
published and thereafter be in effect. User charge rates so enacted by the
Village by ordinance shall remain in effect until modified or rescinded by a
subsequent duly passed ordinance.
The users of wastewater treatment services may be notified periodically, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to the wastewater treatment operation,
maintenance and replacement.
A Depreciation Fund shall be established and funds collected for replacement
shall be sufficient to replace sewerage system facilities and equipment
necessary to assure its continued efficient performance and to maintain the
capacity for which it was designed and constructed and unless otherwise
directed by the Board of Trustees, five percent (5%) of gross revenues shall go
into the Depreciation Fund. The Village shall maintain a depreciation
replacement schedule of all personal and real property, including residual
asset value, estimated remaining service life and the total annual replacement
costs. This schedule shall be evaluated as deemed appropriate. (Ord. 2019-1, 4-
9-2019)
7-2-3: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT:
The owner of the premises and the occupant thereof and the user of sewerage
service, shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on said
premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the Village only upon
the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service,
are jointly and severally liable therefor to the Village. Bills shall be
rendered to the user at the end of each two (2) month period and shall be
payable within thirty (30) days after the date of the original bill. For any
bills not paid by said due date, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount
of the charges for current services shall be added and become due. (Ord. 2006-
9, 8-8-2006)
7-2-4: APPEALS:
The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges in section
7-2-2 of this chapter shall be made available to a user or owner within ten
(10) days of receipt of a written request for such. Any error in the method
used or in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the Village Clerk
within ten (10) days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining
the discrepancies. In the event the Clerk and the user or owner cannot resolve
the disagreement, the Board of Trustees shall review said matter and render its
determination at the next available Board meeting. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-2-5: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS:
   (A)   Lien: In the event charges for sewerage service, including any penalty
then due, are not paid within thirty (30) days after the rendition of the bill
for such service, such charges and penalties shall be deemed and are hereby
declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquencies shall become and
constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such services are supplied.
Statements rendered for such user charge shall be deemed notice to the owner of
the property served and shall state that charges not paid within said thirty
(30) days may result in a lien being filed on said real estate pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-141-7. The claim for lien shall be made in the
form of a sworn statement setting out: 1) a description of the real estate,
sufficient for the identification thereof, upon or for which the sewerage
service was supplied, 2) the amount or amounts of money due for such sewerage
service, and 3) the date or dates when such amount or amounts became
delinquent. In all cases where the user charge has become delinquent and the
Village elects to file a notice of lien therefor in the Office of the Recorder
there shall be added in addition to the amount due the Village such charges and
expenses as are necessary and required to verify the legal description of the
parcel to which the lien is to attach, plus a sum determined by the Board of
Trustees as sufficient to cover the cost of preparation of such notices and
forms required. In each instance, the Clerk of the Village shall be authorized
and directed to include such additional costs in the amount claimed due the
Village in the notice of lien. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
   (B)   Enforcement: The Village shall be empowered to prosecute an action in
chancery to foreclose any lien filed pursuant to this chapter, or in the
alternative, resort to an appropriate action at law to collect unpaid user
charges, penalties charged under this chapter, interest thereon, as provided by
statute, and attorney fees incurred by the Village and court cost taxed by the
court, in each such action. The Village reserves the right to disconnect the
sanitary sewer serving the property for which the user charge bill has become
delinquent, or direct the water company to shut off the supply of water to said
premises, regardless of the action taken by the Village to collect said
delinquent bill, until the delinquent bill has been paid to the Village's
satisfaction. (Ord. 2011-11, 11-8-2011)
7-2-6: DISCONTINUE SEWER/WATER SERVICE:
   (A)   Disconnection: Anything in this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, the board of trustees shall have the right to revoke sanitary
sewer connection permits and/or direct the water company to shut off the supply
of water to designated premises in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Such disconnection and/or shutoff may be accomplished prior to or
subsequent to the filing of the lien set forth above. Said lien may be filed
before or after disconnection of sewer service, revocation of connection permit
or shutoff of water supply. The clerk may order sewer service to be
disconnected or water supply shut off to any user in accordance with the
following procedures:
      1.   Bills not paid within thirty (30) days of billing date shall result
in a late payment penalty in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the charges for
current services and a notice of delinquency will be sent by first class mail.
      2.   If not paid within thirty (30) days, then a second notice of
delinquency will be sent to the user and owner by first class mail and
certified mail advising of disconnection of sewer service and/or shutoff of
water supply unless past due amount and penalty is paid, or unless user or
owner requests a hearing within twenty (20) days of the date of second notice
of delinquency, or unless an extended payment agreement is entered into between
the village and the user or owner.
      3.   If past due amount plus penalty is not paid and no hearing is
requested within twenty (20) days of notice of violation, and no extended
payment agreement is agreed upon, then a notice of disconnection and/or water
supply shutoff may be sent, at any time thereafter, by first class mail to the
user and owner advising of the date after which disconnection and/or shutoff
will occur unless payment is received. Said notice shall also be hung on the
front door of the building located on said property.
      4.   In the event a hearing is requested, the user and owner shall be
notified of the hearing date by first class mail no less than ten (10) days
prior to the date of the hearing before the board of trustees.
      5.   At the hearing, the user and/or owner may present evidence disputing
the charges or the record of payments. The trustees shall make findings as to
the amount owed by the user and owner and shall set a date, no less than ten
(10) days after the hearing, by which said amount must be paid unless an
extended payment agreement is approved by the board of trustees.
      6.   If said amount is not paid by the required date, sewer service may
be disconnected or water shut off at any time thereafter without further
notice, or in the event an extended payment agreement was approved by the board
and payment is not received by the village in accordance with said agreement,
then a notice of sewer disconnection and/or water shutoff will be sent by first
class mail to the user and owner advising of the date after which disconnection
and/or shutoff will occur unless payment is received.
   (B)   Reconnection: All amounts charged under this chapter are due and shall
continue to be due hereunder, whether or not said sewer is disconnected and/or
water supply is shut off, and no sewer shall be reconnected or water supply
turned on until the village is paid in full all amounts due it including
charges owed by the village to the water company related to the water supply
shutoff, together with a one thousand five hundred dollar ($1,500.00) fee for
reconnecting the sewer (if the sewer was disconnected), and in addition, there
shall be paid to the village a deposit of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first
sewer reconnection or turn on of water supply, and one hundred dollars
($100.00) for any subsequent reconnection or water supply turn on. (Ord. 2011-
11, 11-8-2011)
   (C)   Responsibility To Ascertain Charges: The nonreceipt by any parcel
owner of a bill or statement for user charges shall not be an excuse for
nonpayment or entitle the user to request an extension or deferment of the date
upon which payment is due or to avoid inclusion of penalties and interest. The
owner of the property against which a notice of lien has been recorded pursuant
to the terms of this chapter shall be deemed to have notice of the existence of
the charge and shall be responsible for ascertaining from the village all
amounts, if any, due as provided in this chapter and the payment thereof. (Ord.
2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-2-7: CLERK TO RENDER BILLS:
It is hereby made the duty of the village clerk to render bills for sewerage
service and all other charges in connection therewith, and to collect all
monies due thereon, and it is hereby made the duty of all officials of the
village to enforce payment of all unpaid bills and penalties in the manner,
form, time and procedure under the laws of the state of Illinois thereunto
enabling. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-2-8: FUNDS KEPT SEPARATE:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall
be held by the village clerk separate and apart from the clerk's private funds
and separate and apart from all other funds of the village, and all of said
sums, without any deductions whatsoever, shall be delivered to the village
treasurer not more than ten (10) days after the receipt of the same, or at such
more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the village
board of trustees. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-2-9: SEWERAGE FUND:
The village treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system
and all other funds incident to the operation of the said system, as the same
may be delivered to the treasurer, and deposit the same in a proper fund(s) of
the village of St. Joseph. Revenues so deposited shall be disbursed as
appropriated by ordinance and approved by the board of trustees. (Ord. 2006-9,
8-8-2006)
7-2-10: RECORDS, ACCOUNTS:
The village treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall
keep proper books, records and accounts, in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at
regular annual intervals the village board of trustees shall cause to be made
an audit, by an independent auditing concern, of the books to show the receipts
and disbursements of the system. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-2-11: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable to the
village system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination,
excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the
loan agreement and rules of any state loan. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-2-12: COPY FILED WITH COUNTY:
A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the village clerk, shall be filed
in the office of the recorder of Champaign County, Illinois, and shall be
deemed notice to all owners of real estate of their liability for sewerage
service supplied any owners, occupant or user of such services on their
properties. (Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-2-13: VALIDITY:
In the event any one or more of the provisions of this chapter, for any reason,
shall be held to be illegal or invalid, such illegality shall not render
illegal or invalid all other provisions of this chapter, and in every such
event this chapter shall be construed and enforced as if such illegal or
invalid provisions had not been contained herein. No portion or provision
hereof shall be taken to establish lesser or different requirements than those
imposed upon persons by the state and federal governments for purposes of
protecting and improving the environment; and to the extent such statutes and
regulations are different from or in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter, said state and federal statutes, rules and regulations shall govern.
(Ord. 2006-9, 8-8-2006)
7-2-14: CREDIT CARD PAYMENT:
The village may accept payment of sewer fees and charges, or payment for any
other purpose to the village by approved credit card. There shall be an
additional two dollar ($2.00) convenience fee paid to the village with any
payment made by credit card. (Ord. 2011-4, 4-26-2011)
CHAPTER 3
STORM WATER DISPOSAL
SECTION:
7-3-1: Restriction
7-3-2: Penalty For Violations
7-3-1: RESTRICTION:
   (A)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground
water to a building drain or other drain or conduit which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public storm drain, without prior, expressed
approval of the board of trustees. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged, on approval of the board of trustees, to a
storm sewer or natural outlet. (Ord., 11-26-1996)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dam up, obstruct, impede or
change the natural course of any swale, ditch, waterway or watercourse, or to
dam up or obstruct any swale, ditch, sewer, drain, culvert or waterway
established as a part of a platted subdivision, or otherwise established by the
president and board of trustees for the purpose of surface or subsurface storm
water drainage; provided that any of the above listed acts shall not be a
violation of this section if expressly approved by the board of trustees. No
person shall install, or cause to be installed, any driveway, sidewalk or other
improvements which cross over any swale, ditch, waterway or watercourse without
providing an adequate means for unobstructed flow of water in said swale,
ditch, waterway or watercourse, as approved by the village. The village may
require culverts, erosion control and approved design and construction. (Ord.
2001-16, 12-11-2001)
   (C)   1. All proposed structures on lots zoned residential and proposed
additions or modifications to said structures or any other changes to said
residential lots shall not alter the existing grade elevations within two and
five-tenths feet (2.5') of side lot boundary lines and five feet (5') of all
front and rear lot boundary lines, unless the permit applicant has demonstrated
to the zoning administrator for the village that such a proposed grade
elevation change is not detrimental to existing site drainage or to that of the
adjacent properties.
      2.   The documentation required for review by the village zoning
administrator shall consist of an alternate drainage plan, drawn to scale, by a
registered professional engineer and accompanied by the supporting
calculations.
      3.   If an alternate drainage plan is approved, the permit applicant or
property owner must provide a copy of a certification from a registered
engineer that the site improvements specified in the alternate drainage plan
are in place and properly constructed. This certification must be received by
the zoning administrator prior to the issuance of any required certificate of
compliance for the structure so as to obtain verification of grades prior to
occupancy of a new structure or addition.
      4.   The alternate drainage plan and/or the engineer's certification
provided for above may only be waived for good cause shown by expressed
approval of the board of trustees.
      5.   In the event of a violation of this subsection (C), the property
owner shall cause the grade elevation of the applicable areas of the said lot
to be returned to its prior elevation within thirty (30) days of receipt of
notice of violation from the village; or said property owner may request a
hearing before the board of trustees, provided said request is received by the
village clerk within fourteen (14) days after the date said notice was mailed
or delivered in person to the property owner.
      6.   In the event the violation of this subsection (C) is not corrected
within said thirty (30) days after the date of said notice or such time allowed
by the board of trustees after a hearing, which shall not be less than thirty
(30) days, the village may cause the said lot grade elevation to be returned to
its prior elevation. The cost of correcting said grade elevation shall be
charged to the property owner. (Ord. 97-12, 11-25-1997)
7-3-2: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be fined in
accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 4
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
7-4-1: Purpose
7-4-2: Intent
7-4-3: Scope Of Application
7-4-4: Drainage Plan
7-4-5: Drainage System Components
7-4-6: Design Requirements
7-4-7: Protecting Existing Drainage
7-4-7-1: Erosion And Sedimentation Control
7-4-8: Easements
7-4-9: Rule Of Construction
7-4-10: Variances
7-4-11: Submittals
7-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this storm water management chapter is to help guide the
attempts of developers to control the transportation or movement of storm water
and reduce damage to property and protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare. (Ord. 99-11, 11-9-1999)
7-4-2: INTENT:
The intent of this storm water management chapter is to require temporary
storage of storm water runoff, to control the rate of release of storm water
runoff, provide for adequate drainage of development sites and surrounding
areas, and protect existing agricultural drainage systems. (Ord. 99-11, 11-9-
1999)
7-4-3: SCOPE OF APPLICATION:
   (A)   Reviewing Authority: For the purpose of this chapter the reviewing
authority shall be the village planning commission with final approval by the
village board of trustees for storm water management plans submitted in
connection with a subdivision plat. After initial hearing, further modification
may be approved by the board of trustees only. If no subdivision is involved,
the reviewing authority shall be the board of trustees only. (2005 Code)
   (B)   Applicability: The requirements of this chapter shall apply to the
following:
      1.   All subdivisions which require the approval of the village board of
trustees. (Ord. 99-11, 11-9-1999)
      2.   Any development of land within the village unless expressly exempted
herein. For purposes of this chapter, "development" shall mean building of any
structures or covering the ground with any material or adding, removing or
movement of soil which significantly changes the runoff pattern of surface
water.
   (C)   Exemptions:
      1.   This policy shall not apply to completed development or completed
construction which has occurred on sites located in subdivisions which were
developed and approved prior to November 9, 1999. (2005 Code)
      2.   Development of a single-family or duplex residential home and
accessory buildings on a lot of less than one-half (1/2) acre in an R-1 or R-
2 residential zoning district. (Ord. 99-11, 11-9-1999)
7-4-4: DRAINAGE PLAN:
   (A)   A storm water drainage plan including a combination of storm water
storage and controlled release shall be required of all development of land
which is subject to the provisions of this chapter. Such storm water drainage
plan must be approved by the village board of trustees after review and
recommendation of the planning commission before development may begin.
   (B)   If it is determined by the board of trustees that said plan does not
meet the requirements of this chapter, or that the village storm water system
does not have adequate capacity to accept storm water from the development
site, then the development plan shall not be approved. (Ord. 99-11, 11-9-1999)
7-4-5: DRAINAGE SYSTEM COMPONENTS:
   (A)   Minor: The minor drainage component of the drainage system shall
consist of storm sewers, street gutters, small open channels, and swales
designed to store and convey the runoff from the 10-year recurrence interval
precipitation event utilizing the Illinois state water bulletin for rainfall
depths. (Ord. 99-11, 11-9-1999; amd. 2005 Code)
   (B)   Major: The major drainage components shall be designed to store and
convey storm water flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage component.
Information depicting storm water flow paths (including cross sectional data),
velocities, rates, and elevations and maps of flooding shall be included in the
submittal. (Ord. 99-11, 11-9-1999)
7-4-6: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Design Methods:
      1.   Calculation Of Drainage Capacity: The rational method may be used to
size the components of the proposed storm sewer system.
      2.   Calculation Of Required Storage (Watershed Area Less Than Or Equal
To 2,000 Acres): The volume of required storm water storage shall be based on
the following criteria:
         (a)   First flush storm event (0.75 inch rainfall depth). The
detention pond shall be designed to detain the first flush storm event for a
period not less than twenty four (24) hours. The required storage volume for a
first flush storm event shall be calculated as follows:
   Vff = 2,722.5 * C * A
Where:
   C   =   Developed runoff coefficient
A   =   Developed area (in acres)
   Vff   =   First flush volume (in cubic feet)
A restriction shall be designed to limit the first flush storm discharge to a
rate such that the pond will completely discharge in the required time period.
         (b)   2-year storm event. The detention pond shall be designed to
discharge a maximum of 0.04 cfs/developed acre during the 2-year storm event. A
restriction shall be designed to limit the 2-year storm discharge rate. The 2-
year storm restrictor shall be placed at an elevation equal to the first flush
storage elevation.
         (c)   50-year storm event. The detention pond shall be designed to
discharge a maximum of 0.20 cfs/developed acre during the 50-year storm event.
A restriction shall be designed to limit the 50-year storm discharge rate. The
50-year storm restrictor shall be placed at an elevation equal to the 2-year
storage elevation.
      3.   Storm Water Routing Methodologies: The required storage volume and
detention pond routing calculations shall be prepared using a generally
accepted storm water routing analysis, such as HEC-1, HEC-HMS, TR-55, TR-20,
PondPak, or XP-SWMM. Alternate methods of analysis may be considered if their
technical validity and accuracy is demonstrated.
The 10-year high water level shall be calculated using the above methodology
and used to establish the downstream boundary condition for the hydraulic grade
line calculations.
The Huff 3rd quartile 24-hour duration rainfall distribution shall be used for
the 2-year and 50-year detention pond routing calculations.
      4.   Required Freeboard; Detention Pond: A minimum of one vertical foot
of freeboard shall be provided above the 50-year peak water surface elevation.
No building shall be constructed within the proposed storm sewer system with a
first floor elevation less than two (2) vertical feet above the 50-year peak
water surface elevation.
      5.   Off Site Runoff: If storm water runoff enters the proposed
development from another parcel, it shall be demonstrated how this runoff is to
be collected and conveyed. It will be the responsibility of the developer to
provide an adequate and safe flow path for off site runoff.
      6.   Outlet Certification: When a proposed detention pond outlets to an
existing pipe, stream, river, or other drainage facility with a history of
flooding problems, it shall be demonstrated that the water levels in the
receiving system will not adversely affect the hydraulic performance of the
proposed detention pond. If necessary, the proposed detention pond may need to
be raised to a higher elevation so as to avoid the impacts of downstream
hydraulic restrictions.
      7.   Emergency Overflow: An emergency overflow path shall be provided for
each storm water detention facility. This overflow structure shall be
constructed to function without special maintenance and shall not increase the
risk of erosion or endangering public safety. It shall be demonstrated that
discharge from the emergency overflow will have adequate conveyance downstream
of the development.
      8.   Calculation Of Required Storage (Watershed Area Greater Than 2,000
Acres): In the event of a large development (larger than 2,000 acres), the
total area shall be divided into manageable subwatersheds for the purpose of
establishing individual storm water management zones. Each subwatershed shall
be subject to the above storm water conveyance and detention pond sizing
requirements. The size and layout of proposed subwatersheds are subject to
village approval.
   (B)   Storm Water Storage Areas:
      1.   Wet Bottom Detention Pond: The use of wet bottom detention ponds is
recommended, as they help to minimize storm water pollution and provide
positive site amenities. The following requirements shall apply to the design
and construction of wet bottom detention basins:
         (a)   The water surface area of the permanent pool shall not exceed
one-fifth (1/5) of the area of the tributary watershed, or as approved by the
reviewing authority.
         (b)   Minimum normal water depth (excluding safety ledges and side
slopes) shall be eight feet (8') provided, however, that if fish are to be
maintained in the pond at least one-quarter (1/4) of the pond area shall be a
minimum of ten feet (10') deep.
         (c)   Measures shall be included in the design to minimize pond
stagnation and to help ensure adequate aerobic pond conditions.
         (d)   Storage facility side slopes shall provide a safety ledge below
the normal water elevation which shall not exceed a slope of six to one (6:1)
(6 horizontal units to 1 vertical unit) to a point at which the normal water
depth is no less than five feet (5'). Below a normal depth of five feet (5'),
side slopes shall not exceed the stable angle of repose under saturated
conditions of the soil material of the basin.
         (e)   Detention pond discharge pipes less than twelve inches (12") in
diameter shall not be allowed. Multiple discharge pipes from a storm water
storage area are discouraged.
         (f)   It shall be demonstrated that the detention pond discharge pipe
will adequately connect to a receiving system and that the receiving system has
adequate capacity to convey the 50-year peak discharge rate of 0.20 cfs per
developed acre.
         (g)   Warning signs shall be placed at appropriate locations to warn
of deep water, possible flood conditions during storm periods, and other
dangers that exist to pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
      2.   Dry Bottom Detention Pond: A dry bottom detention pond may be
considered only when the construction of a wet detention pond is demonstrated
to be infeasible. Dry bottom detention ponds shall be designed in compliance
with all applicable requirements which govern the construction of wet bottom
detention basins. The following requirements shall apply to the design and
construction of dry bottom detention basins:
         (a)   Dry bottom storm water storage facilities should be designed
where possible to serve a secondary purpose for recreation, open space, or
similar types of uses which will not be adversely affected by occasional
intermittent flooding and will not interfere with storm water management.
         (b)   Minimum grades for turf area within the basin shall be two
percent (2%) (50 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical) except that the minimum
grade shall be one percent (1%) (100 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical) if
tile underdrain is adequately installed underneath the turf areas. Storage
facility side slopes shall not exceed three to one (3:1) (3 units horizontal to
1 unit vertical), shall provide for the reasonably safe approach of persons and
reasonably safe maintenance practices. Side slopes steeper than three to one
(3:1) may be allowed upon a determination by the reviewing authority that
adequate precautions are taken to avoid unreasonable hazard. Storage basin
excavations shall follow the natural land contours as closely as practicable.
The geometry of dry bottom storm water storage basins shall be approved by the
reviewing authority.
         (c)   Temporary seeding, sodding or other soil stabilization measures
as directed by the reviewing authority shall be established in the storm water
storage basin and excess storm water passageway immediately following the
construction or reconstruction of these facilities. During the construction of
the overall development, it is recognized that a limited amount of sediment
buildup may occur in the storm water storage facility due to erosion. In no
case shall the volume of the storage basin be reduced to less than ninety
percent (90%) of the required volume during the construction phase of the
development. Basins may be over excavated to provide additional storage volume
for anticipated sedimentation during construction activities.
         (d)   Permanent erosion control measures such as hydroseeding,
conventional seeding, nurse crops, fertilizing, or sod installation and
associated stabilization techniques such as mulching shall be utilized to
control soil movement and erosion within the storage area and excess storm
water passageway. These measures shall conform to the guidelines established in
the "Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control
In Illinois". The installation of these permanent measures shall take place
only after the majority of construction and other silt and sediment producing
activities have been completed. Prior to the establishment of permanent erosion
control measures, the required capacity of the storm water storage area and the
excess storm water passageway shall, if necessary, be restored by excavation of
deposited material to provide one hundred percent (100%) of the required
storage volume. Upon completion of construction activities the storage volume
shall be certified in writing by an Illinois registered professional engineer.
The specific erosion control measures to be employed shall be included in an
erosion control plan to be approved by the reviewing authority.
         (e)   The outlet control structure shall be provided with an
interceptor for trash and debris, and it shall be designed and constructed to
minimize soil erosion and not to require manual adjustments for its proper
operation. The control structure shall be designed to operate properly with
minimal maintenance or attention. The control structure shall be provided with
safety screens for any pipe or opening, other than a weir, to prevent children
or large animals from crawling into structures. The control structure shall be
constructed to allow access to it at all times, including times of flood flow.
         (f)   Paved low flow conduits shall be provided in storm water storage
basins. These conduits shall be so constructed that they will not unnecessarily
interfere with any secondary use of the storage area and will reduce the
frequency of time that the storage area will be covered with water. These
conduits shall facilitate dewatering of the soils in the storm water storage
area to avoid saturated soil conditions. Low flow conduits shall facilitate
complete interior drainage of the storm water storage area. Tile underdrain
systems may be combined with the low flow conduits or channel systems.
         (g)   Pipe outlets of less than twelve inches (12") in diameter shall
not be allowed unless specifically approved by the reviewing authority.
Multiple outlet pipes from a storm water storage area shall be avoided.
         (h)   Warning signs shall be placed at appropriate locations to warn
of deep water, possible flood conditions during storm periods, and of other
dangers that exist to pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
      3.   Alternative Storm Water Storage Areas: The use of the storm water
storage facilities as described in this chapter are the preferred means of
storm water storage. The following alternative means of storm water storage may
be used on development sites under two (2) acres in area or where practical
necessity makes the use of conventional storm water storage facilities
infeasible. The use of such alternative storm water storage areas is only
permitted upon the approval of the reviewing authority. Storage of storm water
runoff in public streets will not be allowed.
         (a)   Paved Storm Water Storage: Design and construction of the
pavement base must ensure that there is minimal pavement damage due to
flooding. Control structures in paved areas must be readily accessible for
maintenance and cleaning. Flow control devices will be required unless
otherwise approved by the reviewing authority.
         (b)   Rooftop Storm Water Storage: Rooftop storage of excess storm
water shall be designed and constructed to provide permanent control inlets and
parapet walls to contain excess storm water. Adequate structural roof design
must be provided to ensure that roof deflection does not occur which could
cause the roofing material to fail and result in leakage. Overflow areas must
be provided to ensure that the weight of storm water will never exceed the
structural capacity of the roof. Any rooftop storage of excess storm water
shall be approved only upon submission of building plans signed and sealed by
an Illinois licensed structural engineer or architect attesting to the
structural adequacy of the design.
         (c)   Automobile Parking Lot Storage Areas: Automobile parking lots
may be designed to provide temporary detention storage on a portion of their
surfaces. Automobile parking facilities used to store excess storm water may be
constructed having a maximum depth of stored storm water of 0.6 foot; and these
areas shall be located in the most remote, least used area of the parking
facility. Parking lot storm water detention shall not be permitted in areas
containing handicapped parking areas. Design and construction of automobile
parking in storm water areas must ensure that there is minimal damage to the
parking facility due to flooding, including minimal damage to the subbase.
Warning signs shall be mounted at appropriate locations to warn of possible
flood conditions during storm periods.
         (d)   Underground Storm Water Storage: Underground storm water storage
facilities must be designed for easy access in order to remove accumulated
sediment and debris. These facilities must be provided with a positive gravity
outlet unless otherwise approved by the reviewing authority. (2005 Code)
7-4-7: PROTECTING EXISTING DRAINAGE:
   (A)   Natural Drainage:
      1.   Existing perennial streams shall not be modified to accommodate on
site flows of storm water. Stream banks may be modified, however, incident to
the installation of an excess storm water runoff outfall, necessary to ensure
safety or bank stabilization, and/or for the improvement of aquatic habitats.
      2.   Other natural drainage features such as depressional storage areas
and swales shall be incorporated into the drainage system.
   (B)   Agricultural Drainage Improvements:
      1.   The outlet for existing agricultural drainage tile will be located
and the capacity of the outlet shall be maintained for the watershed upstream
of the development area.
      2.   Existing easements for any agricultural drainage tile located
underneath areas that will be developed shall be preserved. If no easement
exists an easement shall be granted for access and maintenance as provided in
this chapter. Such easements shall be of sufficient width and located to
provide for continued functioning and necessary maintenance of drainage
facilities. No buildings or permanent structures including paved areas but
excluding streets, sidewalks, or driveways, which cross the easement by the
shortest possible route may be located within the easement without the consent
and approval of any public body to which the easement is granted.
      3.   All agricultural drainage tile located underneath areas that will be
developed shall be replaced with nonperforated conduit to prevent root blockage
provided, however, that drainage district tile may remain with the approval of
the drainage district.
      4.   Agricultural drainage tile which, due to development, will be
located underneath roadways, drives, or parking shall be replaced with ductile
iron, or reinforced concrete pipe or equivalent material approved by the
reviewing authority as needed to prevent the collapse of the agricultural
drainage conduit.
      5.   Agricultural drainage tile may be relocated within development areas
upon approval of the reviewing authority. Such relocation shall maintain
sufficient slope and capacity to prevent sedimentation and to prevent an
increase in scouring or structural damage to the conduit. Such relocation shall
only be with the consent and approval of the drainage district, which is
responsible for maintaining the tile. If the tile is not under the authority of
a drainage district the reviewing authority shall consider the interests of
those landowners who are served by the tile.
      6.   No storm sewer inlet, outlet, or detention basin outlet shall be
connected to farm drainage tile unless flow is restricted to an amount equal to
or less than the discharge capacity of the tile. Such connection shall only be
made with the consent and approval of the drainage district responsible for
maintaining the tile. If the tile is not under the authority of a drainage
district the reviewing authority shall consider the interests of those
landowners who are served by the tile.
      7.   No fill shall be placed nor grade altered in such a manner that it
will cause surface water upstream of the development to pond or direct surface
flows in such a way as to create a nuisance.
      8.   All surface runoff water shall exit the development at such a
velocity which will not cause erosion. All subsurface flows shall exit the
development at such a velocity so as to prevent an increase in scouring or
structural damage to off site tile drains.
      9.   Sizing of culvert crossings shall consider entrance and exit losses
as well as tailwater conditions on the culvert. (Ord. 99-11, 11-9-1999)
7-4-7-1: EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL:
   (A)   The developer shall take such steps as necessary to minimize soil
erosion during and after construction. If there is a threat of erosion, the
village may require an erosion control plan to be submitted with engineering
plans. The erosion control plan shall conform to all applicable portions of the
latest edition of "Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And
Sedimentation Control In Illinois". A copy of this publication is available for
inspection at the office of the village engineer. Further, the following
factors shall always be observed during any phase of development construction:
      1.   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever
possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses should be left
undisturbed whenever possible.
      2.   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the
shortest practical time during development.
      3.   Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused
by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development in
accordance with this chapter.
      4.   Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as
practical during development. (2005 Code)
7-4-8: EASEMENTS:
Easements to the village, drainage district or other public authority to
provide for maintenance of public drainage facilities which serve the site and
which are or are to be dedicated to, owned by, or under the control of such
public authority shall be granted to further this policy when the need for such
facility is in whole or in part specifically and uniquely attributable to the
proposed development. All known agricultural drainage tile located underneath
areas to be developed shall be granted an easement if no written easement
exists prior to development. Such easement shall be approved in writing by the
public body to which they are granted and recorded in the Champaign County
recorder's office before the reviewing authority issues any final approval
except in the case of subdivisions where such easements are shown on the plat.
(Ord. 99-11, 11-9-1999)
7-4-9: RULE OF CONSTRUCTION:
These policy guidelines shall be construed liberally in the interests of the
public so as to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 99-11,
11-9-1999)
7-4-10: VARIANCES:
The granting of variances is not consistent with the purpose of this chapter.
It is, therefore, essential that every effort be made to comply with the
requirements contained in this chapter.
   (A)   Only the board of trustees may grant a variance. When, in the opinion
of a developer, the standards of this chapter place an undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply for a variance. The
village engineer shall review the applicant's request, prepare a recommendation
and a public hearing before the planning commission shall be scheduled on the
matter in a manner prescribed by the board of trustees. The board of trustees
shall rule on the variance at its earliest convenience, after the hearing.
   (B)   A variance may be granted by the board of trustees if the applicant
demonstrates all of the following:
      1.   The property cannot yield a reasonable return if the variance is not
granted;
      2.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      3.   There will be no threat to public health and safety or to beneficial
stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a
nuisance;
      4.   There will be no additional public expense such as for flood
protection, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to streambeds and
banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities;
      5.   The applicant's circumstances are unique such that the proposed
variance will not serve as a special privilege, but will alleviate a
demonstrable hardship not shared by other property;
      6.   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved including existing stream uses;
      7.   All other agency permits have been obtained;
      8.   The applicant did not know or deliberately place himself or herself
in the position of hardship;
      9.   Such other considerations applicable to the particular property as
determined by the board of trustees.
   (C)   The village may require an independent study and report by a qualified
professional engineer or other appropriate qualified professionals, the cost of
which shall be paid by the applicant for the variance. The purpose of the study
shall be to provide evaluations of the applicant's proposed development as they
may affect stream flows and hydraulic characteristics of the watercourse and to
also evaluate possible alternatives to the applicant's proposal. (Ord. 99-11,
11-9-1999)
7-4-11: SUBMITTALS:
   (A)   Storm Water Drainage Plan: Two (2) copies of a storm water drainage
plan and sixteen (16) copies of the site plan prepared by a qualified Illinois
professional engineer must be submitted to the village clerk with any zoning
petition, subdivision application, building permit application or otherwise
prior to development where required by this chapter. Such drainage plan must at
a minimum contain the following:
      1.   Full description of before and after development topography,
existing drainage patterns (including locations of agricultural drainage tile
serving the area to be developed as well as serving off site areas but which
crosses the area to be developed, as well as the efforts to identify and locate
underground tile), grading, and environmental characteristics of the property.
      2.   The potential impacts of the development on storm water resources
both upstream and downstream.
      3.   Erosion control plan.
      4.   An explanation of the minor and major drainage system performance
under storm events up to and including the 100-year precipitation event and of
the provisions for handling drainage from any tributary off site areas.
      5.   Storm water detention system designs. Calculations shall be
submitted with all assumptions, coefficients, and other parameters identified
and their sources noted. The subdivision name or other project identification,
engineer's firm, the engineer's name, and date shall all be indicated. A plot
or tabulation of storage volumes with corresponding water surface elevations
(stage storage table) and of the basin outflow rates for those water surface
(stage discharge) elevations shall be furnished. High water surface elevations
shall be listed for the first flush, 2-year, and 100-year recurrence interval
rainfall events. These tabulations shall be listed for water surface elevation
intervals not exceeding 1.0 foot. Adequate freeboard shall be demonstrated in
these calculations. These calculations shall be located on the site plan. (Ord.
2007-1, 2-27-2007)
   (B)   Certifications: The following certifications shall be submitted prior
to the issuance of any certificate of compliance, final plat approval, or
release of performance guarantee for development on the site as provided in the
applicable provisions of the village zoning and/or subdivision ordinances:
      1.   Certification of storage volume as provided in this chapter.
      2.   As built drawings of the drainage system including the storage
facility in sufficient detail to determine that the constructed facility is
substantially the same as that presented in the approved storm water drainage
plan with certification to that effect by a qualified Illinois professional
engineer.
      3.   Bonds as required by the reviewing authority.
      4.   Warranties as required by the reviewing authority. (Ord. 99-11, 11-
9-1999)
   (C)   Submittals To Be Complete: All submittals required hereunder shall be
submitted to the village clerk and village engineer, in completed form, no less
than two (2) weeks prior to the initial hearing date. Any documents which are
not completed and in form acceptable to the village engineer by two (2) weeks
prior to the hearing date shall result in postponement of the hearing to the
next meeting date. (Ord. 2007-1, 2-27-2007)
CHAPTER 5
POTABLE WATER
SECTION:
7-5-1: Definitions
7-5-2: Use Of Ground Water As A Potable Water Supply Prohibited
7-5-3: Penalties
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited
liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption, including, but
not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes, or
preparing foods. (Ord. 2002-29, 11-26-2002)
7-5-2: USE OF GROUND WATER AS A POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED:
Except for such uses or methods in existence before the effective date hereof,
the use or attempt to use as a potable water supply ground water from within
the corporate limits of the village of St. Joseph by the installation or
drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited, including at
points of withdrawal by the village of St. Joseph. (Ord. 2002-29, 11-26-2002)
7-5-3: PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
as provided in title 1 of this code. (Ord. 2002-29, 11-26-2002)
CHAPTER 6
WATER USE RESTRICTION
SECTION:
7-6-1: Authority
7-6-2: Purpose
7-6-3: Declaration Of Policy
7-6-4: Definitions
7-6-5: Application Of Regulations
7-6-6: Declaration Of Water Use Restrictions, Implementation, And Termination
7-6-7: Water Use Restriction Levels
7-6-8: Variance
7-6-9: Violation And Penalty
7-6-10: Severability
7-6-1: AUTHORITY:
   (A)   The authority to impose regulations to restrict the use of water
provided via the public water supply system shall be expressly reserved and may
be amended from time to time, as necessary, by the president and village board
of trustees for the village of St. Joseph. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-13-2013)
7-6-2: PURPOSE:
   (A)   This chapter establishes a village water use restriction ordinance for
the village of St. Joseph, Champaign County, Illinois. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-13-2013)
7-6-3: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
   (A)   In the event that the Illinois American Water Company (IAWC) district
manager notifies the village regarding a period of high usage, water shortage,
or water emergency, the village shall take measures appropriate to efficiently
safeguard the safety and health of the general public or to provide for the
public convenience. The use of public water supply system water in the village,
or in any portion thereof, for irrigation, cooling, watering or other uses may
be forbidden, restricted, or regulated and such regulations may be made
effective as to all persons using the public water supply system water or as to
particular classes of public water supply system users. Rationing may be
imposed to address an imminent or actual public water supply disruption or
shortage, either in lieu of or in addition to other measures hereby authorized.
(Ord. 2013-7, 8-13-2013)
7-6-4: DEFINITIONS:
DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM: An irrigation system that saves water by allowing water
to drip slowly to the roots of plants, either onto the soil surface or directly
onto the root zone. Such systems include, but are not limited to, soaker hoses.
EVEN NUMBER ADDRESS: A street address ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 or a letter "A" -
"M", or a location without an address.
HANDHELD WATERING DEVICE: A means of watering that requires the watering device
to be held in order to operate, including watering cans, buckets, and hoses
equipped with a spray nozzle and an automatic shutoff valve. Such a hose is a
handheld watering device provided it is continuously attended.
HARVESTED RAINWATER: Water accumulated and stored during times of
precipitation, such as through rain barrels and cistern systems, which is
prevented from entering the stormwater treatment system, and is redirected for
reuse on site.
HIGH USAGE: Period of time during which public water system demand or public
water system supply equals or exceeds public water system treatment production
capacity and potentially threatens system storage capacity and the continued
availability of water for human consumption, sanitation and/or fire protection.
ILLINOIS AMERICAN WATER COMPANY: Shall include its successors.
LANDSCAPE: The area of the property planted with vegetation other than grass.
LAWN: The area of the property planted with grass.
LAWN SPRINKLER: A device attached to a hose designed to allow for the
unattended watering of lawns or landscaping, but does not include a drip
irrigation system.
LAWN WATERING: Any means or methods of applying water to a lawn.
NONESSENTIAL WATER USES: (A) Washing down sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard surface areas.
   (B)   Washing down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate
fire protection.
   (C)   Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any
gutter or street.
   (D)   Washing any motorbike, motor vehicle, boat, trailer, airplane or other
vehicle, except for public emergency vehicles.
   (E)   Maintaining fountains, reflection ponds, and decorative water bodies
for aesthetic or scenic purposes.
   (F)   Filling or maintaining fill levels in public or private swimming and
wading pools.
   (G)   Watering lawns, plants, trees, and other flora on private or public
property, except as otherwise provided under this chapter.
   (H)   Serving water routinely in restaurants.
   (I)   Increasing water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and lakes.
   (J)   Irrigating golf courses except greens, tees, and fairways.
   (K)   Obtaining water from hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting.
ODD NUMBER ADDRESS: A street address ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 or a letter "N" -
"Z".
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited
liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM: Shall include water supplied by the Illinois
American Water Company, or its successors. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-13-2013)
7-6-5: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person using water
within the village, and
      1.   The property is supplied by village's public water supply system,
regardless of whether the property is located within the municipal boundaries
of village; and
      2.   The property is located within the specific area identified in the
alert or declaration.
   (B)   Emergency service providers in the act of providing emergency service
shall be exempt from provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-13-2013)
7-6-6: DECLARATION OF WATER USE RESTRICTIONS, IMPLEMENTATION, AND TERMINATION:
   (A)   Upon receiving notification from the IAWC district manager, or
designee, explaining the justifiable need for a level 1 voluntary water use
restriction alert, level 2 mandatory water use restriction declaration, or
level 3 emergency water use restriction declaration, and within twenty four
(24) hours or on the next business day, the president, or any designee, shall:
      1.   Declare or rescind a level 1 voluntary water use restriction alert;
or
      2.   Recommend to the village board of trustees that:
         (a)   A level 2 mandatory water use restriction declaration or level 3
emergency water use restriction declaration be declared or rescinded; or
         (b)   A change to or from a level 2 mandatory water use restriction
declaration or level 3 emergency water use restriction declaration is declared.
   (B)   Upon the declaration of, or upon the rescinding of, a:
Level 1 voluntary water use restriction alert,
Level 2 mandatory water use restriction declaration, or
Level 3 emergency water use restriction declaration,
the president, or any designee, shall take actions necessary to notify all
public water supply users and the general public of the appropriate response
actions and practices, including, but not limited to, notifying broadcast media
outlets and emergency alert messaging systems as appropriate.
   (C)   Mandatory water use restriction provisions shall take effect
immediately upon the issuance of public notification of a level 2 mandatory
water use restriction declaration, or level 3 emergency water use restriction
declaration. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-13-2013)
7-6-7: WATER USE RESTRICTION LEVELS:
   (A)   Levels: The village establishes three (3) levels of water use
restrictions to address an imminent or actual public water supply disruption or
shortage, as indicated in table 7.1 of this section. The water use restriction
levels are based on IAWC Champaign district measurements of water supply, water
demand, and water system conditions, such as days of remaining storage, water
demand as a percent of supply, or water quality indicators.
      TABLE 7.1
      DESCRIPTION OF WATER USE RESTRICTION LEVELS
 
Level 1   Conditions indicate potential for public water supply shortages.
Voluntary Voluntary water conservation is encouraged.
Level 2   Water supplies are measurably lower than the seasonal norm and are
Mandatory diminishing. Mandatory restriction measures are imposed.
Level 3   The public water supply system is experiencing a water shortage and
Emergency treated water supply is clearly inadequate. More stringent
          restriction measures must be imposed.
 
   (B)   Level 1 Voluntary Water Use Restriction Alert:
      1.   During a level 1 voluntary water use restriction alert, the
following voluntary actions by all persons (residential, institutional,
commercial, and industrial) are recommended, but not mandated:
         (a)   Stop nonessential water uses.
         (b)   Use rain barrels to collect and store water from roof drains,
and use this water for garden irrigation and lawn irrigation.
         (c)   If watering a lawn, set timers to run the system before ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after five o'clock (5:00) P.M. to reduce water loss
through evaporation during the heat of the day.
         (d)   Use drip irrigation hoses to water garden plants and landscape
plants, trees, and shrubs at the roots.
         (e)   Install water and energy efficient appliances.
         (f)   Wash dishes and clothes only when appliance is full.
         (g)   Regularly check and repair toilets, faucets, water pipes, and
outdoor hoses for leaks.
   (C)   Level 2 Mandatory Water Use Restriction Measures:
      1.   During a level 2 mandatory water use restriction declaration, all
persons (residential, institutional, commercial, and industrial) shall adhere
to the following required public water supply system water use restrictions:
         (a)   All persons shall cease nonessential water uses.
         (b)   All persons shall adhere to the following schedule if a lawn is
to be watered:
(1) All properties with an even number address may use water for lawn watering
only on even numbered calendar dates between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
(2) All properties with an odd number address may use water for lawn watering
only on odd numbered calendar dates between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
      2.   During a level 2 mandatory water use restriction declaration, there
shall be no restrictions as to hours or days when water may be used for any of
the following:
         (a)   The watering of sod on the initial day of sod installation;
         (b)   Lawn watering where such watering is done using harvested
rainwater;
         (c)   The watering of landscape, such as trees, shrubs, flowers and
gardens, with a handheld hose not larger than one inch (1") diameter or by
means of an automatic root feed or drip irrigation system;
         (d)   Lawn watering where such watering is done with the proper,
attended use of a handheld watering device;
         (e)   Vehicle or equipment washing, provided that all water hoses in
use are equipped with an automatic shutoff valve or spray nozzle which shuts
off automatically; or
         (f)   Any other lawful use of water such as bathing, clothes washing,
or other normal household uses not otherwise specifically restricted by the
provisions of this section.
   (D)   Level 3 Emergency Water Use Restriction Measures:
      1.   During a level 3 emergency water use restriction declaration, all
persons (residential, institutional, commercial, and industrial) shall adhere
to the following required public water supply system water use restrictions:
         (a)   All persons shall cease nonessential water uses.
         (b)   The use of automatic water sprinklers and other remote water
broadcast devices shall be prohibited.
         (c)   The use of aesthetic fountains that do not operate on recycled
water shall be prohibited.
         (d)   Persons shall be prohibited from using public water supply to
fill swimming pools, water slides that do not recycle, or for other related
recreational water consuming activities. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-13-2013)
7-6-8: VARIANCE:
   (A)   A person may request a variance from a mandatory level 2 or level 3
water use restriction requirement from the president, or designee, on a form
provided for that purpose within seven (7) days after such restriction becomes
effective, provided that compliance with such mandatory water use restriction
would result in serious health, safety, or economic hardship to that person.
   (B)   In order for a variance to be granted, the petitioner must show one or
more of the following conditions:
      1.   Compliance with this chapter cannot be technically accomplished
within the duration of the water use restriction declaration.
      2.   Alternate methods can be implemented which will achieve the same
level of reduction in water use.
   (C)   The president may, in writing, grant temporary variances for existing
water uses otherwise prohibited under this chapter if it is determined that
failure to grant such variances would cause an emergency condition adversely
affecting health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the
petitioner and if one or more aforementioned conditions in subsection (B) of
this section is met. Any such variance so ratified may be revoked by later
action of the president.
   (D)   Any such variance denied by the president can be appealed to the
village board of trustees at a public hearing.
      1.   No such variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any
violation of this chapter occurring prior to the issuance of the variance.
      2.   A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the village to
offset costs of providing notice of the public hearing.
      3.   A variance granted by the village board of trustees shall be subject
to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the village board of
trustees:
         (a)   Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance.
         (b)   Variances granted shall expire when the water use restriction
declaration has been rescinded, unless the petitioner has failed to meet
specified requirements. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-13-2013)
7-6-9: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of president, or designee, to investigate
violations of the mandatory restrictions and to issue and post a notice of
violation consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects, fails to comply with, or
resists enforcement of the mandatory provisions of this chapter shall, within
ten (10) days of receiving a notice of violation, as indicated in subsection
(A) of this section, be subject to the following administrative penalties:
 
First violation  $ 50.00 per occurrence
Second violation 100.00 per occurrence
Third violation  200.00 per occurrence
 
   (C)   Each day upon which there is a violation shall be deemed to be a
separate occurrence. Payment of said administrative penalty shall be made to
the village within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice of violation. (Ord.
2013-7, 8-13-2013)
7-6-10: SEVERABILITY:
In the event that any portion of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional
for any reason, the remaining portions of this chapter shall not be affected.
The provisions of this chapter shall prevail and control in the event of any
inconsistency between this chapter and other rules and regulations of the
village and/or state of Illinois. (Ord. 2013-7, 8-13-2013)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Obstructing Streets, Sidewalks
8-1-2: Moving Buildings; Permit Required
8-1-3: Excavations
8-1-4: Remove Grade Stakes
8-1-5: Dirt Removal
8-1-6: Rural Mailboxes
8-1-7: Specific Streets As Part Of Street System
8-1-8: Street Specifications
8-1-9: Sidewalk Specifications
8-1-10: Sidewalk Protection During Construction
8-1-11: Small Wireless Facilities
8-1-1: OBSTRUCTING STREETS, SIDEWALKS:
   (A)   Building Or Other Materials: It shall be unlawful for any builder or
other person to encumber or obstruct any street, sidewalk or alley within the
Village with any building materials, equipment or other like articles without
written permission from the President of the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Rubbish, Dirt, Filth: No person shall obstruct or encumber any street,
alley or sidewalk with rubbish, dirt or other articles of property, upon any
such street, alley or sidewalk longer than may be necessary for the prompt
removal of the same.
   (C)   Obstruction Of Street Or Alley: It shall be unlawful for any person to
obstruct any street or alley within the Village by unnecessarily stopping
thereon with any automobile, vehicle, trailer or other chattel, so as to
interfere with persons or vehicles using the same.
   (D)   Temporary Merchandise On Right-Of-Way: It shall be unlawful for any
person or entity to place, hang or set out over or upon any Village sidewalk,
any goods, wares or merchandise, except temporarily within two feet (2') of the
premises or building occupied by him/her/it or to place, suspend or erect any
sign, showbill, showcase, flag or other obstruction, projecting into or hanging
over any sidewalk exceeding two feet (2') from the building or premises
occupied by him/her/it, or to knowingly permit the same to be done or continue
in front of any building or premises owned or occupied by him/her/it or under
his/her/its control.
   (E)   Encroachments: No person or entity shall make or cause to be made any
erection, enclosure, or obstruction encroaching in whole or in part upon or
over any street, alley or sidewalk within the Village without permission from
the Board of Trustees.
   (F)   Notice; Removal: The owner of any erection or enclosure already
erected or placed without permission of the Board of Trustees and encroaching
upon or over any street or alley within the Village, shall remove the same
within thirty (30) days after notice by the President of the Board of Trustees.
   (G)   Cost Of Removal: The President may cause any encumbrance, obstruction,
erection or enclosure in, over or upon any street, alley or sidewalk contrary
to this chapter to be removed and the costs of such removal shall be paid by
the person or entity causing such obstruction.
   (H)   Liability For Damages: Any person who shall place or leave, or cause
to be placed or left, any encroachment, encumbrance or obstruction in, over or
upon any street, alley or sidewalk within the Village shall in all cases be
liable to the Village for all damages or injury arising from such encroachment,
encumbrance or obstruction.
   (I)   Authorized Obstructions: Any obstruction or encroachment upon or over
a Village sidewalk, alley or street authorized by this chapter or by permission
of the Board of Trustees shall in all instances be a license revocable at any
time by the Board of Trustees. Any such obstructions or encroachments shall
leave adequate and safe space for the public use of such sidewalk, alley or
street. Any such structures shall be erected in a good, safe and sound manner.
All approved awnings must be at least eight feet (8') above the sidewalk. (2005
Code)
8-1-2: MOVING BUILDINGS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall move or cause to be removed, or aid in removing any building
through or across any street or alley within the Village without written
permission from the Board of Trustees, nor shall in removing such building
unnecessarily encumber or obstruct any street or alley, nor for a longer time
than may be necessary in the prompt and diligent removal of such building.
(2005 Code)
8-1-3: EXCAVATIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate, strip, undermine or
in any manner dig away any public street, alley, sidewalk, right of way, or any
part of any public street, alley, sidewalk or right of way within the village
unless authorized as provided hereafter.
   (B)   No person or entity shall make any excavation in any village street,
alley, sidewalk or right of way without written permission from the village
president or, in his absence, the village superintendent of public works. Any
person or entity acting by or under such permission as aforesaid, making or
causing to be made any excavation or ditch for any purpose in any street,
alley, sidewalk or right of way shall, without any unnecessary delay, cause the
same to be filled and compacted to the proper level of the street, alley,
sidewalk or right of way, and finish the surface as required by this code or by
the board of trustees and upon completion remove all equipment, excess
materials and debris; and shall leave said site in the same or as good
condition as before said work began; and shall from time to time, if necessary,
continue to repair the same until the earth is completely settled and the
surface conforms to the proper level of the street, alley, sidewalk or right of
way.
   (C)   Any person or entity tearing up or in any manner injuring any street,
sidewalk, bridge, culvert or vegetation within the village for any purpose, or
negligently breaking or injuring the same by the removing of any building over
the same, or otherwise, shall without delay cause such street, sidewalk,
bridge, culvert, or vegetation to be repaired and placed in the same or as good
condition as before the breaking or injuring thereof.
   (D)   Utility excavations shall be in accordance with the following
requirements:
      1.   All street cut trenches made either to existing pavements or
sidewalks or future pavement areas shall be backfilled utilizing one of two (2)
recommended methods: those being the use of controlled low strength materials
(CLSM) or, alternately, the placement of mechanically compacted lifts, six inch
(6") maximum, of CA6 or CA10 aggregate materials as approved by the village.
CLSM material shall be in accordance with section 593 of the Illinois
department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction".
The use of FA6 aggregate material, commonly known as "turkey grit", as backfill
will be permitted as approved by the village president. Water inundation or
jetting of the fine aggregate backfill material will not be permitted. The
proper backfill shall extend not less than two feet (2') in each direction
beyond the edge of the pavement.
      2.   When a trench is cut into an existing concrete street or sidewalk,
the pavement shall be replaced in kind with a total thickness two inches (2")
greater than existing to a maximum of ten inches (10"). When restoring concrete
pavement, the entire slab into which the trench was cut shall be removed and
replaced.
If the surface is either asphalt or oil and chip, a six inch (6") thick
concrete pavement shall be installed and two inches (2") of hot mix asphalt
surface course shall be placed atop the concrete base. The use of full depth
integrally colored concrete pavement will be permitted as approved by the
village. Replacement pavement shall be installed no less than a distance of two
feet (2') in each direction beyond the edge of the excavation trench.
      3.   All utility structures (i.e., shutoff valves, vault boxes, lids,
poles, lines, markers, etc.) that pose a threat to public safety shall be
replaced when directed by the village. Any failures occurring outside of the
original restored or repaired pavement or right of way area resulting from the
utility activity will be repaired by the responsible utility company.
      4.   Any person, firm, corporation or entity which plans to install any
underground utilities within a present or proposed street or sidewalk right of
way area is required to notify the village a minimum of twenty four (24) hours
prior to beginning work, except in the case of an emergency. The notification
shall include the exact location and nature of the work to be performed.
Roadway or sidewalk area repairs or restorations made without proper
notification may require reexcavation and replacement with approved backfill.
In emergency situations, the village shall be notified immediately upon the
responsible party's decision that excavation is required.
      5.   Variance from any of the utility excavation policy provisions as
stated herein may be granted, on a case by case evaluation basis, by the
village president or, in his absence, by the superintendent of public works.
All variances granted shall be specifically outlined in writing and include a
justification for the variance. Factors to be considered in rendering a
variance decision may include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   Specific trench width and/or depth;
         (b)   Actual size of concrete slabs affected;
         (c)   Pipe size;
         (d)   Conditions of surrounding soil and/or pavement;
         (e)   Extent of variance requested;
         (f)   Environmental circumstances at work site; and
         (g)   Extent of possible future public damage.
Any questions, concerns or disputes regarding interpretation or administration
of this chapter may be referred by an affected party to the village board of
trustees which, by majority vote, shall have final authority in resolving such
matters.
      6.   Permits are required for all utility excavations within any village
right of way. Such utility work within or affecting the village rights of way
will require the contractor to furnish the village evidence of liability
insurance coverage naming the village of St. Joseph as an additional insured.
The village president or, in his absence, the superintendent of public works is
empowered to issue right of way excavation permits for any use of village
streets or other public property for periods of no longer than one hundred
eighty (180) days for construction purposes.
For projects that cover large linear distances, each individual permit will
cover up to two thousand feet (2,000') in length. Additional permits will be
required for projects exceeding two thousand (2,000) linear feet.
The village of St. Joseph reserves the right to require appropriate traffic
control measures as shown in the Illinois department of transportation's
highway standards in areas affected by the utility work as directed by the
village president. "As built" plans shall be provided if required by the permit
as determined by the village president.
Permit applications shall include the construction schedule, general
construction plans including site restoration provisions, erosion control
measures (if needed), traffic control measures, and a list of contact
information for the entity performing the work.
Persons or entities excavating or performing work on village right of way
without a permit in violation of the provisions herein are subject to fines as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
In the event the contractor fails to complete all work (including restoration)
on village property as required herein by the date stated in the permit issued
therefor, the contractor may be granted an extension for good cause shown as to
the reason that the completion date could not be met.
In the event the contractor fails to complete all work (including restoration)
as required herein by the completion date provided in the permit or any
extension thereof, the village may give written notice to said contractor
stating deficiencies in the work and requiring that all deficiencies be correct
and/or that all work be completed by a date certain. In the event the
contractor fails to correct said deficiencies and/or complete the work by said
deadline, the contractor shall be subject to a fine of seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) per violation. Each day after said deadline that said
deficiency continues uncorrected and/or that the work is not completed shall be
considered a separate offense. (Ord. 2015-5, 8-13-2015)
8-1-4: REMOVE GRADE STAKES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to purposely change or remove any stake,
post or stone placed or set to designate the corner of any lot or land, street
or alley, or to show the grade of any street, alley or sidewalk within the
village. (Ord., 6-23-1881)
8-1-5: DIRT REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, remove or carry away any earth,
gravel, pavers or other material from any street, sidewalk, alley, or public
right of way without permission of the board of trustees. (2005 Code)
8-1-6: RURAL MAILBOXES:
No rural mailboxes shall be allowed on parking or right of way of any street in
the village; provided, however, that if this provision conflicts with any
federal statute or law, then said federal statute or law shall supersede this
provision. (Ord., 5-5-1970)
8-1-7: SPECIFIC STREETS AS PART OF STREET SYSTEM:
   (A)   1. Jeanes Drive, including its entrance onto Main Street, is located
within the village and is a part of the overall street system of the village.
      2.   The entrance of Jeanes Drive onto Main Street is desirable and
necessary for highway purposes and said entrance was constructed and has been
opened for public use for some time prior to the date of this chapter.
      3.   It is desirable and necessary that there be a relinquishment of
access control by the appropriate state and federal government agencies for
highway purposes at the location of said Jeanes Drive onto Main Street.
      4.   The village has heretofore and does in the future accept all
maintenance and construction costs in connection with and incidental to the
entrance of said Jeanes Drive onto Main Street. (Ord., 12-1972)
   (B)   CHS Route 12 (Grand Avenue) from FAS Route 516 (Main Street), westerly
and northerly approximately 0.50 miles to the south right of way line of FAI
Route 74 will be included in the municipal street system of the village upon
completion of the improvement and notification of its acceptance by the state.
(Ord., 5-8-1984)
8-1-8: STREET SPECIFICATIONS:
Unless otherwise provided by the board of trustees, all new streets within the
village or in subdivisions outside the village which are subject to village
approval, shall be designed and constructed as follows:
   (A)   Subgrade: All subgrades shall be prepared in accordance with the
requirements of the Illinois department of transportation "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition except as
amended or expanded as follows:
      1.   Soils Report: On all new or reconstructed arterial streets, a soils
report shall be prepared by an experienced, independent materials testing firm.
The soils report should at a minimum include the following: location and design
section which identifies the project's location, length, existing conditions,
existing and proposed pavement typical sections, stations of borings; a soil
geology section which describes existing soil types and profiles and provides a
sieve analysis of each soil boring with grain size distribution plots, liquid
limit, plastic limit, percent sand, percent clay, percent silt, and subgrade
support rating; copies of actual boring logs; a soil profile plot based on
interpretation of boring logs; and a conclusion and recommendation section
which includes recommendations for lime stabilization with recommended
application rates of lime and water and any other subgrade stabilization
alternatives.
      2.   Topsoil: Existing topsoil shall be removed from the areas of the
proposed street pavement plus two feet (2') beyond the proposed back of curb.
Removal shall be to a depth as necessary to remove all organic material or to
the proposed bottom of pavement structure, whichever is greater.
      3.   Compaction And Testing: Street pavement subgrade shall be compacted
and tested in accordance with the applicable portions of Illinois department of
transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
         (a)   The street pavement subgrade shall have sufficient stability to
accommodate construction traffic without excessive subgrade rutting or shoving.
Subgrade strengths at the time of construction shall have a California bearing
ratio (CBR) of at least six percent (CBR = 6%) in the top twelve inches (12")
of the subgrade.
         (b)   The dynamic cone penetrometer (DCP) is used to estimate the in
situ CBR of granular materials and fine grained soils. The DCP shall be used to
determine the recommended subgrade CBR of the subgrade and the DCP shall comply
with the most current ASTM standards. Testing should be performed every one
hundred feet (100') of roadway with tests alternating between lanes (i.e., 200
foot intervals in each lane of traffic), or as approved by the village
engineer.
      4.   Proof Rolling: In addition to compaction and stability testing, the
village engineer may require that the subgrade be "proof rolled" prior to
approval of the subgrade and before the placement of base materials. Trucks
shall be loaded as follows: twenty seven thousand (27,000) pounds on two (2)
axles and forty five thousand (45,000) pounds on three (3) axles with the
tolerance not to exceed ten percent (10%). A loaded truck shall make a single
pass over the entire length of each traffic lane to be constructed. Any areas
of the prepared and compacted subgrade which show rutting, cracking, or rolling
upon proof rolling will not be accepted. The contractor will recompact and/or
reconstruct the sections that fail and proof roll again for acceptance.
When pavements are to be placed over an aggregate base, the base shall be proof
rolled prior to placement of any pavement.
      5.   Remediation: Any areas of street pavement subgrade which fail to
meet or exceed the minimum compaction and stability testing requirements or
fail the proof rolling test shall be remedied to achieve the required
stability. Acceptable methods of remediation shall include, but not be limited
to: aeration and recompaction; undercut and backfill; and lime stabilization.
The remedied areas shall be retested for acceptance. Streets which do not meet
the minimum subgrade compaction requirements will not be accepted.
   (B)   Pavement: All pavements shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the Illinois department of transportation "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition except as
amended or expanded as follows:
      1.   Street Thickness Standards:
 
Street Type Full Depth HMA1   PC Concrete
            Minimum Thickness Minimum Thickness
Local          9 inches       7 inches
Collector      9 inches       7 inches
Arterial       See note 2     See note 2
Industrial/    See note 2     See note 2
commercial
 
Notes:
1.   HMA - Hot mix asphalt.
2.   The pavement design and thickness shall be established utilizing the
current Illinois department of transportation bureau of design and environment
pavement design guidelines. All pavement design calculations shall be submitted
to the village engineer for review and approval.
      2.   Design Period: The minimum design period for any street pavement
shall be twenty (20) years.
      3.   Materials: Materials for all types of pavements shall conform to the
Illinois department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", latest edition.
      4.   Curb And Gutter: All streets shall be provided with Portland cement
concrete curb and gutter at thickness equal to the adjacent pavement thickness.
Proposed curb and gutter for all street construction shall be type B-6.18
barrier curb or type M-6.18 mountable curb in accordance with the Illinois
department of transportation highway standards or as approved by the village
engineer.
      5.   Driveways: Driveways shall not be poured until the framing is
inspected and approved by the designated village inspector.
         (a)   All private residential driveway approaches within the village
right of way shall be a minimum of six inches (6") thick of Portland cement
concrete or eight inches (8") thick of hot mix asphalt.
         (b)   All commercial driveway approaches within the village right of
way shall be a minimum of eight inches (8") thick of Portland cement concrete.
Hot mix asphalt will not be allowed for commercial driveway approaches unless
approved otherwise by the village engineer.
   (C)   Testing: Testing of all pavements shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Illinois department of transportation "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition, or as
approved by the village engineer. All testing shall be performed by an
engineering firm approved by the village engineer. All costs of testing shall
be paid by the owner/developer.
   (D)   Drainage: All drainage facilities shall be constructed in accordance
with the requirements of the Illinois department of transportation "Drainage
Manual", latest edition except as amended or expanded as follows:
      1.   Design Storm: All roadways shall be provided with inlets and
underground drainage facilities having a design capacity adequate to convey
surface water generated from a 10-year recurrence interval precipitation event
under the state of land development which generates the highest peak flow
scenario.
      2.   Method Of Analysis: Stormwater calculation methods shall be as
described in title 7, chapter 4, "Stormwater Management", of this code.
      3.   Inlet Spacing: Inlets shall be spaced to prevent encroachment of
ponded water onto the traveled lanes. Inlet design, including spacing, shall be
based on the 10-year recurrence interval precipitation event and shall meet the
lane encroachment guidelines listed in the Illinois department of
transportation "Drainage Manual", latest edition.
      4.   Stormwater Detention: Stormwater detention shall be provided as
specified in title 7, chapter 4, "Stormwater Management", of this code.
      5.   Minimum Slopes: Minimum longitudinal slopes for roadways shall be
0.004 foot/foot (0.4 percent). Minimum cross slopes for roadways shall be 0.015
foot/foot (1.5 percent).
      6.   Review: All design calculations shall be submitted to the village
engineer for technical review and approval before work begins. (Ord. 2007-2, 5-
22-2007)
8-1-9: SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS:
Unless otherwise provided by the board of trustees, all new and replacement
public sidewalks shall be constructed as follows: (Ord. 2007-2, 5-22-2007)
   (A)   Sidewalks shall be laid to conform to grade lines to be approved by
the village engineer, and shall be constructed of materials and in the manner
specified in the most recent, published state of Illinois "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". Existing topsoil shall be
removed from the area of the proposed sidewalk to a depth as necessary to
remove all organic material or ten inches (10"), whichever is greater. The
subgrade shall be tamped or rolled until thoroughly compacted and at the proper
line and grade as shown on the plans. At locations where the sidewalk is
constructed at entrances, the sidewalk shall be thickened to the thickness of
the adjacent entrance. Sidewalks shall be sloped a minimum of one-eighth inch
(1/8") to each foot in width from the inner to outer edge. (Ord. 2007-8, 11-27-
2007)
   (B)   Sidewalks shall be a minimum of six inches (6") thick and four feet
(4') wide of Portland cement concrete.
   (C)   No sidewalk or driveway approach (within Village right- of-way) shall
be poured until the framing is inspected and approved by the designated Village
inspector. (Ord. 2007-2, 5-22-2007)
8-1-10: SIDEWALK PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   Whenever an application for a zoning permit is submitted to the
Village for a new building or addition, the contractor or property owner shall
request an inspection of any existing public sidewalk. Upon completion of all
such improvements, the contractor or property owner shall again request an
inspection of any existing public sidewalk.
   (B)   During construction, the owner of the lot where construction is taking
place and the builder shall be responsible for covering the public sidewalk
with six inches (6") to eight inches (8") of dirt at the location where
construction vehicles will cross over the public sidewalk. Construction
vehicles shall not cross over the public sidewalk at any other location than
these protected locations. Upon completion of construction and prior to
occupancy of the newly constructed improvements, all said dirt shall be removed
from the public sidewalk and sidewalk shall be cleaned.
   (C)   The contractor and the property owner shall be jointly and severally
liable for any damage to the said sidewalk which occurs between the time of
said inspections required by this section, or any damage to public sidewalks
where either or both of said inspections were not requested. Any such damage to
public sidewalks shall be repaired by the contractor or property owner within
thirty (30) days of written notice from the Village Clerk requiring that said
repairs be made. In the event said repairs are not completed within said thirty
(30) days, or extension thereof approved by the Board of Trustees, then the
Village may have said repairs made, in which event the contractor or property
owner shall reimburse the Village within thirty (30) days of mailing (by
certified mail) of a copy of an invoice for said repairs and demand by the
Village Clerk for payment. In the event payment is not received by the Village
within said thirty (30) days, a lien may be filed against said property with
the Recorder in the amount of the Village's costs of repair. In addition, said
contractor and/or property owner, who fails to comply with a demand served upon
him or her: 1) shall be guilty of a violation of this section for each day that
payment is not received beyond the thirtieth day after said demand for payment
is mailed by the Village, and 2) shall not be issued a new zoning permit for
any property within the Village until said contractor/property owner is in
compliance with this section and demands served hereunder. (Ord. 2007-2, 5-22-
2007)
8-1-11: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   (A)   Purpose And Scope:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of- way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act.
      2.   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This section supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
      3.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
section, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
section to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws
or regulations.
   (B)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
    ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
   APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those
codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit
to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522
(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153
(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51),
as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE: A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: 1) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section
VI.D.1.a.i through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or 2) designated as a locally landmarked
building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the
Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the
Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation
Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois
State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in
public rights-of-way.
   PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action
or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE: A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: 1) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and 2) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
   UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
1) equipment associated with wireless communications; and 2) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: 1) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or 2) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.
   (C)   Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities:
      1.   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
subsection (D)9 of this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but
not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: a) in rights-
of-way in any zoning district, or b) outside rights- of-way in property zoned
exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
      2.   Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
         (a)   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the Village, together with the Village's Small Cell
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
            (1) Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
            (2) The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
            (3) Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act
of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application
as it is proposed to be installed;
            (4) The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
            (5) A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
            (6) Certification that the collocation complies with the
collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the
applicant's knowledge.
            (7) In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
         (b)   Application Process: The Village shall process applications as
follows:
            (1) Application Priority: The first completed application shall
have priority over applications received by different applicants for
collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
            (2) Collocation On Existing Utility Pole: An application to
collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be
deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within
ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75)
days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this section.
            (3) Installation Of New Utility Pole: An application to collocate a
small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole
shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the
Village fails to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty
(120) days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five
(105) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this section.
            (4) Denial: The Village shall deny an application which does not
meet the requirements of this section.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that
concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions contained
herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced
before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of
the provider.
The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code
provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the
documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies an
application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit
the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of denial is
sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village
shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial shall
require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the Village's review period.
The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed
with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted
with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited
in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure
requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
            (5) Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an
approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility
pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment
Agreement, provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a Municipal
utility pole by the applicant. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on
a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Village and the
applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment
Agreement.
         (c)   Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after
receiving an application, the Village shall determine whether the application
is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the
Village must specifically identify the missing information. An application
shall be deemed complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the
applicant within thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees
specifically enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted
by the applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
         (d)   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled
by:
            (1) An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
Village; or
            (2) A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
         (e)   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate
small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be
allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and
receive a single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small
wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same
type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may
remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
         (f)   Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a
period of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for
equivalent durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless
facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the
applicable Village codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained
in this section.
If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits
shall be subject to the applicable Village Code provisions or regulations in
effect at the time of renewal.
         (g)   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal
delivery at the Village's designated place of business, by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail.
   (D)   Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
      1.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on
Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably
determines that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      2.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
section. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      3.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with
industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a
public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the
interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such
interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of
Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      4.   Electric Distribution Systems: The wireless provider shall not
collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of
an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker
safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may
be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and on the
top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      5.   Public Safety: The wireless provider shall comply with all
applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety.
      6.   Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written
design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth
in a Village ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village, a comprehensive
plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the
rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      7.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation
requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required
to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or
category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems
on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole,
the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred
feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant
shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the
criteria in this paragraph.
      8.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         (a)   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility
pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in
place on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located
within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or
wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
         (b)   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
      9.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions
set forth in the Village zoning ordinance.
      10.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      11.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      12.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right- of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
      13.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   (E)   Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
      1.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
      2.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
      3.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      4.   The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with subsection (C)2(a)(4) of this section; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
      5.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   (F)   Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this section authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      1.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      2.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      3.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this section do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to
that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a) to obtain a
franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video
service or b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or
operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject
to this section.
   (G)   Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the Village and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject
to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this section.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Village
makes available under this section for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
(2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the Village
that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement
remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small
wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Village's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before the
wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this
paragraph.
   (H)   Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an
annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village
utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year or 2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the
wireless provider's use of space on the Village utility pole.
If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs,
the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after
the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent
to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   (I)   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or
transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village.
Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider.
   (J)   Dispute Resolution: The Circuit Court of Champaign Illinois shall have
exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for
collocation of small wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the
right-of-way, the Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on
its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per
year per Municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final
resolution of the dispute.
   (K)   Indemnification: A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the
Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or
property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use
or occupancy of the Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors
arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this section and the
Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless
against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole
negligence of the Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall
further waive any claims that they may have against the Village with respect to
consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the
theory of liability.
   (L)   Insurance: The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless
provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance:
      1.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
      2.   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      3.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to
the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 2018-9, 7-24-2018,
eff. 7-24-2018)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING AREAS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Construction Of Parking Areas
8-2-1: CONSTRUCTION OF PARKING AREAS:
The owners of lots or parcels of land situated in the village are permitted to
construct parking on or along the street frontage of said lot or parcel of land
in the following manner:
   (A)   Written permission from the board of trustees must first be obtained.
   (B)   Except in special circumstances, permission shall be granted only in
R-1 and R-2 zoning districts on streets with no curbs.
   (C)   The parking area shall be surfaced and maintained with crushed rock or
gravel.
   (D)   The parking area shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in width and a
minimum of twenty feet (20') in length for each parking space.
   (E)   The parking area improvement shall not obstruct drainage or sidewalks.
   (F)   Unless otherwise permitted by the board of trustees, only parallel
parking shall be permitted.
   (G)   No double parking shall be permitted.
   (H)   All expenses, including grading, culverts, rock, gravel, and continued
upkeep and maintenance shall be paid by the lot owner or residents.
   (I)   The board of trustees may revoke the permission granted hereunder at
any time if the parking area is not properly and adequately maintained or used,
or for any other reason determined to be in the best interest of the village.
(2005 Code)
CHAPTER 3
HOUSE NUMBERING
SECTION:
8-3-1: Numbering Streets, Houses
8-3-1: NUMBERING STREETS, HOUSES:
   (A)   The streets will be numbered east, west, north, and south from the
intersection of First and Lincoln Streets. Properties on the east side of
north-south streets and on the north side of the east-west streets will be
given even numbers. Properties on the west side of north-south streets and on
the south side of east-west streets will be given odd numbers. (Ord., 5-10-
1988)
   (B)   The zoning administrator is hereby designated as the person
responsible for determining the official number each building and lot shall be
assigned within the village. Provided that for new subdivisions, the village
engineer shall submit a house numbering plan to the trustees for final approval
at the time of approval of the final plat. The zoning administrator shall then
assign house numbers in accordance with said plan. (2005 Code)
   (C)   Every building must have its assigned building number prominently
displayed on said building or other approved surface with numbers no less than
three inches (3") high and of a different color than the surface to which they
are attached. Each building's number must be visible from the street directly
in front of the said building. (Ord., 5-10-1988)
   (D)   If any person shall fail to post the assigned building number or
publicly display any number on any building or lot within the village that is
not in conformance with the official street number assigned to each respective
lot and building by the zoning administrator, the zoning administrator shall
cause to be served, by certified mail, upon the record owner and the person who
last paid the general taxes on such lot (if such person be different from the
record owner), a notice that no building number is displayed or that the
building number displayed is not in conformance with the official number
assigned and shall advise such persons of the correct number and, further,
shall order such person to permanently remove any incorrect number and post the
correct number within ten (10) days of mailing of the notice. A copy of this
section shall be attached to such notice. (2005 Code)
   (E)   If the record owner or the person who last paid the general taxes on
the subject lot fails to permanently remove any incorrect number and post the
correct number within ten (10) days following mailing of the notice provided
for herein, upon conviction thereof, the record owner or the person who last
paid the general taxes on the subject lot shall be guilty of a violation of
this section.
   (F)   It shall be an affirmative defense to any person charged with a
violation of this section if such person establishes that he or she has no
legal right to remove any incorrect number or post the correct number so long
as that person provides all known information to the village regarding the
person or entity that would have such right. (Ord., 5-10-1988)
CHAPTER 4
STREETLIGHTS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Installation Of Streetlights
8-4-1: INSTALLATION OF STREETLIGHTS:
Streetlights shall be installed and located as determined by the board of
trustees. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PARKS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Closing Time
8-5-1: CLOSING TIME:
All village parks shall be closed between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. unless a permit for use of the parks during the
hours is issued by the board of trustees. No unauthorized persons shall be on
the park grounds during closing hours. (Ord. 8-8-1, 8-14-1984)
CHAPTER 6
REIMBURSEMENT
SECTION:
8-6-1: Reimbursement Of Funds
8-6-1: REIMBURSEMENT OF FUNDS:
The village treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any
reimbursement or compensation by any government body or agency, or other entity
or person to the village for expenses, services and/or materials incident to
disaster operations, or any other matter. Reimbursement for providing a vehicle
or other heavy equipment shall be compensated at the rate of ninety five
dollars ($95.00) per hour for machine and operator unless a lessor rate is
approved by the board of trustees. (Ord., 11-8-1994)
CHAPTER 7
TREES
SECTION:
8-7-1: Definitions
8-7-2: Creation And Establishment Of A Tree Trust Committee
8-7-3: Duties And Responsibilities
8-7-4: Street Tree Species To Be Planted
8-7-5: Permit Required
8-7-6: Spacing
8-7-7: Distance From Curb And Sidewalk
8-7-8: Distance From Street Corners And Fireplugs
8-7-9: Utilities
8-7-10: Public Tree Care
8-7-11: Tree Topping
8-7-12: Pruning, Corner Clearance
8-7-13: Dead Or Diseased Tree Removal On Private Property
8-7-14: Removal Of Stumps
8-7-15: Interference With Tree Trust Committee
8-7-16: Review By Village Board
8-7-17: Penalty For Violations
8-7-18: Exceptions
8-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are herewith defined
as follows:
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the village, or to which
the public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways
within the village. (Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-2: CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF A TREE TRUST COMMITTEE:
There is hereby created and established a tree trust committee for the village,
which shall consist of four (4) members, who shall be appointed by the
president with the approval of the village board. (Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
It shall be the responsibility of the committee to study, investigate, counsel
and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees
and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be
presented annually to the village board and upon their acceptance and approval
shall constitute the official comprehensive village tree plan for the village.
The committee, when requested by the village board, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of
question coming within the scope of its work. (Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-4: STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED:
The following list constitutes the official street tree species for St. Joseph.
No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street
trees without written permission of the tree trust committee.
Scientific Name Common Name Cultivars
Scientific Name            Common Name               Cultivars
Large Trees (50' And Up):                            
                                                    
Acer saccharum             Sugar maple               Green mountain
                                                   Legacy
Celtis occidentalis        Hackberry                  
Fagus grandifolia          American beech             
Fagus sylvatica            European beech             
Fraxinus americana         White ash                 Autumn applause
                                                   Autumn purple
                                                   Champaign county
Fraxinus pennsylvanica     Green ash (seedless only) Marshall seedless
                                                   Summit
                                                   Patmore
Ginkgo biloba              Ginkgo (male)              
Gymnocladus dioicus        Kentucky coffee (male)     
Magnolia acuminata         Cucumber tree              
Quercus alba               White oak                  
Quercus bicolor            Swamp white oak            
Quercus coccinea           Scarlet oak                
Quercus imbricaria         Shingle oak                
Quercus macrocarpa         Bur oak                    
Quercus muehlenbergii      Chinquapin oak             
Quercus robur              English oak                
Quercus rubra              Red oak                    
Quercus shumardii          Shumard oak                
Quercus stellata           Post oak                   
Taxodium distichum         Bald cypress               
Tilia americana            Redmond linden             
                          Glenleven linden           
Tilia cordata              Littleleaf linden         Chancellor
                                                   Greenspire
                                                    
Medium Trees (25' To 50'):                           
                                                    
Acer platanoides           Norway maple
Acer rubrum                Red maple                 October glory
                                                   Red sunset
                                                   Armstrong
                                                   Bowhall
Carpinus betulus           European hornbeam
Nyssa sylvatica            Black gum
Pyrus calleryana           Flowering pear            Aristocrat
                                                   Chanticleer
                                                   Redspire
Quercus acutissima         Sawtooth oak
                                                    
Small Trees (Up To 25'):                             
                                                    
Acer campestre             Hedge maple               Tree form
Acer ginnala               Amur maple                Tree form
Amelanchier canadensis     Shadblow serviceberry     Tree form
Amelanchier grandiflora    Apple serviceberry        Tree form
Amelanchier laevis         Allegany serviceberry     Tree form
Carpinus caroliniana       American hornbeam          
Cercidiphyllum japonicum   Katsura tree               
Crataegus sp.              Hawthorn (thornless)       
Ostrya virginiana          Ironwood                   
Syringa reticulata         Japanese tree lilac        
 
(Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No street trees or park trees shall be planted within the village without first
obtaining a permit from the tree trust committee. (Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-6: SPACING:
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three (3) species
size classes listed in section
8-7-4 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer together than the
following: small trees, thirty feet (30'); medium trees, forty feet (40'); and
large trees, fifty feet (50'); except in special plantings designed or approved
by a landscape architect and approved in writing by the tree trust committee.
(Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-7: DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK:
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be
in accordance with the three (3) species size classes listed in section
8-7-4 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or
sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet (2'); medium trees, three
feet (3'); large trees, four feet (4'). (Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-8: DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS:
No street tree shall be planted closer than thirty five feet (35') from any
street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or
curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet (10') from any
fireplug. (Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-9: UTILITIES:
No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in section
8-7-4 of this chapter may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of
any overhead utility wire, and street trees shall be planted in proximity to
any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility as
approved by the tree trust committee. (Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-10: PUBLIC TREE CARE:
   (A)   The village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety
or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
   (B)   The tree trust committee may remove or cause or order to be removed,
any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of
its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water
lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus,
insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street
trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of
said trees is in accordance with sections
8-7-4 through
8-7-8 of this chapter. (Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-11: TREE TOPPING:
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or village
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
"Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from
this section at the determination of the tree trust committee. (Ord., 10-24-
1995)
8-7-12: PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE:
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right of way within the
village shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and
so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet (8') above the surface of
the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or
dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the
safety of the public. The village shall have the right to prune any tree or
shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light
along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any
traffic control device or sign, or interferes with vehicular or pedestrian
traffic. (Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-13: DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The village shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the village, when such trees constitute a
hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a
potential threat to other trees within the village. The tree trust committee
will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said
owners at their own expense within sixty (60) days after the date of service of
notice or owner shall request a hearing before the board of trustees within
said time period. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such
provisions or to request a hearing within said time provided, the village shall
have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal to the
owners. In the event said cost of removal is not paid within thirty (30) days
of the receipt of said bill by the owners the village may file a lien on the
real estate from which the trees were removed and may file suit to enforce said
lien. (Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-14: REMOVAL OF STUMPS:
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the
ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the
ground. (Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-15: INTERFERENCE WITH TREE TRUST COMMITTEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
tree trust committee, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street
trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.
(Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-16: REVIEW BY VILLAGE BOARD:
The village board shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the tree trust committee. Any person may appeal from any ruling or
order of the tree trust committee to the village board who may hear the matter
and make final decision. (Ord., 10-24-1995)
8-7-17: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be fined in
accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code. (2005 Code)
8-7-18: EXCEPTIONS:
The regulations and prohibitions of this chapter shall not apply to land owned
and operated by a duly created government conservation district, including the
Champaign County soil and water conservation district. (Ord. 2009-8, 4-28-2009)
TITLE 9
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Speed
9-1-2: Parking
9-1-3: School Crossings
9-1-4: Traction Engine
9-1-5: Stop Streets
9-1-6: One-Way Streets And Alleys
9-1-7: Snowmobiles
9-1-8: Emergency Snow Routes
9-1-9: Skateboards, Rollerblades And Roller Skates
9-1-10: Honorary Signs
9-1-1: SPEED:
   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on any street not under the
jurisdiction of the State of Illinois, or under the jurisdiction of the County
of Champaign within the Village at a speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles
per hour unless a different speed limit is provided for in subsection (B) of
this section. (Ord. 2018-2, 3-27-2018)
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle on any street or highway listed in
this subsection in excess of the maximum speed limit listed herein: (Ord., 11-
10-1981)
      1.   Reserved. (Ord. 2018-2, 3-27-2018)
      2.   The maximum speed on the following streets shall be twenty (20)
miles per hour:
 
Green Street   From its intersection with Sherman Street to its intersection
               with James Street.
James Street   From its intersection with Green Street to its intersection with
               Elm Street.
Sherman Street From its intersection with Green Street to its intersection with
               Elm Street.
 
(Ord., 11-10-1981)
      3.   The maximum speed limit shall be twenty (20) miles per hour in the
following school zones on days when school is in session and children are
present:
 
Ethel Street      From Main Street to Harlan Wise Drive.
Harlan Wise Drive From Douglas Street to Peters Drive.
Main Street       From Warren Street to Grand Avenue.
Peters Drive      From Fifth Street to Harlan Wise Drive.
Prospect Street   From Main Street to Fifth Street.
Fifth Street      From Warren Street to Peters Drive.
 
(Ord. 2006-11, 8-8-2006)
   (C)   No operator or driver of any vehicle on any street or highway within
the Village shall unnecessarily cause the vehicle he is driving to accelerate
excessively. For purposes of this section, to "accelerate excessively" shall
mean to cause the vehicle's tires to spin or lose traction on the pavement, or
to accelerate at a rate that is faster than ordinary and reasonable.
   (D)   The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable
maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed
when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going
around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or
winding roadway, or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or
other traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions. Speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on
or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of
all persons to use due care. (Ord., 11-10-1981)
9-1-2: PARKING:
   (A)   Parking or standing of any vehicle, trailer, or object of any type is
hereby prohibited on the streets stated as follows:
Alley north and east of St. Joseph- Both sides, from Main Street to Grand
Ogden High School (Spartan Drive)   Avenue.
Elm Street                          East side, between Grand Avenue and
                                    Orchard Street.
                                    North side, between Elm Street and the
Grand Avenue                        driveway on the south side of lot 6 of
                                    Castle's, Guy Subdivision No. 1 (700
                                    West Grand Avenue).
                                    Both sides, from Sportman's Club Road to
                                   the St. Joseph Community Park (on Glover
                                    Avenue).
                                   Both sides, north of Western Drive.
Main Street                         Both sides, between Warren Street and
                                    Grand Avenue.
                                    North side, between the hours of 7:00
Orchard Street                      A.M. and 4:00 P.M., Monday through
                                    Friday.
                                   South side.
Prospect                            North side, between Third Street and
                                    Main Street.
                                   Both sides, between Third Street and
                                    Fifth Street.
                                    South side, from Third Street west to a
Warren Street                       point 75 feet west of the west edge of
                                    the sidewalk on the west side of Third
                                    Street.
Second Street                       West side, between Warren Street and
                                    Orchard Street.
Fifth Street                        Both sides, from Ethel Street to
                                    Evergreen Drive.
Sixth Street                        West side, between Douglas Street and
                                    Ethel Street.
Eighth Street                       Both sides, between Warren Street and
                                    Grand Avenue.
 
(Ord. 2014-5, 11-11-2014)
   (B)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic
control device, no person shall stop a vehicle nor shall any person load or
unload passengers from a vehicle on the streets stated as follows:
 
Fifth Street West side, from Ethel Street to Prospect Street.
 
(Ord., 10-8-1991)
   (C)   No person shall park any semitrailer, pole trailer or trailer in
excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds or tandem vehicle in excess of sixteen
thousand (16,000) pounds on a street in a residential district for a period
longer than is necessary for the reasonably expeditious loading or unloading of
such vehicles. No such trailer shall be parked overnight in a residential
district. (Ord. 97-9, 9-23-1997)
   (D)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle or trailer of any type
on a public sidewalk or crosswalk, including the portion of the public sidewalk
which is also used as part of the access to a private or public driveway or
parking lot.
   (E)   Vehicles, trailers or other objects in violation of this section shall
be towed at the owner's expense and may be reclaimed upon payment of towing and
storage fees. This section may also be enforced pursuant to 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-1303 (2002).
   (F)   Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where parking, standing
or stopping is prohibited or limited hereby, except as to restrictions provided
in subsections (C) and (D) of this section.
   (G)   The Village President or his/her designee shall identify and
specifically mark in as practicably close to the designated location as
possible the following parking spaces to be designated as handicapped parking
spaces:
On the north side of Lincoln Street-the first space east of Main Street.
On the south side of Lincoln Street-the first space east of Main Street.
On the west side of Main Street-the first space south of Lincoln Street.
On the east side of Main Street-the fourth space south of Warren Street.
On the west side of Main Street-the sixth space south of Warren Street.
   (H)   On streets with curbs, no parking shall be allowed on the parkway.
   (I)   On streets with curbs, parked vehicles must be parked with right side
wheels parallel to and within twelve inches (12") of the curb on the right hand
side of the street.
   (J)   On streets without curbs, vehicles shall not be parked on the parkway
in a position that interferes with drainage or obstructs a sidewalk.
   (K)   Off street parking of motor vehicles shall be in accordance with the
provisions of title 10, chapter 11 of this code.
   (L)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles,
while the driver thereof is engaged in the performance of emergency duties, nor
shall said provisions apply to persons actually engaged in repairing or
otherwise improving the public right of way under the authority of the village
or the state of Illinois. (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2006-2, 1-24-2006; Ord. 2022-
12, 6-28-2022)
9-1-3: SCHOOL CROSSINGS:
School crossing signals shall be erected at the following locations, if such
locations are under the jurisdiction of the state of Illinois, department of
public works and buildings, the erection of such signals shall be subject to
the approval of said department:
Intersection of Fifth Street and Warren Street in the village.
(2005 Code)
9-1-4: TRACTION ENGINE:
Whenever any person wants to cross a street or sidewalk in the village with a
traction engine, he or she shall entirely cover the said street or sidewalk
with planks of a thickness of not less than two inches (2"). (2005 Code)
9-1-5: STOP STREETS:
Stop signs shall be placed at the following intersections:
Apple Tree Court at Apple Tree Court and Hawthorne Drive.
Aspen Court at Aspen and Locust Drive.
Birch Court at Birch and Locust Drive.
Bluestem Drive at Bluestem and Seventh.
Briarcliff Drive at Briarcliff and Main Street.
Briarcliff Drive at Briarcliff and Water Street.
Briarcliff Drive and Mark Place, all directions.
Catalpa Court at Catalpa and Winston Drive.
Cedar Drive at Cedar Drive and U.S. 150.
Cedar Drive and Magnolia Drive, all directions.
Cedar Drive and Peters Drive, all directions.
Chestnut Drive at Grand Avenue.
Chestnut Drive at Park Avenue.
Crestwood Drive at Crestwood and Grand Avenue.
Crestwood Drive at Crestwood and Warren Street.
Cypress Court at Cypress Court and Hawthorne Drive.
Douglas Street at Douglas and Elm Street.
Douglas Street at Douglas and Main Street.
Douglas Street at Douglas and Fifth Street.
Driveway opposite Thomas Drive at Lincoln Street.
Elm Street at Elm and Grand Avenue.
Elm Street at Elm and Warren Street.
Ethel Street at Ethel and Main Street.
Ethel Street at Harlan Wise Drive.
Ethel Street and Fifth Street, all directions.
Evergreen Drive at Evergreen and Main Street.
Evergreen Drive at Evergreen and Water Street.
Evergreen Drive at Evergreen and Fifth Street.
Evergreen Drive and Mark Place, all directions.
Grand Avenue and Cedar Drive, all directions.
Grand Avenue at Grand and Main Street.
Grand Avenue and Sportsman's Club Road (2350 E), all directions.
Grand Avenue and Third Street, all directions.
Grand Avenue and Eighth Street, all directions.
Grant Street at Grant and Fifth Street.
Grant Street at Grant and Seventh Street.
Harlan Wise Drive at Douglas Street.
Harlan Wise Drive at Peters Drive.
Hawthorne Drive at Hawthorne and Grand Avenue.
Holly Ridge Court at Grand Avenue.
Holzem Court at Holzem and Cedar Drive.
James Street at James and Elm Street.
Jeanes Drive at Jeanes and Main Street.
Juniper Court at Juniper and Winston Drive.
Laurel Drive at Grand Avenue.
Laurel Drive at Park Avenue.
Laurel Drive at Sherwood Drive.
Lincoln Street at Lincoln and Second Street.
Lincoln Street and Main Street, all directions.
Lincoln Street and Fifth Street, all directions.
Linden Drive at Linden and Grand Avenue.
Linden Drive at Linden and Warren Street.
Locust Drive and Cedar Drive, all directions.
Locust Drive at Chestnut Drive.
Main Street (southbound) at Main and Evergreen Drive.
Market Street at Market and Sherman Street.
Meadow Circle at Meadow Circle and Fourth Street.
Meadow Drive at Meadow Drive and Third Street.
Meadow Drive at Meadow Drive and Fourth Street.
Mimosa Drive at Mimosa and Linden Drive.
Monroe Street at Monroe and First Street.
North Glover Court at North Glover Court and Grand Avenue.
Northgate Drive at Northgate and Meadowsweet Drive.
Old Grand Avenue at Old Grand Avenue and Main Street.
Old Grand Avenue at Old Grand Avenue and Third Street.
Orchard Street at Orchard and Elm Street.
Park Avenue and Linden Drive, all directions.
Park Avenue and Magnolia Drive, all directions.
Park Avenue at Park Avenue and Balsam Drive.
Park Circle at Park Circle and Fourth Street.
Paul Court at Paul Court and Briarcliff Drive.
Prospect Street at Prospect and Main Street.
Prospect Street at Prospect and Fifth Street.
Reagan Drive at Cedar Drive.
Rosewood Drive at Rosewood and Grand Avenue.
Rosewood Drive at Rosewood and Park Avenue.
Rosewood Drive at Rosewood and Warren Street.
Sherman Street at Sherman and Elm Street.
Sherman Street at Sherman and Main Street.
Sherman Street at Sherman and Fifth Street.
Sherman Street at Sherman and Sixth Street.
Sherwood Drive and Grand Avenue, all directions.
Sherwood Drive and Park Avenue, all directions.
Sherwood Drive at Warren Street.
South Glover Court at South Glover Court and Grand Avenue.
Stout Street at Stout and Grand Avenue.
Stout Street at Stout and Warren Street.
Sycamore Drive at Sycamore and Grand Avenue.
Sycamore Drive at Sycamore and Magnolia Drive.
Thomas Drive at Thomas and Kara Avenue.
Thomas Drive at Thomas and Lincoln Street.
Walker Avenue at Walker and Stout Street.
Warren Street and Main Street, all directions.
Water Street (southbound) at Water and Elm Street.
Western Court at Grand Avenue.
Western Drive at Grand Avenue.
Wingstem Drive at Wingstem and Balsam Drive.
Wingstem Drive at Wingstem and Meadowsweet Drive.
Winston Drive at Winston and Locust Drive.
Woodland Drive at Woodland and Grand Avenue.
First Street (southbound) at First and Douglas Street.
First Street (northbound) at First and Sherman Street.
First Street at First and Warren Street.
Second Court at Second Court and Briarcliff Drive.
Second Street at Second and Douglas Street.
Second Street at Second and Sherman Street.
Second Street at Second and Warren Street.
Third Court at Third Court and Evergreen Drive.
Third Street at Third and Douglas Street.
Third Street at Third and Ethel Street.
Third Street at Third and Lincoln Street.
Third Street at Third and Prospect Street.
Third Street at Third and Sherman Street.
Third Street at Third and Warren Street.
Fourth Court at Fourth Court and Evergreen Drive.
Fourth Street at Fourth and Douglas Street.
Fourth Street at Fourth and Ethel Street.
Fourth Street at Fourth and Grand Avenue.
Fourth Street at Fourth and Lincoln Street.
Fourth Street at Fourth and Northgate Drive.
Fourth Street at Fourth and Prospect Street.
Fourth Street at Fourth and Sherman Street.
Fourth Street at Fourth and Warren Street.
Fifth Street at Fifth and Grand Avenue.
Fifth Street at Fifth and Warren Street.
Sixth Street at Sixth and Douglas Street.
Sixth Street at Sixth and Ethel Street.
Sixth Street at Sixth and Lincoln Street.
Seventh Street at Seventh and Douglas Street.
Seventh Street at Seventh and Ethel Street.
Seventh Street at Seventh and Grand Avenue.
Seventh Street at Seventh and Lincoln Street.
Seventh Street at Seventh and Warren Street.
Eighth Street at Eighth and Douglas Street.
Eighth Street at Eighth and Lincoln Street.
Eighth Street at Eighth and Warren Street.
(Ord., 11-10-1992; amd. Ord., 6-14-1994; Ord., 11-28-1994; Ord., 11-14-1995;
Ord. 97-13, 12-9-1997; Ord. 98-11, 10-13-1998; Ord., 3-9-1999; Ord. 00-05, 3-
28-2000; Ord. 2001-12, 11-13-2001; Ord. 2002-21, 5-14-2002; Ord. 2002-25, 8-27-
2002; Ord. 2002-27, 10-8-2002; Ord. 2002-33, 12-23-2002; Ord. 2003-10, 12-9-
2003; Ord. 2004-1, 2-10-2004; Ord. 2005-3, 3-22-2005; Ord. 2006-6, 6-27-2006;
Ord. 2006-8, 7-25-2006; Ord. 2008-9, 4-8-2008; Ord. 2008-14, 8-26-2008; Ord.
2010-11, 9-28-2010; Ord. 2013-4, 7-9-2013; Ord. 2018-5, 4-10-2018)
9-1-6: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The following streets and alleys shall be designated as one-way streets or
alleys, with the appropriate signs being erected:
   (A)   That portion of the alley running parallel with and located one-half
(1/2) block south of Lincoln Street between Main Street and Third Street in the
Village shall be restricted to eastbound traffic only.
   (B)   That portion of the alley running generally north-south and located
immediately south of Grand Avenue and one-half (1/2) block west of Main Street
(west side of Kilbury's Addition) in the Village shall be restricted to
northbound traffic only. (Ord. 2014-6, 11-11-2014)
9-1-7: SNOWMOBILES:
   (A)   Routes provided for snowmobiles on streets within the Village
boundaries shall be used for entry and exit from said Village and shall be used
for no other purpose, save for those specific instances where duly elected
Village officials request snowmobile assistance in times of emergency.
   (B)   Aforesaid routes shall consist of the following streets and no others:
Douglas Street, Fifth Street, Eighth Street, Elm Street (but only between Grand
Avenue on the north and James Street on the south and no farther in either
direction).
   (C)   Snowmobile owners and operators availing themselves of this benefit
conferred by the Village shall in consideration thereof agree to render forth
their snowmobiles and their personal services at the request of duly elected
Village officials in times of emergencies; said emergencies shall exist
whenever said officials at their discretion deem them to so exist. (Ord., 10-9-
1979)
   (D)   Snowmobile owners and operators shall travel in the right lane of
traffic on the aforesaid designated streets and shall not exceed the limits
provided for other vehicles. (2005 Code)
   (E)   Snowmobiles may not be operated in or on any Village park or other
public property within the Village except for as provided in this section.
(Ord. 2008-3, 1-22-2008)
9-1-8: EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES:
   (A)   Designation of Snow Routes: The following streets are hereby
designated as snow routes:
Grand Street     From Western Court to Glover Street.
Main Street      From Warren (HWY 150) to Grand Street.
Lincoln Street   From 2nd to Thomas Drive.
Main Street      From Warren (HWY 150) to Evergreen.
Evergreen Street From Elm Street to Harlen Wise Drive.
Sherman Street   From Elm Street to Main Street.
Ethel Street     From Harlen Wise Drive to 5th Street.
5th Street       From Peters Drive to Warren (HWY 150).
Third Street     From Warren (HWY 150) to Northgate Street.
 
   (B)   When Parking Prohibited: After notice, as provided in subsection (E)
of this section, that a two-inch (2") snowfall has accumulated, there shall be
no parking on either side of streets designated as snow routes until such time
as notice, as provided in subsection (E) of this section, is given that parking
may be resumed.
   (C)   Towing; Reclaiming: Vehicles parking on snow routes in violation of
this provision shall be towed and may be reclaimed upon payment of any towing
and storage fees.
   (D)   Erection Of Signs: Signs and such other devices shall be placed and
established as are necessary to identify the snow routes created hereby.
   (E)   Notice Of Two Inch Snowfall: The Village President, or other official
designated by the Village President, is hereby authorized and directed to
declare when two inches (2") of snow has accumulated, and to cause notice to be
given as follows: 1) to hang notices on the main door of all buildings located
on both sides of the streets of snow routes and 2) to place notices on the
windshields of all cars that are parked on said snow routes at the time of said
initial declaration, which shall be notice that the Village intends to remove
snow on such snow routes and to tow vehicles which are parked thereon at any
time more than four (4) hours after the time of the initial notices provided
above and which no parking restriction shall remain in effect until such time
as snow removal is completed and no further immediate accumulation of snow is
expected.” (Ord., 2-8-1994; amd. 2005 Code; Ord. 2022-04, 3-22-2022)
9-1-9: SKATEBOARDS, ROLLERBLADES AND ROLLER SKATES:
No person shall ride on a skateboard, rollerblades or roller skates on the
following streets and the public sidewalks and driveways adjacent thereto:
 
Lincoln Street From Second Street to Third Street.
Main Street    From Warren Street to Sherman Street.
 
(Ord., 3-12-1996)
9-1-10: HONORARY SIGNS:
   (A)   Defined. Members of the public and/ or Trustees may petition the Board
of Trustees to erect honorary street signs to provide special recognition of
individuals for past services as defined under this ordinance. Such signage
shall be known as being an “Honorary Sign” and shall be in such a form, color
and design and posted at such places as approved by the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Criteria. In order to approve an Honorary Sign, the Board of Trustees
shall consider a petition and any supporting statements and/or information
which support significant cultural, historical or humanitarian impact on the
Village by an individual, an organization, an entity or a significant event
with a history of good moral character. The location designated for the sign
must have a geographical relationship to the proposed honoree. There shall be
only two such designations per calendar year and will be granted on a first
submitted first granted basis.
   (C)   Application. To apply, a petitioner must submit a written application
to the Village providing the following information and signed by the
Petitioner:
      1.   Name, organization, address, contact, phone number and e-mail
address of the petitioner. Allows for one honoree per location (one block in
length).
      2.   The name of the Honoree and the requested location of the sign.
      3.   A detailed explanation for the basis of the request articulating the
cultural, historical, humanitarian and/or lineage to the Village that forms the
basis for the particular Honoree’s nomination.
      4.   An explanation of the reasoning for the requested location of the
Honorary sign.
      5.   If possible, a letter of consent from a duly authorized family
representative.
      6.   An Application Fee (refundable if application is denied) to be set
by the Village Administrator or President in an amount reflecting the cost to
the Village for such sign together with the cost of installation.
      7.   Deadline for application consideration for the calendar year
following December 31st.
   (D)   Time Limit. Honorary Signs shall be limited to being posted for five
(5) years at which time, the sign will be given to the petitioner. Application
can be renewed only upon approval by the Board of Trustees.
   (E)   Sign Design.
      1.   Legend will be white lettering on brown background.
      2.   Sign(s) will be installed by Village crews and shall remain in place
for a period of five years (60 months) with a date of removal to be noted on
the sign by Village staff.
      3.   Upon removal by Village crews, the sign(s) will be given to the
applicant and donated to the designee’s family.
      4.   Maintenance of the sign installation and/or replacement of the
various materials shall be at the expense of the dona tor. Failure to cover the
cost of the maintenance or replacement material(s) will cause the sign
installation to be removed immediately. (Ord. 2021-07, 10-26-2021)
CHAPTER 2
GOLF CARTS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Definitions
9-2-2: Operations On Streets
9-2-3: Registration Of Golf Carts, Neighborhood Vehicles And Utility Task
Vehicles
9-2-4: Operation On Certain Streets And Roads Prohibited
9-2-5: Obedience To Vehicle Code
9-2-6: Penalties
9-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
 
COUNTY ROADS:                        Include any roads outside the boundaries
                                     of the Village limits.
                                     A vehicle specifically designed and
                                     intended for the purposes of transporting
                                     one or more persons and their golf clubs
GOLF CART:                           or maintenance equipment while engaged in
                                     the playing of golf, supervising the play
                                     of golf, or maintaining the condition of
                                     the grounds on a public or private golf
                                     course. (625 ILCS 5/1-123.9)
                                     A self-propelled, electronically powered
                                     four (4) wheeled vehicle; or a self-
                                     propelled, gasoline powered, four (4)
                                     wheeled vehicle with an engine
                                     displacement under one thousand two
NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLE:                hundred (1,200) cubic centimeters; which
                                     is capable of attaining in one (1) mile a
                                     speed of more than twenty (20) miles per
                                     hour, but not more than twenty-five (25)
                                     miles per hour, and which conforms to
                                     federal regulations under title 49 CPR
                                     part 571.500.
                                     A self-propelled, electronically powered
                                     four (4) wheeled vehicle; or a self-
                                     propelled, gasoline powered four (4)
                                     wheeled motor vehicle witl1 bench or
                                     bucket seats, an engine displacement under
UTILITY TASK (SIDE BY SIDE) VEHICLE  one thousand two hundred (1,200) cubic
(UTV):                               centimeters which is capable of attaining
                                     in one (1) mile a speed of more than
                                     twenty (20) miles per hour, but not more
                                     than fifty (50) miles per hour, which is
                                     steered and maneuvered with a steering
                                     wheel.
                                     Any of the streets within the boundaries
                                     of the Village of St. Joseph, Illinois
VILLAGE STREETS:                     (hereinafter "Village") except for
                                     interstates, State and County roads. (Ord.
                                     2018-11, 11-13-2018; amd. Ord. 2022-15,
                                     10-25-2022)
 
9-2-2: OPERATIONS ON STREETS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate an all-terrain vehicle as defined by
625 ILCS 5/1-101.8.
   (B)   It shall be lawful for a qualified person to operate a Golf Cart,
Neighborhood Vehicle and Utility Tas Vehicle (UTV) on designated streets within
the Village, subject to the provisions of this Article.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a Golf Cart,
Neighborhood Vehicle and Utility Task Vehicle (UTV) on any street in the
Village, unless:
      1.   The driver is at least sixteen (16) years of age and has a valid
driver's license; and
      2.   The vehicle is properly titled with the Illinois Secretary of State,
if required; and
      3.   Has the minimum required liability insurance as set out in 65 ILCS
5/7-601 et seq., and maintains proof of said insurance specifically for the
Golf Cart, Neighborhood Vehicle and Utility Task Vehicle (UTV) to be operated
on Village streets within the permitted vehicle; and
      4.   Has been properly registered with the Village and must display such
registration as required in this chapter; and
      5.   Has the following required, operable equipment:
         (a)   Brakes.
         (b)   Steering wheel apparatus.
         (c)   Tires.
         (d)   A driver's side outside mirror and either an interior rearview
mirror or a passenger side outside mirror.
         (e)   Red reflector warning devices in the front and rear.
         (f)   A slow moving emblem on the rear of the vehicle.
         (g)   A headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of
five hundred feet (500') to the front, illuminated at all times when operated
on Village streets.
         (h)   A tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least one
hundred feet (100') from the rear, illuminated at all times when operated on
Village streets.
         (i)   At least two (2) brake lights which emit a red light visible
from a distance of one hundred feet (100') from the rear.
         (j)   Turn signals mounted to the front and rear of the vehicle.
         (k)   Windshield.
         (l)   Horn which is audible from a distance of two hundred feet
(200').
   (D)   All persons eligible to operate a Golf Cart, Neighborhood Vehicle and
Utility Task Vehicle on designated streets of the Village must comply with the
following requirements:
      1.   Must not exceed the lower of the posted speed limit or twenty-five
(25) miles per hour.
      2.   Shall only be operated from five o'clock (5:00) A.M. until ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Central).
      3.   Shall not be operated in inclement weather, nor when visibility is
impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or at any time when there
is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a
distance of five hundred feet (500').
      4.   Each driver and passenger of a Golf Cart, Neighborhood Vehicle and
Utility Task Vehicle shall wear a properly fastened and adjusted seat safety
belt. Children must be secured in a child restraint system as required pursuant
to the child passenger protection act.
      5.   A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a Golf Cart,
Neighborhood Vehicle and Utility Task Vehicle on a roadway while under the
influence of alcohol or drugs is subject to 625 ILCS 11- 500 through 11-502.
(Ord. 2022-15, 10-25-2022)
9-2-3: REGISTRATION OF GOLF CARTS, NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLES AND UTILITY TASK
VEHICLES:
   (A)   Permit. A permit shall be issued within seven (7) days upon the
approval of an application from an owner of a Golf Cart, Neighborhood Vehicle
and Utility Task Vehicle to operate a Golf Cart, Neighborhood Vehicle and
Utility Task Vehicle upon the streets and roadways within the jurisdiction of
the Village, except where expressly prohibited.
   (B)   Application. Any person requesting a permit shall submit to the
Village Administrator or his/her designee on a form supplied by the Village
which shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   An application which contains the owner’s name, address, phone
number, driver’s license number, vehicle identification number (VIN), make and
model of vehicle.
      2.   Proof of valid insurance information, which meets the requirements
of 625 ILCS 5/7-601 et seq., specifically for the Golf Cart, Neighborhood
Vehicle and Utility Task Vehicle to be operated on Village streets.
      3.   Signed and notarized waiver of liability by applicant releasing the
Village from any and all future claims resulting from the operation of their
Golf Cart, Neighborhood Vehicle and Utility Task Vehicle pursuant to this
Chapter or any other ordinance of the Village.
      4.   Present the vehicle for physical inspection to ensure that the
vehicle is safe to operate on Village streets and is in compliance with the
requirements of this Article. A Golf Cart, Neighborhood Vehicle and Utility
Task Vehicle will be allowed to be driven to the Village Hall to have the
vehicle inspected and permitted, if the requester has called ahead and arranged
with the Village Administrator (or designee) a specific meeting time.
   (C)   Fee. An annual registration effective May 1st through April 30th each
year and permit fee of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) for applicants age sixty-
five (65) or older and Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per year for all other applicants
shall be submitted at the time of the application for the permit, and subject
to renewal thereafter.
   (D)   Permit Renewal. A permit shall be valid for the period of one (1) year
from May 1st though April 30th the following calendar year may be renewed upon
application of the owner, in compliance with paragraph (B) of this Section.
   (E)   Transferability. A permit is nontransferable.
   (F)   Change of Contact Information. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to inform the Police Department of any change of address, phone number,
or insurance coverage, within ten (10) business days of such change.
   (G)   Denial of Permit. A permit shall be denied only for the following
reasons:
      1.   The vehicle is not properly titled with the Illinois Secretary of
State, if required,
      2.   The insurance information for the vehicle cannot be verified,
      3.   The registered owner does not have a valid driver’s license,
      4.   The owner has provided any false information in their application,
      5.   The vehicle does not conform to the requirements of this Article.
      6.   The vehicle is otherwise precluded from public roadways by
applicable law.
   (H)   False Information. It shall be unlawful for anyone to provide false
information in the application for a permit to operate a Golf Cart, Utility
Task Vehicle (UTV) and/or Neighborhood Vehicle. (Ord. 2022-15, 10-25-2022)
9-2-4: OPERATION ON CERTAIN STREETS AND ROADS PROHIBITED:
Golf Carts may not be operated on sidewalks, Village parks or other Village
property other than parking areas, and streets as provided herein.
   (A)   Golf Carts may be operated on Village streets, except as provided
herein, which have a posted speed limit of thirty five (35) miles per hour or
less, but Golf Carts are not authorized to exceed a speed of twenty five (25)
miles per hour. Persons driving a Golf Cart are to pull over to the right side
of the road and stop, yielding the right-of-way to approaching traffic from
behind.
   (B)   Golf Carts, Utility Task Vehicles (UTV) and/or Neighborhood Vehicles
are not authorized to be operated on the following national, State or County
highways or Village streets except to cross said highways/streets at
intersections with another public street authorized herein, in a path
approximately ninety degrees (90°) to said highways/streets, after said Golf
Cart comes to a complete stop, yielding the right-of-way to all pedestrian and
vehicular traffic which constitutes a hazard, as provided herein:
      1.   Interstate 74.
      2.   State Route 150 (Warren Street) - except to cross at 2nd Street or
5th Street.
      3.   Main Street - north of Douglas Street - except to cross at Lincoln
Street or Old Grand Ave.
      4.   Sherman Street - between Main Street and Elm Street.
      5.   Sportsman Club Road - except to cross at Grand Ave.
      6.   Elm Street - south of Sherman Street - except to cross at James
Street/Douglas Street. (Ord. 2022-15, 10-25-2022)
9-2-5: OBEDIENCE TO VEHICLE CODE:
   (A)   Every operator of a Golf Cart, Neighborhood Vehicle and Utility Task
Vehicle shall obey all sections of 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., the Illinois
Vehicle code, and all provisions of this Article.
   (B)   The Village may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a
finding that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this
Article or if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate
the motorized Golf Cart, Neighborhood Vehicle or Utility Task Vehicle on the
designated roadways.
   (C)   Every person operating a Golf Cart, Neighborhood Vehicle or Utility
Task Vehicle pursuant to a permit hereunder on designated Village streets has
all the rights and duties applicable to a driver of any other vehicle pursuant
to the state highway traffic laws and regulations except when those provisions
cannot reasonably be applied to motorized Golf Carts, Neighborhood Vehicles or
Utility Task Vehicle. (Ord. 2022-15, 10-25-2022)
9-2-6: PENALTIES:
   (A)   A violation of this Article shall be punishable by a fine of Three
Hundred Dollars ($300.00) which, if paid at the Village Hall, within 30 days of
issuance shall be discounted to Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00). Any violation
tied to lack of permit shall have the relevant fine reduced by the amount of
the registration fee paid if a permit has been secured after the issuance of
the notice of violation.
   (B)   A second conviction for a violation of this Article within one (1)
year of the date of a prior conviction shall result in suspension of permit, to
be reinstated only by the President.
   (C)   Upon conviction of operating a Golf Cart, Neighborhood Vehicle or
Utility Task Vehicle or on a state highway, other than crossing at the
designated locations, shall result in a fine no less than Seven Hundred Fifty
Dollars ($750.00) and the suspension of permit for one (1) year. (Ord. 2022-15,
10-25-2022)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, AND APPLICABILITY
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Applicability
10-1-4: Transition Rules
10-1-5: Severability
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title is a recodification of the St. Joseph Zoning Ordinance as adopted by
Ordinance No. 2005-12A on September 13, 2005. This title as so recodified shall
be known and may be cited as the "St. Joseph Zoning Ordinance," or "Zoning
Ordinance" or "Ordinance." (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
The intent of this Zoning Ordinance is to establish land use regulations to
serve the village. The purposes of this Zoning Ordinance are:
   (A)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (B)   To secure adequate light, air, privacy, and convenience of access to
property.
   (C)   To promote the orderly development of St. Joseph in accordance with
the comprehensive plan.
   (D)   To protect the character and maintain the stability of St. Joseph's
established land use areas.
   (E)   To divide the village into zoning districts according to use of land
and structures, height and bulk of structures, intensity of the use of lot
area, area of open spaces, or other classification, as deemed best suited to
carry out the purposes of this title.
   (F)   To establish reasonable standards to which structures must conform.
   (G)   To prevent the overcrowding of land and the undue concentration of
structures by regulating and limiting the use and bulk of structures in
relation to the surrounding land.
   (H)   To regulate the intensity of the use of land.
   (I)   To provide for safe and efficient traffic circulation.
   (J)   To prohibit uses or structures incompatible with the character of
development or intended uses within specified zoning districts.
   (K)   To protect against fire, explosions, noxious fumes, and other dangers.
   (L)   To otherwise avoid or decrease the hazards to persons or damage to
property resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm water and
floodwater.
   (M)   To provide for the gradual elimination of nonconformities.
   (N)   To prevent additions to and alteration or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations lawfully imposed under this title. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   Territorial Application: This title applies to all land use, and
structures within the corporate limits of the Village.
   (B)   General Application: The regulations established by this title are the
minimum regulations for the promotion and protection of the public health,
safety, and welfare.
   (C)   Compliance With Regulations:
      1.   Any portion or whole of a structure must be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, and enlarged in conformance with the requirements of this
title.
      2.   Any structure or land must be used and occupied in conformance with
the requirements of this title.
   (D)   Relation To Private Agreements: This title does not nullify any
private agreement or covenant. However, where this title is more restrictive
than a private agreement or covenant, this title controls.
   (E)   Relation To Other Laws And Regulations: Unless otherwise specifically
provided, this title controls over less restrictive Village statutes,
ordinances, or regulations, and more restrictive Village statutes, ordinances,
or regulations control over the provisions of this title.
   (F)   Rules Of Construction: To the extent that there is any inconsistency
between the text of this title and any illustrations or graphics, this text
controls. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-1-4: TRANSITION RULES:
   (A)   Existing Illegal Structures And Uses: A structure or use that is
illegal at the time of the adoption of, but is made legal by the provisions of
this title, is deemed lawful as of the effective date of this title. However,
if that structure or use does not conform to every requirement of this title,
then that structure or use remains illegal.
   (B)   Existing Uses:
      1.   If a structure or land is used in a manner that was classified as a
permitted use prior to the effective date of this title, and now that use is
classified as a special use as of the effective date of this title, that use is
deemed a lawful special use. Any subsequent addition, enlargement or expansion
of that use must conform to the procedural and substantive requirements of this
title for special uses.
      2.   If a structure or land is used in a manner that was classified as a
special use prior to the effective date of this title, and that use is now
classified as a permitted use as of the effective date of this title, that use
is deemed a lawful permitted use. Any subsequent addition, enlargement, or
expansion of that use must conform to any title requirements for such permitted
use and is no longer subject to the conditional use ordinance under which it
was originally approved.
      3.   If a structure or land is used in a manner that was classified as
permitted or special use prior to the effective date of this title, but this
title no longer classifies that use as either a permitted or special use in the
zoning district in which it is located, that use is deemed a nonconforming use
and is controlled by the provisions of Chapter 10-12 (Nonconformities).
   (C)   Structures Rendered Nonconforming: If a structure lawfully existing on
the effective date of this title was a conforming structure before the
effective date of this title, but such structure does not meet all standards
set forth in this title in the zoning district in which it is located, that
structure is deemed a nonconforming structure and is controlled by the
provisions of Chapter 10-12 (Nonconformities).
   (D)   Lots Rendered Nonconforming: If a lot of record lawfully existing on
the effective date of this title was a conforming lot before the effective date
of this title, but such lot does not meet all standards set forth in this title
in the zoning district in which it is located, that lot is deemed a
nonconforming lot of record and is controlled by the provisions of Chapter 10-
12 (Nonconformities).
   (E)   Previously Issued Zoning Permits: If a zoning permit for a structure
was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this title, and if
construction has begun within one hundred eighty (180) days of the issuance of
that permit and diligently pursued to completion, the structure may be
completed in accordance with the plans on the basis of which the building
permit was issued and may, upon completion, be occupied under an occupancy
permit for the use originally intended.
   (F)   Previously Granted Special Uses And Variations: All special uses and
variations granted prior to the effective date of this title, except as deemed
permitted or legal by this title, remain in full force and effect. The
recipient of the special use or variation may proceed to develop the property
in accordance with the approved plans and all applicable conditions. However,
if the recipient has failed to act on the special use or variation before the
approval expires, including any periods of extension granted, the provisions of
this title will govern.
   (G)   Previous Adopted Zoning Ordinances: Existing structures and uses that
were in compliance with previous Zoning Ordinances or previously permitted, and
not in compliance with current Zoning Ordinance, shall be grandfathered in
under new Zoning Ordinances, until such time that property owner requests or
proposes changes to property dimensions, zoning district, structure, land use,
setbacks, or variances. At such time of request, proposed modifications shall
follow current title version. Existing structures or uses that were not
previously in compliance with past Zoning Ordinances or previously permitted,
except for subsection (A) above, shall remain out of compliance with new Zoning
Ordinances.
   (H)   Pending Applications: An application that has been deemed complete and
scheduled for a public hearing or meeting, as applicable, is subject to the
title requirements in effect on the date the application was deemed complete.
(Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-1-5: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence or provision of this
title is adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, that
judgment does not affect, impair, invalidate or nullify the remainder of this
title. The effect of the judgment is confined to the section, paragraph,
subdivision, clause, sentence or provision immediately involved in the
controversy in which judgment or decree was rendered. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Rules Of Interpretation
10-2-2: Definitions
10-2-1: RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   (A)   Any term not defined in this title shall have the meaning of common or
standard use.
   (B)   When it is consistent with the context, the following use of words
applies for purposes of this title:
      1.   The present tense shall refer also to the future.
      2.   The singular shall also refer to the plural, and vice versa.
      3.   The masculine gender includes the feminine.
      4.   The word "shall" is used to indicate a mandatory requirement, and
not a suggestion.
      5.   Requirements that apply to a "person" and are defined as such also
apply to a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company,
corporation or governmental body.
      6.   The words "Village" and "Municipality" will mean the Village of St.
Joseph, Illinois.
      7.   The acronym "PZC" will mean the Village of St. Joseph Planning and
Zoning Commission authorized to exercise the statutory powers granted to plan
commissions, zoning boards of appeal, and other zoning functions under the
Illinois Municipal Code or as assigned by the Board of Trustees.
      8.   The words "Administrator"; "Zoning Administrator"; "Zoning Official"
or "Zoning Officer" shall refer to the official appointed by the Village
President with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees to
administer this title, or his representative.
      9.   The words "Village Board" shall mean the President and Board of
Trustees of the Village.
      10.   All distances shall be measured to the nearest integral foot; six
inches or more shall be considered one foot.
      11.   The body text of this title shall govern over any title, subtitle,
or heading. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE,         A structure, building, or use on the same lot with a principal structure,
ACCESSORY          building, or use, but of a customarily subordinate or incidental nature.
BUILDING, OR
ACCESSORY USE:
                   A business that sells or disseminates explicit sexual material, and at which
ADULT USE:         access to the public display of explicit sexual material is restricted to
                   persons 18 years of age or older. An adult bookstore, adult cabaret, or adult
                   motion picture theater are considered adult uses and are defined as follows:
                   A business that offers for sale or rent fifteen percent (15%) or more of
                   materials consisting of any of the following: publications, books, magazines,
                   periodicals, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, DVD, or other
   ADULT RETAIL:video reproductions, or other visual representations that depict or describe
                   specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or instruments,
                   devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified
                   sexual activities.
                   A business where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion
                   picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines are used to show files,
   ADULT ARCADE:motion pictures, video cassettes, DVD, slides, computer generated graphics, or
                   other photographic reproductions that are characterized by an emphasis upon the
                   depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
                   areas.
                   A business that features dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers or similar
                   entertainers, or live entertainment, in which persons regularly appear in a
                   state of nudity, or where live performances are characterized by the exposure of
   ADULT CABARETspecified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. Adult cabaret
                   establishments specifically exclude minors, or minor are specifically prohibited
                   by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether any such business is licensed to
                   sell alcoholic beverages.
   ADULT MOTION A business used for presenting motion pictures that are distinguished or
   PICTURE      characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
   THEATER:     specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by
                   patrons.
   ADULT HOTEL/ A hotel or motel or similar business establishment that rents, leases, or lets
   MOTEL:       any room for less than a six-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single
                   room more than twice in a 24-hour period.
   The following definitions describe the sexually-oriented activities contained
   within the general definitions for the above adult uses:
   SEXUALLY     Any artificial or simulated specified anatomical area or other device or
   ORIENTED     paraphernalia that is designed in whole or part for specified sexual activities.
   DEVICES:
   SEXUALLY     Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals, pubic region, buttock, and
   ANATOMICAL   female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or human
   AREA:        male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
                   covered.
   SPECIFIED    Any activity that includes human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
   SEXUAL       arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; or fondling
   ACTIVITIES:  or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female
                   breasts, even if completely and opaquely covered.
                   An unnamed public right-of-way that is primarily designed to serve as a
ALLEY:             secondary means of vehicular access to the rear or side of abutting premises
                   that front on a nearby street.
                   Any change in the bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or supporting members
ALTERATION:        of a structure, any change or rearrangement in the floor area of a building, any
                   enlargement of a structure whether by extending horizontally or by increasing in
                   height, or any movement of a structure from one location or position to another.
                   A facility that contains a combination of housing, supportive services,
                   personalized assistance, and health care designed to respond to the individual
                   needs of residents aged fifty five (55) and over who need help with activities
ASSISTED/          of daily living. Facilities have separate bedrooms or living quarters. The
INDEPENDENT LIVING emphasis of the facility remains residential, with nursing care not provided
FACILITY:          twenty four (24) hours a day. The facility may include communal kitchen, dining,
                   and recreational facilities. Those providing services to the residents may or
                   may not reside on the premises. An Assisted/Independent Living Facility may not
                   house a "service dependent population" as defined in this Chapter.
BASEMENT:          A portion of a building partly underground, but having less than half its clear
                   height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
BED AND BREAKFAST  An operator-occupied residence providing accommodations for a charge to the
INN:               public with up to five rooms for rent, with breakfast or refreshments provided
                   as an option to guests of the establishment.
                   All property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets or between
BLOCK, FRONT:      an intersecting street and the dead end of a street, measured along the line of
                   street.
BOARDING HOUSE:    A dwelling unit, or part thereof in which, for compensation, lodging and meals
                   are provided for up to five guests only by means of a single common kitchen.
                   An enclosed structure having a roof supported by walls, columns, or other
BUILDING:          devices, and used for the housing, shelter, enclosure, and support of
                   individuals, animals, or property of any kind.
BUILDING           A non-accessory building in which the principal use of the premises is
PRINCIPAL:         conducted.
BUILDING           The line nearest the front of and across a lot, delineating the minimum open
RESTRICTION LINE:  space required between the front of a structure and the street right-of-way
                   line.
                   A portion of the building located partly or wholly underground and having one-
CELLAR:            half or more of its floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the
                   adjoining ground.
                   A place used for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or
CLINIC:            injured persons and those who are in need of medical or surgical attention, but
                   who are not provided with board or kept overnight on the premises.
COMMERCIAL USE OR  Any use or establishment wherein goods or services are purchased or sold,
COMMERICAL         whether to the consuming public (retail) or to other businesses (wholesale).
ESTABLISHMENT:
                   A dwelling operated under state license or certification, or contract to provide
                   supervision, food, lodging, or other services to a service dependent population,
COMMUNITY LIVING   living and cooking together in a single cooperative housekeeping unit,
FACILITY:          consisting of: a basic group of members of a service dependent population and
                   additional staff persons providing supervision of service to the basic group, as
                   specified in aforesaid licensing, certification or contract regulations.
   CATEGORY I   A community living facility intended for permanent placements, and not for
   COMMUNITY    crisis or short term, transient placements, with a basic group limited to not
   LIVING       more than five service dependent individuals plus a maximum of two live in staff
FACILITY:          at any given time, subject to a higher number of staff if required to meet state
                   or federal regulations.
   CATEGORY II  A community living facility intended for permanent placements, and not for
   COMMUNITY    crisis or short term, transient placements, with a basic group limited to not
   LIVING       more than eight service dependent individuals plus a maximum of two live in
FACILITY:          staff at any given time, subject to a higher number of staff if required to meet
                   state or federal regulations.
   CATEGORY III A community living facility that may be used for temporary placement of service
   COMMUNITY    dependent individuals, with a basic group limited to not more than fifteen (15)
   LIVING       service dependent individuals plus a maximum of four live in staff at any time,
FACILITY:          subject to a higher number if required to meet state or federal regulations.
                   The growing, harvesting, and storing of crops, including legumes, hay, grain,
                   fruit, truck or vegetable crops, floriculture, horticulture, mushroom growing,
CROP PRODUCTION:   orchards, and forestry; accessory farm dwellings; and accessory farm buildings
                   used for growing, harvesting, or preparing crop products for market or for use
                   on the farm.
                   A building or portion thereof, used to receive adults, for short term hours of
DAYCARE CENTER,    care, not providing for overnight occupancy, and used to provide essential
ADULT:             personal care, protection, supervision, training, or programs to meet the needs
                   of the adults served, but which shall not include day/night care home.
                   A building or portion thereof, used to receive infants, preschool, school age
DAYCARE CENTER/    children, or combinations thereof, for short term hours of care, not providing
NURSERY SCHOOL:    for overnight occupancy, and used to provide essential personal care,
                   protection, supervision, training, or programs to meet the needs of the children
                   served, but which shall not include school or day/night care home.
                   A dwelling unit actually occupied by a family, which is used or designed to be
                   used for care of not more than eight children under the age of sixteen (16)
DAY/NIGHT CARE     years who are not part of the family occupying the dwelling unit; provided that
HOME:              the maximum of eight children includes all children under the age of sixteen
                   (16) years who are part of the family occupying the dwelling unit, and provided
                   further that any children who are not part of the family are received for care
                   for less than twenty four (24) consecutive hours.
                   Any building, or portion thereof, designed and used primarily as living quarters
DWELLING:          for one or more families, but not including hotels, motels, and other
                   accommodations for the transient public.
DWELLING, MULTI-   A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units, but not including a row
FAMILY:            house or townhouse building.
DWELLING, SINGLE-  A dwelling containing one dwelling unit.
FAMILY:
DWELLING, TWO-     A dwelling containing two dwelling units.
FAMILY:
DWELLING UNIT:     A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by one family for
                   residential purposes and having a kitchen and bathroom.
                   A multiple-family structure, controlled by either a public body, institutional
ELDERLY HOUSING,   body, or nonprofit corporation, 80 percent of whose occupants shall be 65 years
RETIREMENT         of age or over, and where the rental agreement includes a requirement that all
HOUSING:           members of each household consume at least one meal per day in a congregate
                   dining facility contained with the multiple-family structure.
                   A family is defined as:
                   1.   A person living alone; or
                   2.   Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption and
                   maintaining a common household; or
FAMILY:            3.   Up to four (4) persons unrelated to each other by blood, marriage, or legal
                   adoption and maintaining a common household; or
                   4.   Members of a service dependent population residing in a community living
                   facility as defined in this chapter, together with his, her, or their domestic
                   servants and gratuitous guests.
                   The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building, measured from
FLOOR AREA:        the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls
                   separating buildings, but not including cellar or basement space not used for
                   retailing and not including accessory off street parking or loading space.
FRONTAGE:          The portion of a lot abutting a street.
GARAGE:            A structure designed and primarily used for the storage of motor vehicles.
GOVERNMENT         A structure or portion thereof used for the operations of any unit of
BUILDINGS:         government, and not leased or operated as a private enterprise.
HEIGHT, AS APPLIED The vertical measurement between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
TO A STORY:        floor next above it, or if there is no floor above, then the vertical
                   measurement between the surface of the floor and the ceiling next above it.
HEIGHT, AS APPLIED The vertical measurement from grade to a point midway between the highest and
TO A BUILDING:     lowest points of the roof.
HEIGHT, AS APPLIED The vertical measurement from the average level of the surface of the ground
TO A STRUCTURE,    immediately surrounding such structure to the uppermost portion of such
UNENCLOSED OR      structure.
DETACHED:
                   Where such structure is attached to another structure and is in direct contact
HEIGHT, AS APPLIED with the surface of the ground, the vertical measurement from the average level
TO A STRUCTURE,    of the surface of the ground immediately adjoining such structure to the
ENCLOSED OR        uppermost portion of such structure shall be the height. Where such structure is
ATTACHED:          attached to another structure and is not in direct contact with the surface of
                   the ground, the vertical measurement from the lowest portion of such structure
                   to the uppermost portion shall be the height.
HELIPORT-          Any area described or defined as a restricted landing area - heliport under the
RESTRICTED LAND    Illinois Aviation Safety Rules (92 Ill. Admin. Code Part 14) and that is further
AREAS:             regulated under the rules for restricted landing areas by the Illinois
                   Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics.
                   Any occupation for gain or support carried on as an accessory use in a dwelling
HOME OCCUPATION:   unit or accessory structure to that dwelling unit by a resident of that dwelling
                   unit, and meeting the limitations specified in chapter 10-4 of this title.
HOSPITAL:          A building or portion thereof used for the treatment of sick, injured, or infirm
                   persons and licensed as a hospital by the State.
                   A building in which lodging or lodging and meals are regularly provided or
HOTEL:             offered to the public for compensation and that is customarily open to transient
                   guests.
                   The manufacturing of finished products or parts from previously prepared
                   materials, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging
INDUSTRIAL -       of such products, and storage, sales, and distribution of such products,
LIGHT/LIGHT        provided that all industrial activities and any noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare,
ASSEMBLY:          or vibration resulting from the industrial activities are contained entirely
                   within a building. A light industrial use may also include a showroom, ancillary
                   sales of products related to the items manufactured or stored on- site, and/or
                   ancillary outdoor storage.
                   The manufacturing of products from processed or unprocessed raw materials,
                   including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, storage,
INDUSTRIAL -       sales, and/or distributions of such products. This manufacturing may produce
GENERAL:           noise, vibrations, illumination, or particulate that is perceptible to adjacent
                   land users but is not offensive or obnoxious. General industrial uses may also
                   include ancillary outdoor storage areas.
                   The manufacturing or compounding of raw materials, which may include the storage
                   of large volumes of highly flammable, toxic, or explosive matter. This
INDUSTRIAL -       manufacturing may involve outdoor operations as part of their manufacturing
HEAVY:             process. Heavy manufacturing processes have greater than average impacts on the
                   environment, and may have significant impacts on the use and enjoyment of
                   adjacent property in terms of noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health and
                   safety hazards.
                   Any public, quasi-public, or non-profit use including, but not limited to, a
INSTITUTIONAL USE: library, park, public or private school, hospital, or any other structure or
                   land used exclusively for any such public, quasi-public, or nonprofit purpose.
                   Any structure within which or premises on which six or more dogs or six or more
KENNEL:            cats (or any combination thereof) at least six months of age are kept, boarded,
                   or retained, for compensation. This definition excludes commercial breeding as
                   part of a kennel operation.
                   A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this
LOT:               title in accordance with the provisions of this title, and having its principal
                   frontage upon a street.
                   A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, where the corner
                   interior angle formed by the intersection is 135 degrees or less; or a lot
   CORNER LOT:  abutting upon a curved street or streets if tangents to the curve at the two
                   points where the lot lines meet the curve form an interior angle of less than
                   135 degrees.
   INTERIOR LOT:A lot other than a corner lot.
   THROUGH LOT: A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets.
LOT AREA:          The horizontal projection of a parcel of land or a body of water or combination
                   of both, exclusive of any portion of the right-of-way of any street.
LOT COVERAGE:      The portion of a lot that is occupied by buildings or structures including
                   accessory buildings or structures.
LOT DEPTH:         The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line
                   of a lot.
LOT LINES:         The lines bounding a lot.
LOT OF RECORD:     A lot or parcel of land, the plat, map, or deed to which has been recorded in
                   the office of the Champaign County Recorder prior to the adoption of this title.
LOT WIDTH:         The lot area divided by the lot depth or, alternatively, the diameter of the
                   largest circle that will fit entirely within the lot lines.
                   A structure, transportable in one or more sections, that while in the traveling
                   mode is eight feet or more in width or forty feet (40') or more in length, or,
                   when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) square feet or more, and
MANUFACTURED HOME  that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with
OR MOBILE HOME:    or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
                   includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems
                   contained therein. This definition excludes: motor vehicles, boat trailers;
                   single or dual axle utility trailers; specified construction trailers, campers,
                   trailers, or recreational vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME  A contiguous parcel of land planned and approved for the placement of mobile
PARK:              homes or manufactured homes.
                   A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered with and/
MEDICAL MARIJUANA  or licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to perform necessary
CULTIVATION        activities to provide usable medical cannabis to only medical cannabis
CENTER:            dispensaries registered with and/or licensed by the Illinois Department of
                   Financial and Professional Regulation.
                   A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered with and/
                   or licensed by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation
MEDICAL MARIJUANA  to acquire medical cannabis from only medical cannabis cultivation centers
DISPENSARY:        registered with and/or licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture, for
                   dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or related supplies and educational
                   materials to qualifying patients.
                   A dwelling that is manufactured in a production facility and assembled on
MODULAR HOME:      location. The assembly process typically uses a traditional, permanent stick-
                   built home foundation. Unlike a mobile home or a manufactured home, a modular
                   home cannot be moved once built.
                   A building in which lodging or lodging and meals are regularly provided or
MOTEL:             offered to the public for compensation and that is customarily open to transient
                   guests, and that is distinguished from a hotel primarily by reason of providing
                   direct independent access to, and adjoining parking for each lodging unit.
NONCONFORMING LOT, A lot, sign, structure, or use that lawfully existed on the effective date of
NONCONFORMING      the adoption or amendment of this title that does not conform to the regulations
STRUCTURE, OR      and standards of the zoning district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE:
OPERATIONS:        The processing, assembly, fabrication, or handling of materials or products or
                   movement of bulk materials or products not in containers or pipelines.
                   An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, company,
OWNER, OWNERSHIP:  organization, trust, or any other legal entity having a proprietary interest in
                   a use, structure, premises, lot or tract of land.
PARCEL:            A designated tract of land entered as a separate item on the real estate tax
                   assessment rolls for the purpose of taxation.
PARKING SPACE:     A space accessory to a use or structure and meeting the requirements of this
                   title that is intended for the parking of one vehicle.
PLAT, LOT:         A drawing of a lot showing its dimensions, the building arrangement thereon and
                   such other information as may be needed for enforcement of this title.
POOL:              An artificially created container or tank capable of containing water for any
                   period of time.
PREMISES:          A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon.
                   A dwelling unit operated for the purpose of promoting the joint rehabilitation
                   of its occupants from alcohol or drug addiction. A recovery home shall be
                   registered with an appropriate local authority and shall be limited to not more
                   than eight individuals recovering from alcohol or drug addiction and up to two
                   live-in staff members. The occupants of a recovery home shall not include
                   persons for whom such course of rehabilitation is a requirement of a sentence
RECOVERY HOME:     upon conviction of a criminal offense, nor shall it include those for whom the
                   need for such rehabilitation occurs during or immediately following a sentence
                   of incarceration for a criminal offense. Occupants of said home shall also not
                   include any individual who has been convicted of either the manufacture or
                   delivery of a controlled substance as prohibited by the Illinois Controlled
                   Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq., or as prohibited by any other similar
                   law from another jurisdiction.
                   Any vehicle or boat designed for temporary living quarters, recreation, or
RECREATIONAL       temporary human habitation and not used as a commercial vehicle, including, but
VEHICLE:           not limited to, the following: boat/watercraft, camper trailer, conversion vans,
                   motor home, motorized trailer, off-the-road vehicle, racing car or cycle, travel
                   trailer, truck camper, and utility or haul trailer.
                   Housing for three or more individuals unrelated by blood, marriage, adoption, or
RESIDENTIAL CARE   guardianship which receive some form of nursing care, supervision, or assistance
FACILITY:          from employees at the facility. Nursing care and support staff are available
                   twenty four (24) hours a day. Included are nursing homes, sheltered care
                   facilities, intermediate care facility, and other similar uses.
RESTRICTED LANDING Any area described or defined as a Restricted Landing Area under the Illinois
AREA:              Aviation Safety Rules (92 Ill. Admin. Code Part 14) and as further regulated by
                   the Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics.
RIGHT-OF-WAY:      The entire dedicated tract or strip of land that is to be used by the public for
                   circulation and service.
                   A building that contains a row of two or more single-family attached dwelling
ROW HOUSE          units, each unit being separated from the adjoining units in each story by walls
BUILDING:          without openings, and each unit having independent access to the exterior of the
                   building in the ground story and each unit being located on a separate lot.
ROW HOUSE          A dwelling unit that is part of a row house building.
DWELLING:
                   A structure, fence, wall, or planting of sufficient opaqueness or density and
SCREEN:            maintained such that it completely or partially obscures from view throughout
                   its height the premises upon which it is located in accordance with regulations
                   in chapter 10-5 of this title.
                   Those persons, who by reason of mental or physical disability require
                   supervision in a quasi-parental relationship, but do not require medical or
SERVICE DEPENDENT  nursing care on-site. A service dependent population shall not include persons
POPULATION:        for whom such services are a requirement of a sentence upon conviction of a
                   criminal offense or whose need for such services arises during or immediately
                   following a sentence of incarceration for a criminal offense.
                   The measurement extending across the front yard of a lot and being the minimum
SETBACK, FRONT     horizontal distance between the front lot line and the main building or main
YARD:              structure or any projections thereof, other than the projections of uncovered
                   steps, balconies, terraces, porches, decks, or entryways or roof overhangs of no
                   more than two feet (2').
                   The measurement extending across the rear yard of the lot and being the minimum
SETBACK, REAR      horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building
YARD:              or main structure or any projection thereof, other than uncovered steps,
                   balconies, terraces, porches, decks or entryways or roof overhangs of no more
                   than two feet (2').
                   The measurement extending across the side yard of the lot between the front yard
SETBACK, SIDE      and the rear yard and being the maximum horizontal distance between the main
YARD:              building or main structure or any projection thereof other than uncovered steps,
                   balconies, terraces, porches, decks or entryways or roof overhangs of no more
                   than two feet and the side line of the lot.
                   A three-dimensional area that is intended to be kept clear of unauthorized
                   structures, plants, or trees in order to maintain visibility for safety
SIGHT VISIBILITY   purposes. The sight visibility triangle is described as the area between two and
TRIANGLE:          one-half feet (2½') and six feet (6') above the centerline grades of
                   intersecting streets in an area bounded by the street right-of-way lines of
                   corner lots and a straight line joining points along said street right-of-way
                   lines thirty feet (30') from the nearest point of intersection.
                   Any name, identification, description, display, illustration, or device that is
                   affixed to or represented directly or indirectly on a building, structure, or
SIGN:              land in view of the general public, and that directs attention to a product,
                   place, person, institution, or business. Further sign definitions are specified
                   in chapter 10-8 of this title.
SPECIAL            A condition for the establishment of a special use.
CONDITIONS:
SPECIAL USE:       A use that may be permitted in a zoning district pursuant to, and in compliance
                   with, procedures specified herein.
STREET:            Any public or private way set aside as a permanent right of way for street
                   purposes.
                   Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the surface of the
STRUCTURE:         ground or affixed to something having a fixed location on the surface of the
                   ground.
STRUCTURE,         The structure in or on which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which
PRINCIPAL:         it is located.
                   A use that is transitory by nature and may be permitted in a zoning district
TEMPORARY USE:     pursuant to, and in compliance with, procedures specified in chapters 10-10 and
                   10-11 of this title.
ULTRALIGHT         Any aircraft that is described or defined as an ultralight vehicle under Part
AIRCRAFT:          103 of the Federal Aviation Regulations.
ULTRALIGHT LANDING An area specifically designed, maintained and used only for the take-off and
AREA:              landing of an ultralight aircraft.
USE:               The specific purpose for which land, a structure, or premises, is designed,
                   arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
                   A business or entity providing water, sanitary sewer, power and light,
UTILITY, PUBLICLY  television cable, or similar services to the public of such a nature that it
REGULATED:         enjoys an exclusive franchise, in a specific geographic area, and is regulated
                   by a federal, state, or local governmental regulatory agency.
                   Permission or approval granted in accordance with chapter 10-11 of this Zoning
VARIANCE:          Ordinance, constituting a modification of or deviation from the exact provisions
                   of this title as applied to a specific lot or structure.
                   A business that provides services in minor repairs to motor vehicles,
                   motorcycles, bicycles, all-terrain vehicles not exceeding 1½ tons capacity,
                   including repair or replacement of cooling, electrical, fuel, and exhaust
VEHICLE REPAIR -   systems, brake adjustments, replacement tires, realigning and repairs, wheel
MINOR:             servicing, alignment and balancing, repair and replacement of shock absorbers,
                   and replacement or adjustment of mufflers and tail pipes, hoses, belts, light
                   bulbs, fuses, windshield wipers/wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings,
                   and the like.
                   A business that provides services in engine rebuilding, major reconditioning of
VEHICLE REPAIR -   worn or damaged motor vehicles, motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles, recreational
MAJOR:             vehicles and trailers, towing and collision service, including body, frame, or
                   fender straightening or repair, and painting of motor vehicles, and may include
                   minor auto repair services.
                   A building within which raw materials, goods, or equipment including vehicles,
WAREHOUSE:         are kept and wherein no manufacturing, assembly, construction, repair, sales or
                   other activity is performed except for the packaging of goods and materials for
                   shipment.
                   A building or buildings containing multiple, independently accessible spaces
WAREHOUSE, SELF-   where raw materials, goods or equipment, or personal goods including personal
STORAGE:           vehicles, are kept and wherein no other commercial or industrial activity
                   occurs.
                   An open space, other than a court, of uniform width or depth on the same lot
YARD:              with a structure, lying between the structure and the nearest lot line and that
                   is unoccupied and unobstructed from the surface of the ground upward except as
                   may be specifically provided by the regulations and standards herein.
                   A yard extending across the front of a lot and being the area between the front
                   lot line and the main building or any projections therefrom. The front yard
YARD, FRONT:       shall run the full width of the lot. On corner lots the yards fronting both
                   streets shall be considered front yards, and the front yards shall run the full
                   width of the lot on both street frontages.
YARD, REAR:        A yard extending the full width of a lot and situated between the rear lot line
                   and the nearest line of a principal structure located on the lot.
                   A yard situated between a side lot line and the nearest line of a principal
YARD, SIDE:        structure located on the lot and extending from the rear line of the required
                   front yard to the front line of the required rear yard. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-
                   2021)
 
CHAPTER 3
DISTRICTS, ZONING MAP, AND DISTRICT STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Districts
10-3-2: Zoning Map
10-3-3: Annexation Of New Territory
10-3-4: Exemptions For Rights Of Way
10-3-5: Residential Districts
10-3-6: Commercial General And Commercial Downtown Districts
10-3-7: Industrial District
10-3-8: Agricultural District
10-3-1: DISTRICTS:
The zoning districts into which the village is divided by the Zoning Ordinance
shall be designated as indicated in Table 10-3A:
Table 10-3A Zoning Districts
Table 10-3A Zoning Districts
A    Agricultural
R-1  R-1 Residential
R-2  R-2 Residential
R-2a R-2a Residential
R-3  R-3 Residential
R-4  R-4 Residential
C    Commercial General
CD   Commercial Downtown
I    Industrial
 
(Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-3-2: ZONING MAP:
   (A)   Location Of Districts:
      1.   The Zoning Ordinance includes a zoning district map describing
certain districts. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts
established by this title are set forth in the Official Zoning Map, as
periodically amended.
      2.   The Official Zoning Map is incorporated into, and made an integral
part of, this title.
      3.   The original of the Official Zoning Map, signed by the Village
Clerk, shall be kept in the Village Office.
      4.   The Official Zoning Map shall be corrected and brought up to date in
January of each year.
   (B)   Interpretation Of District Boundaries: Where uncertainty exists with
respect to the boundaries of any districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map,
the following rules shall apply:
      1.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the centerlines of alleys, streets or highways, said alley, street lines, or
highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
      2.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
      3.   Where a district boundary line does not coincide with any of the
lines described in subsections (B)1 or (B)2 of this section, the district
boundary line involved shall be dimensioned on the zoning map.
      4.   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is legally vacated,
the districts adjoining each side of such vacated public way shall
automatically extend to the center of such way and all area included in the
vacation shall be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended
districts. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-3-3: ANNEXATION OF NEW TERRITORY:
Unless a valid pre-annexation agreement in effect at the time of annexation
provides otherwise, or unless, after a public hearing before the Planning and
Zoning Commission, specific action by the Village Board provides otherwise, all
territory which may be annexed to the village shall, upon annexation, be
classified as a Village zoning district consistent with the Village of St.
Joseph Comprehensive Plan as indicated in Table 10-3B.
Table 10-3B. Zoning District Classification upon Annexation
Village of St. Joseph Comprehensive Plan Village of St. Joseph Zoning District
Future Land Use Map Designation
Village of St. Joseph Comprehensive Plan Village of St. Joseph Zoning District
Future Land Use Map Designation
Residential                              R-1 Residential
Mixed Residential                        R-3 Residential
Natural Recreation                       R-1 Residential
Neighborhood Recreation                  R-1 Residential
Downtown Business, Commercial            CD Commercial Downtown
Regional Business                        C Commercial General
Institutional                            C Commercial General
Agricultural                             A Agricultural
Industrial                               I Industrial
 
(Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-3-4: EXEMPTIONS FOR RIGHTS OF WAY:
The provisions of this title do not apply to land located within rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-3-5: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Purpose Statements:
      1.   R-1 Residential District: The R-1 Residential District is intended
for a low to moderate density environment of detached single-family dwellings
sited on lots that are serviced by community sewer and water. Limited non-
residential uses, which are compatible with surrounding residential
neighborhoods, may be permitted.
      2.   R-2 Residential District: The R-2 Residential District is intended
for a moderate density environment of detached single-family dwellings sited on
lots that are serviced by community sewer and water. Limited non-residential
uses, which are compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods, may be
permitted.
      3.   R-2a Residential District: The R-2a Residential District is intended
for a moderate density environment of detached single-family dwellings or
attached two-family dwellings.
      4.   R-3 Residential District: The R-3 Residential District is intended
to accommodate a variety of residential buildings, such as detached single-
family dwellings, two- family dwellings, townhouses, and other multi-family
housing. The R-3 Residential District is intended only for areas where adequate
public utilities and other infrastructure exists that can serve moderate to
higher density development, as well as where such development will not
negatively impact lower density residential neighborhoods. Limited non-
residential uses, which are compatible with surrounding residential
neighborhoods, may be permitted.
      5.   R-4 Residential District: The R-4 Residential District accommodates
a variety of residential structures, such as detached single-family dwellings,
two-family dwellings, townhouses, and other multi-family housing. The R-
4 Residential District is intended only for areas where adequate public
utilities and other infrastructure exists that can serve higher density
development, as well as where such development will not negatively impact lower
density residential neighborhoods. Limited non-residential uses, which are
compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods, may be permitted.
   (B)   Lot And Building Requirements:
      1.   Except as provided elsewhere in this code, a principal building
erected in the R-1, R-2, R-2a, R-3, or R-4 Residential District must conform to
the lot area, height, and placement standards indicated in Table 10-3C.
Table 10-3C. Schedule of Lot Area, Height, and Placement Standards for
Residential Districts
         Minimum Lot Area Per                                Minimum Required
         Dwelling Unita (square                              Yard Setbacks
         feet)                      Minimum Maximum  Maximum (feet)
                  Two-     Multi-   Average Building Number
District Single   Family   Family   Lot     Height   of
         Family   Dwelling Dwelling Widthb  (feet)   Stories Front Each Rear
         Dwelling per      per      (feet)                         Side
                  Dwelling Dwelling
                  Unit     Unit
Table 10-3C. Schedule of Lot Area, Height, and Placement Standards for
Residential Districts
         Minimum Lot Area Per                                Minimum Required
         Dwelling Unita (square                              Yard Setbacks
         feet)                      Minimum Maximum  Maximum (feet)
                  Two-     Multi-   Average Building Number
District Single   Family   Family   Lot     Height   of
         Family   Dwelling Dwelling Widthb  (feet)   Stories Front Each  Rear
         Dwelling per      per      (feet)                         Side
                  Dwelling Dwelling
                  Unit     Unit
R-1      9,600    n/a      n/a      80      35       2-1/2   30    10    35
R-2      7,500    n/a      n/a      65      35       2-1/2   30    7-1/2 35
R-2a     7,500    7,500    n/a      65      35       2-1/2   30    7-1/2 35
R-3      9,600    5,000    5,000    65      35       2-1/2   30    7-1/2 35
R-4      8,000    4,000    3,000    65      50       n/a     30    7-1/2 35
Table 10-3C Notes:
a.   The provisions of this Section notwithstanding, all lots shall comply
with the provisions of Title 7, Health and Sanitation.
b.   The minimum average lot width requirement applies to the area between the
farthest front point of the main building and the farthest back point of the
main building on a lot.
c.   "n/a" means "not applicable".
 
      2.   Flag Shaped Lots:
         (a)   If a lot in a residential district has a narrow access drive
(e.g., "flag shaped lot"), the narrow access area shall be included in
calculating the average lot width. Any such narrow access drive shall be
excluded in calculating the setback requirement if the Zoning Administrator
determines that to do so is consistent with the intent of this title.
         (b)   In no event shall any lot in a residential district have a
frontage along a road of less than forty feet (40') or a setback from any
boundary line of less than that required for the side yard setback in its
zoning district.
      3.   Institutional uses, when permitted in a residential district, may be
erected to exceed height limits specified for the district, provided that all
required yard setbacks are increased by one foot for each foot of building
height above the specified height limit.
      4.   Detached accessory buildings and accessory structures erected in the
R-1, R-2, R-2a, R-3, or R-4 Residential District must comply with the following
provisions in addition to other applicable provisions of this title:
         (a)   Detached accessory buildings and accessory structures must not
be located within a front yard.
         (b)   On a corner lot, an accessory building must not be located
within the front yard on either street.
         (c)   A detached accessory building or structure must be located a
distance of not less than three feet from any side lot line.
         (d)   A detached accessory building or structure must be located a
distance of not less than five feet (5') from any rear lot line.
         (e)   A detached accessory building must be located so that the
majority of its footprint is situated within the rear yard.
         (f)   One or more detached accessory buildings must not occupy more
than a total of thirty percent (30%) of a rear yard.
         (g)   Accessory buildings may include:
            (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area
25 percent of the ground floor area of the main building.
            (2)   A private residential garage used only for the housing of
passenger vehicles and with a floor area not to exceed five hundred fifty (550)
square feet. An additional floor area of two hundred (200) square feet may be
provided for each three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area by which such
lot exceeds six thousand (6,000) square feet provided that no garage shall
exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet nor house more than five (5) such
vehicles.
   (C)   Exceptions To Lot And Building Requirements In Residential Districts:
The lot and building requirements specified in subsection (B) above shall be
modified as indicated below:
      1.   Any lawful lot of record at the time of passage of this title having
less area or width than herein required may be used for a dwelling unit
appropriate to the district in which the property is located provided that all
provisions of Title 7, Health and Sanitation are met.
      2.   The ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices and
ornamental features shall be permitted not to exceed eighteen inches (18") in
any required yard setback.
      3.   The front yard setback requirement shall be reduced to the greater
of the existing setback of two (2) immediately adjacent existing houses.
      4.   The required side yard setback shall be maintained on each side of
the dwelling, but such side yard setback may be reduced to ten percent (10%) of
the lot width on lots of less than seventy five feet (75') in width; provided,
however, that no side yard setback shall be less than five feet (5').
      5.   The required side yard setback on the street side of a corner lot
shall be the same as the required front yard setback on such street, except
that the buildable width shall not be reduced to less than thirty two feet
(32').
      6.   For the purpose of side yard setback regulations, a two-family
dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot.
      7.   The required rear yard setback may be reduced to twenty percent
(20%) of the depth of the lot on any lot not exceeding one hundred twenty five
feet (125') in depth.
      8.   Chimneys and antennas may be no higher than five feet (5') above the
highest point of the roof. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-3-6: COMMERCIAL GENERAL AND COMMERCIAL DOWNTOWN DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Purpose Statements:
      1.   Commercial Downtown District. The Commercial Downtown District is
intended to preserve and enhance the historical village center by providing for
a mix of commercial and residential uses, including, but not limited to, retail
sales and service, office, and multi-family housing, that serves the residents
of the Village and surrounding areas. Future mixed-use development is
encouraged, and residential dwelling units are permitted above the ground-
floor. Uses, building materials, appearance, setbacks, historic feel, heights,
access, windows, signage and site plans shall relate to a Downtown environment.
      2.   Commercial General District. The Commercial General District is
intended for areas with a variety of high intensity highway-accessed commercial
uses or regional commercial uses.
   The previous district "Commercial" (C) is the same as the current district
"Commercial General" (C).
   (B)   Lot And Building Requirements:
      1.   Except as provided elsewhere in this code, a principal building
erected in the Commercial Downtown District or Commercial General District must
conform to the lot area, height, and placement standards indicated in Table 10-
3D.
 
Table 10-3D. Schedule of Lot Area, Height, and Placement Standards for
Commercial Downtown and Commercial General Districts
           Minimum Lot Areaa                             Minimum Required Yard
           (square feet)      Minimum                    Setbacks (feet)
           Principal Multi-   Average Maximum  Maximum
District   Building  Family   Lot     Building Number of
           or        Dwelling Width   Height   Stories   Front Each Side Rear
           Principal per      (feet)  (feet)
           Structure Dwelling
                     Unit
Commercial None      5,000    n/a     35       2-1/2     0     b         b
Downtown
Commercial None      5,000    n/a     35       2-1/2     25    b         b
General
Table 10-3D Notes:
a.   The provisions of this Section notwithstanding, all lots shall comply
with the provisions of Title 7, Health and Sanitation.
b.   None unless adjacent to a residential district in which case a minimum
side yard of 10 feet is required, and/or a minimum rear yard of 25 feet is
required.
c.   "n/a" means "not applicable".
 
      2.   Institutional uses, when permitted in the Commercial Downtown
District or Commercial General District, may be erected to exceed height limits
specified for the district, provided that all required yard setbacks are
increased by one foot for each foot of building height above the specified
height limit.
      3.   Where a lot in the Commercial Downtown District or Commercial
General District is used for commercial or industrial purposes, more than one
main building may be located on the lot or tract but only provided that
emergency access is available to all buildings and provided such buildings:
         (a)   Conform to all lot area, height, and placement standards for the
district in which the lot is located; and
         (b)   Conform to all provisions of Title 7, Health and Sanitation.
      4.   Detached accessory buildings and accessory structures erected in the
Commercial Downtown District or Commercial General District must comply with
the following provisions in addition to other applicable provisions of this
title:
         (a)   Detached accessory buildings and accessory structures must not
be located within a front yard.
         (b)   If on a corner lot, detached accessory buildings and accessory
structures must not be located within the front yard on either street.
      5.   Accessory buildings and accessory uses in the Commercial General
Districts (C) shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the floor area of a
building for incidental storage or light industrial activity.
Accessory buildings and accessory uses in the Commercial Downtown District (CD)
shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the floor area of a building for
incidental storage.
   (C)   Exceptions To Lot And Building Requirements In The Commercial Downtown
District And Commercial General District:
The height and area regulations specified in subsection (B) above shall be
modified as indicated below:
      1.   The front yard setback may be reduced to the same distance as an
immediately adjacent, existing building in the same block.
      2.   The required side yard setback as indicated in Table 10-3D shall be
maintained on each side of a dwelling, but such side yard setback may be
reduced to ten percent (10%) of the lot width on lots of less than seventy five
feet (75') in width; provided, however, that no side yard setback of a dwelling
shall be less than seven and one-half feet (7½').
      3.   The required rear yard may be reduced to twenty percent (20%) of the
depth of the lot on any lot not exceeding one hundred twenty five feet (125')
in depth.
      4.   The ordinary project of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental
features shall be permitted not to exceed eighteen inches (18') in any required
yard setback.
      5.   Filling station pumps and pump islands, where permitted, may occupy
required yard setbacks, provided that they are not less than fifteen feet (15')
from property lines.
      6.   Chimneys and antennas may be no higher than ten feet (10') above the
highest point of the building. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-3-7: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
   (A)   Purpose Statement: The Industrial District is intended to provide
areas to accommodate light to moderate intensity industrial uses with necessary
services and facilities while minimizing obtrusion on or by adjoining uses and
districts.
   (B)   Lot and Building Requirements:
      1.   Except as provided elsewhere in this code, a principal building
erected in the Industrial District must conform to the area, height, and
placement standards indicated in Table 10-3E.
 
Table 10-3E. Schedule of Lot Area, Height, and Placement Standards for the
Industrial District
           Minimum Lot                                 Minimum Required Yard
           Area                     Maximum            Setbacks (feet)
           Per         Minimum      Building Maximum
District   Principal   Average Lot  Height   Number of
           Buildinga   Width (feet) (feet)   Stories   Front Each Side Rear
           (square
           feet)
Industrial None        n/a          50       n/a       25    b         b
Table 10-3E Notes:
a.   The provisions of this Section notwithstanding, all lots shall comply
with the provisions of Title 7, Health and Sanitation.
b.   None unless adjacent to a residential district in which case a minimum
side yard of 10 feet is required, and/or a minimum rear yard of 25 feet is
required.
c.   "n/a" means "not applicable".
 
      2.   Where a lot in the Industrial District is used for commercial or
industrial purposes, more than one main building may be located on the lot or
tract but only provided that emergency access is available to all buildings and
provided such buildings:
         (a)   Conform to all lot area, height, and placement standards for the
Industrial District; and
         (b)   Conform to all provisions of Title 7, Health and Sanitation.
      3.   Institutional uses or community facilities, when permitted in the
Industrial District, may be erected to exceed height limits specified for the
district, provided that all required yard setbacks are increased by one foot
for each foot of building height above the specified height limit.
      4.   Detached accessory buildings and accessory structures erected in the
Industrial District must comply with the following provisions in addition to
other applicable provisions of this title:
         (a)   Detached accessory buildings and accessory structures must not
be located within a front yard.
         (b)   If on a corner lot, detached accessory buildings and accessory
structures must not be located within the front yard on either street.
   (C)   Exceptions To Lot And Building Requirements In The Industrial
District: The lot and building requirements specified in subsection (B) above
shall be modified as indicated below:
      1.   The minimum required side yard setback as indicated in Table 3E
shall be maintained on each side of a dwelling, but such side yard setback may
be reduced to ten percent (10%) of the lot width on lots of less than seventy
five feet (75') in width; provided, however, that no side yard setback of a
dwelling shall be less than seven and one-half feet (7½').
      2.   The required rear yard setback may be reduced to twenty percent
(20%) of the depth of the lot on any lot not exceeding one hundred twenty five
feet (125') in depth.
      3.   The ordinary project of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental
features shall be permitted not to exceed eighteen inches (18") in any required
yard setback.
      4.   Filling station pumps and pump islands, where permitted, may occupy
required yard setbacks, provided that they are not less than fifteen feet (15')
from property lines.
      5.   Chimneys and antennas may be no higher than ten feet (10') above the
highest point of the building. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-3-8: AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT:
   (A)   Purpose Statement: The Agricultural District is intended to prevent
scattered, indiscriminate urban development within areas which are
predominately used for farming, and to prevent a mixture of incompatible urban
and rural uses.
   (B)   Lot And Building Requirements:
      1.   Except as provided elsewhere in this code, a principal building
erected in the Agricultural District must conform to the lot area, height, and
placement standards indicated in Table 10-3F.
 
Table 10-3F. Schedule of Lot Area, Height, and Placement Standards for
Agricultural District
             Minimum Lot Minimum     Maximum  Maximum   Minimum Required Yard
District     Areaa       Average Lot Building Number of Setbacks (feet)
             (square     Widthb      Height   Stories   Front Each Side Rear
             feet)       (feet)      (feet)
Agricultural 30,000      80          35       2-1/2     30    25        50
Table 10-3F Notes:
a.   The provisions of this Section notwithstanding, all lots shall comply
with the provisions of Title 7, Health and Sanitation.
b.   The minimum average lot width requirement applies to the area between
the farthest front point of the main building and the farthest back point of
the main building on a lot.
 
      2.   Flag Shaped Lots:
         (a)   If a lot in the Agricultural District has a narrow access drive
(e.g., "flag shaped lot"), the narrow access area shall be included in
calculating the average lot width. Any such narrow access drive shall be
excluded in calculating the setback requirement if the Zoning Administrator
determines that to do so is consistent with the intent of this title.
         (b)   In no event shall any lot in the Agricultural District have a
frontage along a road of less than forty feet (40'), or a setback from any
boundary line of less than that required for the side yard setback.
      3.   Where a lot in the Agricultural District is used for commercial or
industrial purposes, more than one main building may be located on the lot or
tract but only provided that emergency access is available to all buildings and
provided such buildings:
         (a)   Conform to all lot area, height, and placement standards for the
Industrial District; and
         (b)   Conform to all provisions of Title 7, Health and Sanitation.
      4.   Institutional uses, when permitted in the Agricultural District, may
be erected to exceed height limits specified for the district, provided that
all required yard setbacks are increased by one foot for each foot of building
height above the specified height limit.
      5.   Detached accessory buildings and accessory structures erected in the
Agricultural District must comply with the following provisions in addition to
other applicable provisions of this title:
         (a)   Detached accessory buildings and accessory structures must not
be located within a front yard.
         (b)   If on a corner lot, detached accessory buildings and accessory
structures must not be located within the front yard on either street.
         (c)   A detached accessory building or structure must be located a
distance of not less than three feet (3') from any side lot line.
         (d)   A detached accessory building or structure must be located a
distance of not less than five feet (5') from any rear lot line.
         (e)   A detached accessory building must be located so that the
majority of its footprint is situated within the rear yard.
         (f)   One or more detached accessory buildings must not occupy more
than a total of thirty percent (30%) of a required rear yard.
         (g)   Accessory buildings may include:
            (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area
twenty five percent (25%) of the ground floor area of the main building.
            (2)   A private residential garage used only for the housing of
passenger vehicles and with a floor area not to exceed five hundred fifty (550)
square feet. An additional floor area of two hundred (200) square feet may be
provided for each three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area by which such
lot exceeds six thousand (6,000) square feet provided that no garage shall
exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet nor house more than five (5) such
vehicles.
   (C)   Exceptions To Lot And Building Requirements In The Agricultural
District: The lot and building requirements specified in subsection (B) above
shall be modified as indicated below:
      1.   Any lawful lot of record having less lot area or lot width than
required as indicated in Table 10-3F may be used for a dwelling unit
appropriate to the Agricultural District provided that all provisions of Title
7, Health and Sanitation are met.
      2.   The minimum required side yard setback as indicated in Table 10-3F
shall be maintained on each side of the dwelling, but such side yard setback
may be reduced to ten percent of the lot width on lots of less than seventy
five feet (75') in width; provided, however, that no side yard setback shall be
less than five feet (5').
      3.   The minimum required side yard setback on the street side of a
corner lot shall be the same as the required front yard setback on such street,
as indicated in Table 3F, except that the buildable width shall not be reduced
to less than thirty two feet (32').
      4.   The minimum required rear yard setback as indicated in Table 3F may
be reduced to twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot on any lot not
exceeding one hundred twenty five feet (125') in depth.
      5.   The ordinary project of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental
features shall be permitted not to exceed eighteen inches (18") in any required
yard setback.
      6.   Chimneys and antennas may be no higher than five feet (5') above the
highest point of the roof. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
CHAPTER 4
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-4-1: General Requirements
10-4-2: Accessory Structures And Uses
10-4-3: Shipping Container Storage Units
10-4-4: Amateur Ham Radio Equipment
10-4-5: Donation Boxes/Drop Boxes
10-4-6: Fence
10-4-6-1: General Provisions
10-4-6-2: Height And Construction
10-4-6-3: Construction With Sharp Material
10-4-6-4: Variances
10-4-6-5: Enforcement
10-4-7: Home Occupation
10-4-8: Large Satellite Dish Antennas
10-4-9: Outdoor Sales And Display
10-4-10: Refuse And Recycling Containers
10-4-11: Solar Energy System
10-4-12: Swimming Pools And Hot Tubs
10-4-13: Vehicle Charging Station
10-4-14: Water Features
10-4-15: Wind Energy System
10-4-16: Environmental Performance Standards
10-4-17: Dumpsters
10-4-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Number Of Structures On A Lot: In the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-
4 Residential Districts there must be no more than one principal building per
lot. ln all other districts, more than one principal building is permitted on a
lot, provided that each complies with all lot area, height, and placement
requirements of a district as though it were a principal building on an
individual lot.
   (B)   All Activities Within An Enclosed Structure: Within all districts, all
activities must be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, with the
exception of the following activities and uses:
      1.   Parking lots.
      2.   Businesses with a permitted outdoor component, including, but not
limited to, outdoor recreation, outdoor storage yards, contractor storage
yards, outdoor dining, car washes, kennels, animal care facilities, and similar
businesses. However, these businesses may be limited or the outdoor components
prohibited as a condition of a special use, when special use approval is
applicable.
      3.   Permitted outdoor storage, outdoor sales, and display areas.
      4.   Permitted outdoor temporary uses.
   (C)   Frontage On A Public Or Private Street: All lots must front on a
public or private street or approved private easement. Frontage on an alley or
limited access highway (e.g., interstate highway) does not satisfy this
requirement.
   (D)   Required Setbacks: No lot may be reduced in area so that the setbacks
are less than required by this title. The required setbacks for a lot cannot be
considered a setback for any other lot. No principal building or accessory
structure may be located in a required setback unless permitted by this title.
   (E)   Applicability Of Lot Area, Height, And Placement Standards: All
structures lawfully erected after the effective date of this title must meet
the lot and building requirements of the zoning district in which the structure
is located. No existing structure may be enlarged, altered, reconstructed, or
relocated in such a manner that conflicts with the requirements of the district
in which the structure is located.
   (F)   Sight Visibility Triangle: Except for the exempt structures indicated
in subsections (F)1 and (F)2 of this provision, nothing shall be constructed,
erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially
impede vision within a sight visibility triangle.
      1.   Lawfully existing buildings as of the date of adoption of this title
provision shall be exempt.
      2.   Authorized public traffic control signs, signals, or devices shall
be exempt. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-2: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES:
All accessory structures and uses are subject to the requirements of this
section and to all applicable standards of this title.
   (A)   General Regulations For Accessory Structures:
      1.   No accessory structure may be constructed on a zoning lot prior to
construction of the principal building to which it is accessory, and no
accessory building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also
being used. This does not preclude the use of a temporary construction shed for
the storage of tools, material, and equipment by a contractor during building
construction.
      2.   Accessory buildings may not be used as dwelling units or for
sleeping purposes.
      3.   As indicated in section
10-10-1 of this title, a zoning permit is required for the construction of an
accessory structure, unless specifically exempted by this title.
      4.   On a through lot, no detached accessory structure, with the
exception of a fence or wall constructed in accordance with this section, is
permitted within the required rear yard. In the case where through lots are all
facing the same way along a block face, encroachment into the rear setback is
permitted, so long as it does not exceed two-thirds of the rear setback depth.
(Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-3: SHIPPING CONTAINER STORAGE UNITS:
   (A)   General Regulations For Shipping Container Storage Units:
      1.   Shipping Containers may be used for permanent or temporary storage
purposes only, however Special Use Permit (permanent) or Temporary Use Permit
(temporary) must be requested by Owner and first granted by the Village.
      2.   Accessory buildings may not be used as dwelling units or for
sleeping purposes.
      3.   As indicated in section
10-10-1 of this title, a zoning permit is required for the installation of a
shipping container.
      4.   Shipping containers shall be single unit height with no stacking
allowed.
      5.   Shipping containers shall not store materials that could be
injurious or harmful to people, property or the Village.
      6.   Insurance for Shipping Container Storage Units shall be obtained by
Property Owner.
   (B)   Permanent Use:
      1.   Shipping containers may be used for permanent use, only within
General Commercial (C) or Industrial (I) Districts.
      2.   Special Use Permit shall be requested for by owner and approved by
Village for permanent uses.
      3.   Limit of two (2) storage units per lot.
      4.   Must be located on paved or aggregate surface location. Not intended
for yard or non accessible locations.
   (C)   Temporary Use:
      1.   Shipping containers may be used for temporary use, on any of the
Commercial, Residential, or Industrial Districts.
      2.   Temporary Use Permit shall be requested for by owner and approved by
Zoning Administrator for temporary uses.
      3.   Limit of one (1) temporary storage unit per lot.
      4.   Must be located on paved or aggregate surface location. Not intended
for yard or non accessible locations. Can only be placed on Village right-of-
way, streets or parking spots with prior approval from Zoning Administrator.
Temporary shipping container location must not interfere with traffic, parking,
pedestrian or ADA access.
      5.   Permit applicant must specify use of temporary storage unit in
request.
      6.   Temporary Use shall be limited to and permitted for up to thirty
(30) days.
      7.   Temporary Use Permit must be displayed on a visible side of the
shipping container, through the duration of the temporary use. (Ord. 2021-04,
6-22-2021)
10-4-4: AMATEUR HAM RADIO EQUIPMENT:
   (A)   Towers that solely support amateur HAM radio equipment and conform to
all applicable performance criteria as set forth in section
10-4-15 Environmental Performance Standards are permitted only in the rear
yard, and must be located a minimum of ten feet (10') from any lot line. Towers
are limited to the maximum building height of the applicable district plus an
additional ten feet (10').
   (B)   Antennas may be ground- or building-mounted and are limited to the
maximum building height of the applicable district plus an additional ten feet
(10').
   (C)   An antenna or tower that is proposed to exceed the height limitation
requires a special use approval. The operator must provide evidence that a
taller tower and/or antenna is necessary to engage successfully in amateur
radio communications.
   (D)   Radio antennas and/or towers owned and operated by the Village are
exempt from these requirements and other requirements of this title. (Ord.
2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-5: DONATION BOXES/DROP BOXES:
   (A)   Donation boxes/drop boxes are permitted for nonresidential uses only.
   (B)   Only one donation box/drop box is permitted per lot.
   (C)   The donation box/drop box must be accessory to and owned by the
principal use on the site. However, donation boxes/drop boxes that are not
accessory to the principal use on the site shall be allowed on Village owned
property with the permission of the Village.
   (D)   Donation boxes/drop boxes may only be located within a side yard
setback or within a rear yard setback and a minimum of ten feet (10') from any
lot line. No donation box/drop box may be located within a parking space. No
donation box/drop box may interfere with vehicle circulation on the site.
   (E)   The area surrounding the donation box/drop box must be kept clean and
free of any junk, debris or other material.
   (F)   Donation boxes/drop boxes must be maintained in good condition with no
structural damage, holes, or visible rust, and free of graffiti.
   (G)   Donation boxes/drop boxes must be locked or otherwise secured.
   (H)   Donation boxes/drop boxes must provide the following contact
information on the front of each donation box: name, address, email, and phone
number of the operator.
   (I)   Donation boxes/drop boxes are limited to six feet in height and sixty
(60) cubic feet in size. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-6: FENCE:
10-4-6-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Before installing a fence, a permit must be applied for and received
form the Village Zoning Administrator. The permit fee shall be fifty dollars
($50.00).
   (B)   Fences may be erected along property lines but shall not encroach
within six inches (6") of existing public sidewalks or public rights of way.
   (C)   Fences built on or within a public easement may be removed by the
village or at the direction of the village at the owner's expense in the event
repairs, maintenance, replacements or improvements are deemed necessary by the
village in such easements.
   (D)   The property owner shall be responsible for calling JULIE to locate
utilities in accordance with JULIE requirements.
   (E)   Fences shall not obstruct any watercourse.
   (F)   Fence or wall height shall be measured from the ground at a point
directly beneath the fence or wall. Where the ground at a point directly
beneath the fence or wall has been increased in elevation from its original
elevation at the time of subdivision development through berming, retaining
walls, fill or other measures and where such increased ground elevation has
resulted in an increase in ground elevation above an adjoining lot, the height
of the fence shall be measured from the original ground elevation before
installation of berming, retaining walls, fill or other measures as determined
by the Board of Trustees. The Zoning Administrator shall consult U.S.
geological survey contour maps, village base map contours, recorded subdivision
plat information and other available information in making such a
determination. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-6-2: HEIGHT AND CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   Rear And Side Yard (Noncorner Lots): Except as provided in section
10-4-6-3 of this chapter, no person shall place, install, construct or maintain
any fence on a lot or area to a height greater than six feet (6') of solid
construction and two (2') additional feet of open construction, above the
original grade, between the rear lot line and the front of the main building or
any projections thereof other than projections of uncovered steps, uncovered
balconies, terraces or uncovered porches. The term "open construction" as used
herein shall mean that the fence is less than fifty percent (50%) solid
construction when viewed at right angle to the fence.
   (B)   Front Yard (Noncorner Lots):
      1.   Chainlink fencing shall not be allowed in front yards.
      2.   Fences of not more than four feet (4') and not more than fifty
percent (50%) solid construction, may be erected between the front of the
building line and the front property line.
      3.   Fences in the front yard shall maintain a fifteen foot (15')
visibility triangle of which two (2) legs shall be measured as follows: along
both sides of the driveway inward from the front property line a distance of
fifteen feet (15') from the intersection of the front property line and the
driveway; and along the right of way measured in the direction away form the
driveway a distance of fifteen feet (15'). The third leg of such triangle shall
be the connection of such two (2) previously described lines. This area as
defined shall be free from any fence creating a visual obstruction for traffic
on street or sidewalk. This visibility triangle shall be maintained on
properties adjacent to the lot line on which the driveway is located for that
part of the adjacent property on which the visibility triangle applies.
   (C)   Corner Lots:
      1.   For corner lots, fences in the front yard and side yard adjacent to
the side street, shall be as provided in subsection (B) of this section.
      2.   Fences in the rear yard and side yard which are not adjacent to a
street, shall be as provided in subsection (A) of this section.
      3.   A thirty foot (30') visibility triangle shall be maintained at
street intersections. This "visibility triangle" is defined as an isosceles
triangle of which two (2) legs shall be measured as follows: along the street
curb/edge in both directions from the intersection a distance of thirty feet
(30'). The third leg of such triangle shall be the connection of such two (2)
previously described lines. No fence shall be installed or maintained in this
defined area.(Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-6-3: CONSTRUCTION WITH SHARP MATERIAL:
   (A)   Barbed Wire: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain
a fence equipped with barbed wire, razor wire or any similar or other sharp or
sharp pointed material. However, this section shall not prohibit the use of
such material when:
      1.   Located in Commercial or industrial zoning districts, or for
government use:
      2.   Used to provide security for a bona fide business operation: and
      3.   Approved by the Board of Trustees, after review of the documentation
indicating the need for security and bona fide operation of a business;
      4.   Provide no more than two feet (2') of such barbed wire or other
similar device is securely affixed to the top of and above a soundly
constructed fence or structural barrier which is at least eight feet (8') in
height.
   (B)   Electric Fence: No person shall erect or maintain anywhere in the
Village an electrically charged fence. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-6-4: VARIANCES:
   (A)   The Board of Trustees upon application made by the property owner or
representative thereof, may grant approval for the construction of a fence
which does not conform to the requirements set forth in this chapter if the
Trustees find that the deviation from those requirements is necessary to
address unusual lot configuration or location or safety concerns. (Ord. 2021-
04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-6-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   Notice To Remove Violation: The Village President shall notify in
writing by certified mail the person who owns or controls any property, whereon
a violation of this chapter is occurring, of his/her determination that a
violation is occurring, and require in writing that the violation be
eliminated, at the expense of such person, within thirty (30) calendar days of
the date such notice was sent. The Village official, employee or committee
member to act in his/her place.
   (B)   Appeal: The person who owns or controls any property, after being
notified by the Village President that a violation exists on his/her property,
may appeal that determination in the manner set forth herein. Appeal of such
determination shall be taken by filing a written appeal not more than fifteen
(15) days following the date of mailing of the notice of the violation provided
for in subsection (A) of this section. The appeal shall be addressed to the
Board of Trustees, through the office of the Village Clerk. The Board of
Trustees shall schedule a hearing date for not less than ten (10) days and not
more than thirty (30) days after receiving such notice of appeal, and shall
notify the person appealing of the date and time of their consideration of the
appeal and such person may appear and be heard by the Board of Trustees.
If determination of the Village president is not reversed as provided for
herein, then the Village President shall require in writing by certified mail
that the violation be removed within fifteen (15) calendar days from such date
of notice.
   (C)   Removal Of Violation By Village: If the violation is not removed
within thirty (30) days, as provided in subsection (A) of this section, or in
event of appeal, within fifteen (15) days following notice from the Village
President that the Board of Trustees failed to reverse the determination, the
Village President may cause the removal of the violation and the cost of such
removal shall be charged against the property on which the obstruction
occurred. The owner or person in charge of the property shall pay said cost of
removal within thirty (30) days of receipt of a statement of said cost. The
failure of the person notified to eliminate the violation as required by a
notice to do so from the Village president or to pay the said cost of removal
within the time allowed therein shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Noncompliance: Any fence lawfully existing on August 26, 1998, which
is not in compliance with this chapter, may continue to lawfully exist, and
normal repairs to such fences are permissible where such repairs do not
constitute a total fence replacement. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-7: HOME OCCUPATION:
   (A)   The home occupation must be conducted by a member or members of the
family or individuals permanently residing on the premises.
   (B)   No more than one person shall be employed in the home occupation,
other than an occupant or occupants of the premises.
   (C)   Signs, displays, or activities that indicate from the exterior that
the structure is being used, in part, for any purpose other than that of a
residence are prohibited. However, one non-illuminated identification sign on
the wall of the structure not exceeding two square feet in area shall be
permitted.
   (D)   The home occupation and all related activity, including storage, must
be conducted completely within the dwelling unit or permitted accessory
structure.
   (E)   No commodities shall be sold or services rendered that require receipt
or delivery of merchandise, goods, or equipment other than by a passenger motor
vehicle or by parcel or letter carrier mail services using vehicles typically
employed in residential deliveries.
   (F)   Alterations to the residence or permitted accessory structures that
would alter the residential character of the dwelling shall be prohibited.
   (G)   The home occupation and any related activity must not create any
traffic hazards or nuisances in public rights-of-way. All vehicle parking
generated by such operations must be located on the lot of the home occupation.
   (H)   The home occupation shall not exceed the limitations imposed by the
provisions of all applicable building, fire, health, safety, and housing codes
and shall conform with all applicable requirements for business and
occupational licensing.
   (I)   There must be no perceptible noise, odor, smoke, electrical
interference, vibration, or other nuisance emanating from the structure where
the home occupation is located in excess of that normally associated with
residential use.
   (J)   Repair and service of vehicles or industrial machinery shall be
prohibited as a home occupation.
   (K)   Home occupation shall not include commercial breeding, boarding or
training of animals, or other business where animals are on the premises, other
than a dog or cat grooming business. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-8: LARGE SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS:
   (A)   Definitions:
 
DISH TYPE One or a combination of the following:
SATELLITE 1.   A signal receiving device (antenna, dish antenna or dish type antenna),
SIGNAL    the purpose of which is to receive communication or other signals from
RECEIVING satellites in Earth orbit.
ANTENNAS, 2.   A low noise amplifier that is situated at the focal point of the receiving
EARTH     component, the purpose of which is to magnify, store, transfer and/or transmit
STATIONS, electronic or light signals.
OR GROUND 3.   A coaxial cable to carry or transmit said signals to a receiver.
STATIONS:
GROUNDING A metal pole permanently positioned in the earth to serve as an electrical
ROD:      conductor through which electrical current may safely pass and dissipate.
LARGE     That part of a satellite signal-receiving antenna characteristically shaped
SATELLITE like a saucer or dish that is over 3.28 meters or six feet in diameter.
DISH:
RECEIVER: A television set or radio receiver.
 
   (B)   Location Of Earth Station:
      1.   Ground-Mounted:
         (a)   No earth station shall be constructed in any front or side yard,
but, shall be constructed to the rear of the residence or principal structure.
         (b)   No earth station, including its concrete base slab or other
structure, shall be constructed less than five feet from any property line or
easement.
         (c)   No earth station shall be linked, physically or electronically,
to a receiver that is not located on the same lot, premises or parcel of land
as is the earth station.
         (d)   An earth station shall not exceed a grade height of fifteen feet
(15').
         (e)   No ground-mounted earth station shall be constructed upon the
rooftop of any garage, residential dwelling, church, school, apartment
building, hospital or any other commercial building or structure.
      2.   Roof-Mounted:
         (a)   Roof-mounted earth stations shall be mounted directly upon the
roof, where permitted hereby, of a primary or accessory building and shall not
be mounted upon appurtenances such as chimneys, towers, trees, poles or spires,
except by variance.
         (b)   A roof-mounted earth station shall not exceed a height of more
than six feet (6') in diameter.
         (c)   A roof-mounted earth station dish shall not exceed six feet (6')
in diameter. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-9: OUTDOOR SALES AND DISPLAY:
   (A)   Retail goods establishments are permitted on-premises accessory
outdoor sales and display of merchandise. However, outdoor storage of goods not
offered for sale by the establishment is prohibited.
   (B)   No sales and display area is permitted in any public right-of-way or
in any required front yard setback, rear yard setback, or side yard setback
unless as may be specifically allowed with a zoning permit or special use
permit that allows for an accessory sidewalk café or similar accessory outdoor
use. The outdoor sales or display area must be located within fifteen feet
(15') of the principal building. Minimum pedestrian and vehicular access
requirements must be maintained.
   (C)   A special use permit shall be required to allow that a portion of the
parking area may be used for outdoor sales and display on a temporary basis for
a maximum of forty five (45) days no more than two (2) times in a calendar
year, in terms of both display structure and goods displayed or sold. Permanent
display structures are prohibited in parking areas. No more than ten percent
(10%) of the required parking area for the existing use may be used for the
temporary outdoor sales and display. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-10: REFUSE AND RECYCLING CONTAINERS:
   (A)   Refuse and recycling containers regulations apply only to multi-family
dwellings and non-residential uses.
   (B)   All refuse and recycling containers must be fully enclosed on three
sides by a solid fence, wall, or wall of the principal building a minimum of
six feet (6') and a maximum of eight feet (8') in height. The enclosure must be
gated. Such gate must be solid and shall remain closed when not in use. When
the extension of a principal building is used as a screening wall, the wall
must be of the same building materials as the principal building. Such wall
must not be the gated enclosure. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-11: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM:
   (A)   Applicability:
      1.   The provisions of this section shall apply to solar energy systems
erected and operated within the corporate limits of the Village.
      2.   Pre-existing solar energy systems shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section with the exception of maintenance and removal of
abandoned systems.
   (B)   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of these regulations is to provide a
uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the siting, installation and
operation of solar energy systems within the Village. These regulations are
intended to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community
without unduly restricting the use of solar energy systems.
   (C)   Definitions:
LARGE     A solar energy conversion system consisting of multiple solar collector
SOLAR     panels, support structures, and associated controls or conversion electronics
ENERGY    that are mounted on the ground as a principal use and with a nameplate
SYSTEM:   capacity of one hundred (100) kilowatts or more.
SELF-     A professionally manufactured system that utilizes solar collectors to produce
CONTAINED small amounts of power that are generated exclusively for a single device. A
SOLAR     self-contained solar energy system is typically located in areas that are not
ENERGY    in close proximity to a utility power source.
SYSTEM:
SMALL     A solar energy conversion system consisting of one or more solar collector
SOLAR     panels, support structure(s) and associated controls or conversion electronics
ENERGY    that are mounted on a principal building, garage, shed, or on the ground as an
SYSTEM:   accessory structure(s) and with a nameplate capacity of less than one hundred
          (100) kilowatts.
          A type of small solar energy system that is mounted on the roof of a principal
          building, garage, or shed. Types of building-mounted small solar energy
          systems include:
          1.   Integrated: A building mounted solar energy system that is an integral
          part of a building, rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or
SMALL     substituting for an architectural or structural part of the building.
SOLAR     Integrated systems include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic or thermal
ENERGY    systems that are contained within roofing materials, skylights, shading
SYSTEM,   devices and similar architectural components.
BUILDING  2.   Flush Roof Mounted: A building mounted solar energy system that is
MOUNTED:  mounted to a finished roof surface where the solar collector panels, once
          installed, project no farther than six inches (6") in height beyond the roof
          surface and is parallel to the roof surface.
          3.   Nonflush Roof Mounted: A building mounted solar energy system that is
          mounted to a finished roof surface where the solar collector panels, once
          installed, project more than six inches (6") in height beyond the roof
          surface.
SMALL
SOLAR
ENERGY    A type of small solar energy system that is mounted to the ground.
SYSTEM,
GROUND
MOUNTED:
          Equipment, whether permanent or temporary, that converts and stores or
SOLAR     transfers energy collected from the sun into usable forms of energy such as
ENERGY    thermal, electrical, and mechanical, and includes any solar collector panel,
SYSTEM:   support structure, pole, base or foundation, control, wire, battery, energy
          storage device, inverter, transformer, generator, heat pump, heat exchanger,
          or other component used in the system.
TOTAL     The vertical distance from grade to the highest point of the solar energy
HEIGHT:   system.
 
   (D)   Large Solar Energy System: Large solar energy systems shall be
prohibited within all zoning districts of the village.
   (E)   Small Solar Energy Systems: General Provisions: Small solar energy
systems shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts subject to the
following provisions:
      1.   All small solar energy systems require an approved zoning permit.
         (a)   In order to receive a zoning permit, small solar energy systems
must be approved by a small solar certification program recognized by the Solar
Rating Certification Corporation or other recognized industry association and
be installed by an experienced installer.
         (b)   Prior to permit issuance, the owner shall sign an acknowledgment
that said owner will be responsible for any and all enforcement costs and
remediation costs resulting from any violations of this section. These costs
could include, but are not limited to, removal of system, property restoration
necessary upon removal of the system, village legal expenses and hearing costs
associated with violations of this section.
      2.   Any owner or operator of a small solar energy system shall maintain
said system in compliance with the standards contained in the current and
applicable state or local building codes and any applicable standards for solar
energy systems that are published by the international building code and
national electrical code as amended from time to time.
      3.   If, upon inspection, the zoning administrator, or his designee,
concludes that a solar energy system fails to comply with such codes and
standards or constitutes a danger to persons or property, the zoning
administrator or his designee, shall require immediate repair or removal of the
system at the owner's expense.
      4.   All support structures for small solar energy systems shall be a
monochromatic, neutral, and nonreflective color and shall match the color of
the material it is being mounted to or the color of structures located on the
lot. Multiple solar collector panels shall match each other.
      5.   When more than one solar collector panel is located on a lot, the
multiple solar collector panels shall be uniform in style.
      6.   All electrical wires associated with a small solar energy system,
other than wires necessary to connect the solar collector panels to the pole
wiring, the pole wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the grounding
wires, must be hidden or enclosed.
      7.   A small solar energy system shall not be artificially illuminated.
      8.   Concentrated sunlight or glare from solar collector panel surfaces
shall be oriented away from neighboring windows.
      9.   One small solar energy system is permitted per lot, but the system
may include one or more solar collector panels. A ground mounted system and a
building mounted system shall not both be installed on a single lot.
      10.   The utility company shall be informed of the customer's intent to
install an interconnected customer owned generator. No small solar energy
system shall be installed until proof of acceptance from the utility company
has been provided to the village. Off grid systems (independent systems or
systems not connected to the utility electrical system) shall be exempt from
this requirement.
      11.   All batteries and energy storage systems shall be installed within
buildings and not outside.
   (F)   Small Solar Energy Systems Ground Mounted Standards:
      1.   Ground mounted small solar energy systems shall only be permitted as
an accessory structure to an existing principal building/principal use, must be
mounted on the ground and must have a nameplate capacity of less than one
hundred (100) kilowatts.
      2.   (a)   A ground mounted small solar energy system with monopole
support structure must be set back:
            (1)   At least 1.1 times its total height from any property line of
the lot on which it is located.
            (2)   At least 1.1 times its total height from any public road
right of way.
            (3)   At least 1.1 times its total height and no less than ten feet
from any overhead utility lines.
         (b)   A ground mounted small solar energy system with no monopole
support structure shall be set back at least five feet (5') from the property
line.
         (c)   No ground mounted small solar energy system shall be located in
an easement.
      3.   No ground mounted small solar energy components shall be located in
the front yard of any lot.
      4.   Ground mounted small solar energy systems shall be limited to a
maximum of fifteen feet (15') in total height.
      5.   Soil Conditions: A soil analysis may be required as part of the
zoning permit application and inspection process to confirm that the soils meet
the minimum bearing capacity assumed by the structural design of the pole(s),
support structure, and foundation.
   (G)   Small Solar Energy Systems Building Mounted Standards:
      1.   Building mounted small solar energy systems shall only be permitted
as accessory structures, must be mounted to the roof of a principal building, a
garage, or a shed and must have a nameplate capacity of less than one hundred
(100) kilowatts.
      2.   Integrated and flush roof mounted systems are allowed on sloped or
flat roofs. Nonflush roof mounted systems are allowed only on flat roofs if the
solar collector panels are completely screened from view to an observer's eye
six feet (6') above the ground at any point along an abutting property line.
      3.   Building mounted small solar energy systems must meet all building
setback requirements, or accessory building setback requirements in the case of
garages and sheds, and are not allowed to encroach into required yards.
Additionally, they must be set back a minimum of one foot from all edges of the
individual roof plane on which they are mounted.
      4.   Nonflush roof mounted systems shall not extend above the highest
point of the roof plane on which they are mounted.
      5.   The solar collector panel surface area shall not exceed sixty
percent (60%) of the roof plane upon which the solar collector panels are
mounted. If more than one roof area is to contain solar collector panels, the
fire district shall review and comment on the installation of the solar
collector panels to verify that adequate roof access is provided to emergency
personnel in the event of an emergency.
      6.   Nonflush roof mounted systems are prohibited on roof planes adjacent
to front yards. Integrated and flush roof mounted systems are permitted on any
roof plane, however if installed on roof planes adjacent to front yards they
may only be installed on one plane with that plane being the highest plane.
      7.   Building mounted small energy systems shall meet all weight and wind
resistance requirements of applicable building codes.
   (H)   Self-Contained Solar Energy System Standards:
      1.   Self-contained solar energy systems are a permitted use. Any low
voltage self-contained solar energy systems shall be an allowed use.
      2.   A self-contained solar energy system shall be set back at least five
feet (5') from the property line.
      3.   No self-contained solar energy system components shall be located in
the front yards of any zoning lot, except for parking lot light poles.
      4.   Self-contained solar energy systems shall be limited to a maximum
aggregate solar collector panel surface area of six (6) square feet.
   (I)   Abandonment: All abandoned or unused solar energy systems shall be
deemed a nuisance after two months of the cessation of operations unless an
extension is approved by the village board. The village may act to abate such
nuisance and require removal at the property owner's expense. After the solar
energy system is removed, the owner of the property shall restore the site to
its original condition, or to an approved improved condition within thirty (30)
days of removal. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-12: SWIMMING POOLS AND HOT TUBS:
   (A)   Private swimming pools and hot tubs are permitted as an accessory to a
residential use. Before installing a swimming pool or hot tub, a permit must be
applied for and received from the Village Zoning Administrator. The permit fee
shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). Private swimming pools or hot tubs, in-ground
or aboveground, of a design water depth of less than three feet (3') are exempt
only from the requirement that a zoning permit be obtained prior to
installation and/or construction. If a pool and fence are being installed at
the same time and both can be inspected by the Village inspector in the same
visit, then the fee for the pool permit and the fence permit shall be a total
of fifty dollars ($50.00).
   (B)   Private swimming pools and hot tubs must be operated for the exclusive
use of residents of the lot and their invited guests. No private swimming pool
or hot tub may be operated as a business or private club.
   (C)   No private swimming pool or hot tub, or portion thereof, including but
not limited to aprons, walks, and mechanical equipment integral to the pool,
may be located within a front yard or side yard.
   (D)   Private swimming pools and hot tubs must be located at least ten feet
(10') from a rear lot line unless approved in a side yard by variance, and
cannot encroach into any easement.
   (E)   No swimming pool shall be installed beneath, or have any edge of the
pool:
      1.   Within ten feet (10') measured horizontally from an overhead or
underground electrical wire, telephone wire, cable TV wire, or any other type
of wire; or
      2.   Within twenty five feet (25') measured horizontally from high
voltage electrical feeder wires.
      3.   The property owners shall be responsible for calling JULIE to locate
utilities in accordance with JULIE requirements.
All diving boards, diving platforms, and diving towers must maintain a
seventeen foot (17') distance, measured horizontally, from all wires. No pool
shall be constructed within five feet of any type of buried wire.
   (F)   All swimming pools or hot tubs may not be installed within a utility
easement.
   (G)   The installation of a swimming pool, equipment, and paving must not
change the existing water drainage characteristics of the site so as to cause
water to drain onto an adjacent property.
   (H)   Enclosure Requirements:
      1.   Swimming pools, in ground or aboveground, of a design water depth of
three or more feet must be enclosed by a separate fence of at least four feet
high or another barrier, constructed with minimal horizontal rungs in order to
discourage climbing by children.
      2.   The maximum width of openings in the fence shall be four inches
(4"). The maximum spacing between the bottom of the fence and the ground shall
be two inches (2").
      3.   A permanent in-ground swimming pool or fixed above-ground pool of a
design water depth of three feet (3') or more, with or without raised decking,
must have a separate security fence at least four feet (4') high above ground
and gated around the pool or perimeter of the yard. The minimum height of this
security fence shall be four feet (4').
      4.   The sidewalls of an above-ground pool shall not be considered as a
fence for purposes of satisfying the requirements of this section.
   (I)   Enclosure Gate Requirements:
      1.   Gates in fences shall be self-closing, and shall be self-latching
with the latch located on the pool-side of the gate.
      2.   Gates must be at least four feet (4') in height. The maximum width
of gate openings (spacing/gaps) shall be four inches (4'). The maximum spacing
between the bottom of the gate and the ground shall be two inches (2").
      3.   Gates must be constructed with minimal horizontal rungs in order to
discourage climbing.
      4.   Where a minimum fence height of six feet (6') is required, a minimum
gate height of six feet (6') shall also required.
   (J)   Swimming pool filter equipment must not be installed in a location
where a child could climb on the equipment to gain access to the swimming pool.
   (K)   The swimming pool must not be filled with water until after the fence
and gates have been installed.
   (L)   Enforcement:
      1.   Notice To Remove Violation: The Village President shall notify in
writing by certified mail the person who owns or controls any property, whereon
a violation of this chapter is occurring, of his/her determination that a
violation, and require in writing that the violation be eliminated, at the
expense of such person, within thirty (30) calendar days of the date such
notice is sent. The Village President may, for purposes of this section,
appoint a Village official, employee or committee member to act in his/her
place.
      2.   Appeal: The person who owns or controls any property, after being
notified by the Village President that a violation exists on his/her property,
may appeal that determination in the manner set forth herein. Appeal of such
determination shall be taken by filing a written appeal not more than fifteen
(15) days following the date of mailing of the notice of the violation provided
for above in this section. The appeal shall be addressed to the Board of
trustees, through the office of the Village Clerk. The Board of Trustees shall
schedule a hearing date for not less than ten (10) days and not more than
thirty (30) days after receiving such notice of appeal, and shall notify the
person appealing of the date and time of their consideration of the appeal and
such person may appear and be heard by the Board of Trustees.
If the determination of the Village President is not reversed as provided for
herein, then the Village President shall require in writing by certified mail
that the violation be removed within fifteen (15) calendar days from such date
of notice.
      3.   Removal Of Violation: If the violation is not removed within thirty
(30) days, as provided above, or in the event of appeal, within fifteen (15)
days following notice from the Village President that the Board of Trustees
failed to reverse the determination, the Village president may: cause an
ordinance violation case to be filed in court and seek fines and an injunction
requiring removal of the violation; or may cause the removal of the violation
by the Village and the cost of such removal shall be charged against the owner
and the property on which the obstruction occurred. The owner or person in
charge of the property shall pay said cost of removal within thirty (30) days
of the receipt of a statement of said cost. The failure of the person notified
to eliminate the violation as required by a notice to do so from the Village
president or to pay the said cost of removal within the time allowed therein
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
      4.   In the event that a pool or appurtenances thereto was installed over
a utility easement, and an urgent repair is needed to be made to the utility
below the pool, the Village is authorized to remove any portion of the pool
and/or appurtenances at the owner's expense and the Village shall not be
responsible for any damages to the pool or appurtenances. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-
2021)
10-4-13: VEHICLE CHARGING STATION:
Electric vehicle charging stations are permitted as an accessory use within any
parking lot or parking structure. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-14: WATER FEATURES:
   (A)   Water features for single-family and two-family dwellings are limited
to a maximum depth of twenty four inches (24") and a maximum surface area of
two hundred fifty (250) square feet, and are exempt only from the requirement
that a zoning permit be obtained prior to installation and/or construction.
   (B)   Water features included in other developments require a Zoning Permit
but are not subject to the limitations indicated in subsection (A) above. (Ord.
2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-4-15: WIND ENERGY SYSTEM:
   (A)   Applicability:
      1.   The provisions of this section shall apply to wind energy systems
erected and operated within the corporate limits of the Village.
      2.   Pre-existing wind energy systems shall be exempt from the provisions
of this section with the exception of maintenance and removal of abandoned
systems.
   (B)   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of these regulations is to provide a
uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the siting, installation and
operation of wind energy systems within the Village. These regulations are
intended to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community
without unduly restricting the use of wind energy systems.
   (C)   Definitions:
                       The all-encompassing sound at a given location, usually
                       a composite of sounds from many sources, near and far.
                       For the purpose of this Section, the 'ambient sound
                       level' shall mean the quiescent background level, that
AMBIENT SOUND:         is, the quietest of ten (10) second average sound levels
                       measured when there are no nearby or distinctly audible
                       sound sources. Daytime ambient measurements should be
                       made during mid-morning, weekday hours and nighttime
                       measurements should be made after midnight.
                       A written statement asserting that a landowner has
                       agreed to waive a specific small wind energy system
PRIVATE WAIVER:        (SWES) separation distance requirement or rotor diameter
                       size limit, and has knowingly agreed to accept the
                       consequences of the waiver. The landowner must sign a
                       private waiver.
                       The rotating part of a wind turbine, including the
ROTOR:                 blades and blade assembly or the rotating portion of the
                       generator.
                       The diameter of the circle swept by the rotor,
ROTOR DIAMETER:        specifically, the distance from the outer-most tip of
                       the blade to the center of the turbine rotor multiplied
                       by two.
                       A repetitive oscillation of light and shadow cast when
SHADOW FLICKER:        light passes through and is interrupted by moving wind
                       turbine blades.
                       The A-weighted sound pressure level in decibels (dB) (or
                       the C- weighted level if specified) as measured using a
                       sound level meter that meets the requirements of a Type
SOUND LEVEL:           2 or better precision instrument according to the
                       American National Standards Institute (ANSI) S1.4. The
                       "average" sound level is time- averaged over a suitable
                       period using an integrating sound level meter that meets
                       the requirements of ANSI S12.43.
                       A temporary wind speed indicator constructed to analyze
                       the potential for utilizing a wind energy system at a
                       given site. This includes the tower, base plate,
                       anchors, cables and hardware, wind direction vanes,
TEST WIND TOWER:       booms to hold equipment, data logger, instrument wiring,
                       and any telemetry devices that are used to monitor or
                       transmit wind characteristics over a period of time for
                       either instantaneous wind information or to characterize
                       the wind resource at a given location.
                       The height of a wind energy system turbine as measured
TOTAL EXTENDED HEIGHT: from natural grade to the tip of the rotor blade at its
                       highest point of travel, or blade- tip height.
                       All necessary devices that together convert wind energy
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM:    into electricity, including the rotor, nacelle,
                       generator, tower, electrical components, foundation,
                       transformer, and electrical cabling.
                       A wind energy system having a total rated capacity of
   ON-SITE WIND     between 101 and 250 kilowatts and that is incidental and
   ENERGY           subordinate to and which generates power for the
   SYSTEM           principal use of the zoning lot on which it is situated,
   (OWES):          even though excess electricity may be used by the
                       utility company in exchange for a reduction in cost of
                       electrical power supplied by that company.
                       A wind energy system having a total rated capacity of
   SMALL WIND       not more than 100 kilowatts and that is incidental and
   ENERGY           subordinate to and which generates power for the
   SYSTEM           principal use of the zoning lot on which it is situated,
   (SWES):          even though excess electricity may be used by the
                       utility company in exchange for a reduction in cost of
                       electrical power supplied by that company.
   WIND ENERGY
   SYSTEM,
   BUILDING-        A wind energy system located on a building.
   MOUNTED
   (BMWES):
 
   (D)   Test Wind Tower: A Test Wind Tower shall be permitted in all zoning
districts as a temporary use for no more than eighteen (18) months. An
extension of this time period, not to exceed an additional eighteen (18)
months, may be granted at the discretion of the Village Board upon submittal
and review of sufficient evidence to support the requested extension.
   (E)   Table 10-4A contains wind energy system height, size, and placement
restrictions. Table 10-4B describes the type of authorization required for wind
energy systems as an accessory use.
 
Table 10-4A. Wind Energy System Height, Size, and Placement Restrictions
Use Type      Zoning       Maximum Height2  Maximum Rotor    Minimum Setback
              Districts1                    Diameter
                           Up to 10 feet,
                           as measured from
                           the highest
                           point of the
                           roof, for all
                           uses in a                         Same as the
                           residential                       required minimum
BMWES:                     district;                         yard (front,
Building-     All          Up to 15 feet,   10 feet          rear, side) for
Mounted Wind               as measured from                  the zoning
Energy System              the highest                       district in
                           point of the                      which it is
                           roof, for all                     located
                           uses in non-
                           residential
                           zoning districts
                           non-residenti al
                           zoning districts
                                                             A distance equal
                           Up to 125 feet                    to the total
                           in a residential                  extended height
SWES:                      district;        15 - 75 feet,    from lot
Small Wind    All          Up to 155 feet   depending on lot boundary lines,
Energy System              in a non-        size2            public rights-
                           residential                       of-way, railroad
                           district                          rights-of-way,
                                                             and overhead
                                                             utility lines.
                                                             A distance equal
                                                             to the total
                                                             extended height
OWES:                                       15 - 75 feet,    from lot
On-Site Wind  Agricultural Up to 175 feet   depending on lot boundary lines,
Energy System Industrial                    size3            public rights-
                                                             of-way, railroad
                                                             rights-of-way,
                                                             and overhead
                                                             utility lines.
Table 10-4A Notes:
1.   Table 10-4B contains specific limitations with regard to permitting
requirements for a wind energy system as an accessory use in each zoning
district.
2.   Except for a BMWES, the 'maximum height' refers to total extended height
of each wind energy system.
3.   The maximum rotor diameter shall be limited based on the separation
distance requirements of this section.
 
Table 10-4B. Authorization Required for Wind Energy Systems as an
Accessory Use1
P   By right with a Zoning Permit required
S   Special Use Permit required
   Not Permitted
              District
Accessory Use A R-1 R-2 R-2 a R- 3 R-4 CD C I
Table 10-4B. Authorization Required for Wind Energy Systems as an
Accessory Use1
P   By right with a Zoning Permit required
S   Special Use Permit required
   Not Permitted
                                    District
Accessory Use                       A R-1 R-2 R-2 a R- 3 R-4 CD C I
Building-mounted wind energy system P P   P   P     P    P   P  P P
Small wind energy system
Total extended height:
≤ 45 feet                         P P   P   P     P    P   P  P P
> 45 feet and ≤ 50 feet           P S   S   S     S    P   P  P P
≥ 50 feet and ≤ 125 feet        S S   S   S     S    S   S  S S
≥ 125 feet and ≤ 155 feet       S                   S  S S
On-site wind energy system
Total extended height:
≤ 100 feet                        P                      P
> 100 feet and ≤ 175 feet         S                      S
Table 10-4B Note:
1.   All structures must conform, as applicable, to the regulations
and standards of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal
Communications Commission, and Illinois Department of Transportation,
Division of Aeronautics.
 
   (F)   Building-Mounted Wind Energy System (BMWES):
      1.   A BMWES shall be considered an accessory use in all zoning
districts.
      2.   A BMWES shall be subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   A BMWES shall meet the design standards set forth in subsection
(I) of this section.
         (b)   The maximum height of a BMWES shall be ten feet (10') as
measured from the highest point of the roof for all uses in a residential
zoning district and fifteen feet (15') as measured from the highest point of
the roof for all uses in non-residential zoning districts.
         (c)   The rotor diameter of a BMWES shall not exceed ten feet (10').
         (d)   The minimum setback for a BMWES shall be equal to the required
minimum yard (front, rear, and side) for the zoning district in which it is
located. The setback shall be measured horizontally from the farthest outward
extension of all moving parts to the nearest lot line.
         (e)   If more than one BMWES is installed, a minimum distance equal to
the height of the highest BMWES must be maintained between the base(s) of each
BMWES.
         (f)   The maximum number of BMWES on a property shall be based on
setback and separation requirements as set forth in the above Items d and e.
         (g)   The building upon which the BMWES is to be mounted shall be able
to safely support operation of the BMWES.
   (G)   Small Wind Energy System (SWES):
      1.   A SWES shall be considered an accessory use within all zoning
districts.
      2.   A SWES shall be subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   A SWES shall meet the design standards set forth in subsection
(I) of this section.
         (b)   The total extended height of a SWES shall not exceed:
            (1)   One hundred twenty five feet (125') in a residential zoning
district; and
            (2)   One hundred fifty five feet (155') in non-residential zoning
districts.
         (c)   (1)   The maximum allowable rotor diameter of a SWES shall be:
               A.   Fifteen feet (15') on a lot with less than one acre of lot
area; and
               B.   Twenty four feet (24') on a lot with one acre or more of
lot area.
            (2)   A rotor diameter greater than twenty four feet (24') may be
authorized provided both of the following conditions are met:
               A.   The separation distance from the SWES to the nearest
dwelling under other ownership is a minimum of 8.3 times the rotor diameter, up
to a maximum diameter of seventy five feet (75').
               B.   The lot area is three acres or larger.
         (d)   The minimum setback for a SWES shall be the distance equal to
the total extended height of the SWES from all lot lines, public right-of-way,
railroad right-of-way, and overhead utility lines. The setback shall be
measured from the center of the SWEC tower's base.
         (e)   The requirements of subsections (G)2(c) and (G)2(d) above may be
lessened if a variance is granted by the Village Board, and provided that prior
to the decision regarding such a variance request, that each landowner with
property that falls within the required setback distance as indicated in
subsections (G)2(c) and (G)2(d) above:
            (1)   Submits for review a signed private waiver that establishes a
specific agreement for a lesser requirement with regard to either subsections
(G)2(c) or (G)2(d), or both subsections (G)2(c) and (G)2(d) above, which
includes the landowner's acknowledgement and acceptance of the consequences of
the waiver; and
            (2)   The signed private waiver is recorded as part of the chain of
title in the deed to any relevant tract of land prior to the authorization of
any permit.
         (f)   No SWES guy wire anchors may extend closer than ten feet (10')
to the lot line, or the distance of the required setback in the respective
zoning district, whichever results in a greater setback.
         (g)   No part of a SWES shall be located on any public easement.
         (h)   In residential districts, the C General Commercial District, or
TC Town Center District, a SWES shall be located entirely behind the principal
building.
   (H)   On-Site Wind Energy System (OWES):
      1.   On-site wind energy systems (OWES) are permitted only in the
Agricultural District or Industrial District.
      2.   An OWES shall be subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   An OWES shall meet the design standards set forth in subsection
(I) of this section.
         (b)   The total extended height of an OWES shall not exceed one
hundred seventy five feet (175'), except that the total extended height shall
not exceed one hundred fifty five feet (155') if located within five hundred
feet (500') of an existing off-site dwelling, the boundary of a residentially
zoned lot.
         (c)   (1)   The maximum allowable rotor diameter of an OWES shall be:
               A.   Fifteen feet (15') on a lot with less than one acre of lot
area; and
               B.   Twenty four feet (24') on a lot with one acre or more of
lot area.
            (2)   A rotor diameter greater than twenty four feet (24') may be
authorized provided both of the following conditions are met:
               A.   The separation distance from the OWES to the nearest
dwelling under other ownership is a minimum of 8.3 times the rotor diameter, up
to a maximum diameter of seventy five feet (75').
               B.   The lot area is three acres or larger.
         (d)   The minimum setback for an OWES shall be the distance equal to
the total extended height of the OWES from all lot lines, public rights-of-way,
railroad rights-of-way, and overhead utility lines. The setback shall be
measured from the center of the OWES tower's base.
         (e)   No OWES guy wire anchors may extend closer than ten feet (10')
to the lot line, or the distance of the required setback in the respective
zoning district, whichever results in a greater setback.
         (f)   No part of an OWES shall be located on any public easement.
   (I)   Design Standards: In addition to all other applicable requirements of
this section, wind energy systems shall be constructed in conformance with the
following design standards:
      1.   Visual Appearance Standards:
         (a)   SWES shall be required to have a monopole type tower.
         (b)   A wind energy system shall be the color supplied by the
manufacturer or a non-reflective, non-obtrusive color such as off white, light
gray or other neutral color. The required coloration and finish shall be
maintained throughout the life of the system.
         (c)   No illumination of a wind energy system shall be allowed unless
required by the Federal Aviation Administration. If lighting is required, the
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to
surrounding land uses.
         (d)   Signs, commercial markings, messages, or banners on the wind
energy system shall be prohibited, except for one warning sign no more than
four square feet in area.
         (e)   All on-site electrical transmission lines connecting a wind
energy system to a building or public utility electricity distribution system
or substation shall be located underground. As-built plans shall be submitted
showing the location of underground conduit and cable located within the public
right-of-way.
      2.   Safety Standards:
         (a)   All wind energy systems shall be equipped with an automatic
over-speed control to render the system inoperable when winds are blowing in
excess of the speeds for which the system is designed and a manually operable
method to render the system inoperable in the event of a structural or
mechanical failure of any part of the system.
         (b)   On a tower-mounted wind energy system with a vertically mounted
rotor, a minimum clearance of 10 feet between the ground and the lowest arc of
the rotor blades is required. On a tower-mounted wind energy system with a
horizontally mounted rotor, a minimum clearance of twenty feet (20') between
the ground and the lowest arc of the rotor blades is required.
         (c)   Wind energy system towers shall be designed to discourage
unauthorized climbing by removal of climbing rungs to a height of twelve feet
(12'), or by using a six-foot (6') height fence with locking portals or other
applicable anti-climbing measures.
         (d)   All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
         (e)   At a minimum, a wind energy system must be engineered to
withstand a wind velocity of one hundred ten (110) miles per hour.
         (f)   All wind energy systems shall be designed and sited so that they
shall not cause any significant electromagnetic interference with any radio,
television, microwave communication, or satellite navigation on other
properties.
            (1)   All wind energy systems shall comply with the Federal
Communication Commission (FCC) requirements for electromagnetic interference
including FCC Part 15.
            (2)   All wind energy system turbines shall utilize nonmetallic
rotor blades.
         (g)   A wind energy system shall not produce vibrations detectible by
persons without the aid of scientific instruments on any adjacent property.
         (h)   All wind energy systems shall conform to applicable industry
standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
         (i)   Wind energy systems shall be designed and located to minimize
shadow flicker.
            (1)   Shadow flicker expected to fall on a dwelling shall be
acceptable provided that the shadow flicker will not fall on the location of
concern for more than thirty (30) hours per year, based on the assumption that
cloud cover will not obscure sunlight during the entire course of the year.
            (2)   Wind energy systems with a total extended height over one
hundred fifty five feet (155') shall be sited in a manner that does not result
in significant shadow flicker impacts on adjacent properties. Significant
shadow flicker impacts are defined as surpassing the threshold as described in
subsection (I)2(i)(1) above.
A special use permit application for a wind energy system having a total
extended height over one hundred fifty five feet (155') shall include a shadow
flicker study. The applicant has the burden of providing evidence that the
shadow flicker will not have significant adverse impact. Using available
software, the applicant shall show calculated locations of shadow flicker
caused by the wind energy system and the expected duration in total number of
hours per year of the flicker cast upon adjacent dwellings and within the
boundary of adjacent residentially zoned lots. Potential shadow flicker must be
addressed either through siting or through other approved mitigation measures.
         (j)   Sound Level Limitations: No wind energy system or combination of
wind energy systems on a single lot shall create noise that exceeds the
regulatory standards set by the Illinois EPA Pollution Control Board at any
property line where the wind energy system is located. Measurement of sound
levels shall not be adjusted for, or averaged with, non-operating periods. Any
wind energy system exceeding this level shall immediately cease operation upon
notification by the Village Board and may not resume operation until the noise
levels have been reduced in compliance with the required standards and verified
by an independent third-party inspector, approved by the Village, at the
property owner's expense. Only upon Village Board review and acceptance of the
third-party noise level report, may the wind energy system resume operation.
   (J)   Additional Permit Application Requirements: In addition to the
requirements established in chapter 10-10 for a zoning permit application and
in chapter 10-11 for a special use permit application, an application for a
zoning permit or a special use permit for a wind energy system shall include:
      1.   A copy of the manufacturer's standard drawings of the wind turbine
structure and stamped engineering drawings of the tower, base, footings, and/or
foundations as provided by the manufacturer sufficient to prove that the wind
energy system is safe for the use intended. Wet stamps shall not be required.
      2.   A copy of the wind turbine manufacturer's certification of
compliance with FCC requirements with the zoning permit application.
      3.   Certificates of design compliance that equipment manufacturers have
obtained from Underwriters Laboratories (UL), National Renewable Energy
Laboratories (NREL), Det Norske Veritas (DNV), Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energie
(GL), or an equivalent third party.
      4.   Evidence must be given that the utility company has been informed of
the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.
Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
      5.   Such evidence and documentation as required verifying that the wind
energy system meets all other zoning ordinance requirements.
   (K)   Maintenance: All wind energy systems shall be maintained in good
condition and in safe working order throughout the life of the system. If the
system is not maintained in operational condition and/or poses a potential
safety hazard, the owner shall immediately correct the situation at the expense
of the owner. Any wind energy system found to be unsafe by the Village Board or
appointed designee, must stop operation immediately upon notification. If the
owner fails to correct the unsafe condition, the Village Board may remove or
cause to be removed, altered or repaired, at cost to the owner, an unsafe wind
energy system immediately and without notice, if, in his/her opinion, the
condition of the system is such as to present an immediate threat to the safety
of the public.
   (L)   Removal of an Inoperable Wind Energy System: The Wind Energy
Conversion System or individual turbine is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance if it has been inoperable or has not been operated to generate any
electricity for one hundred eighty (180) or more consecutive days. If a wind
energy system is derelict for one hundred eighty (180) or more consecutive
days, the owner shall be notified that they must, within six (6) months of
receiving the notice, restore their system to operating condition. If the owner
(s) fails to restore their system to operating condition within the six (6)
month period, then the owner shall be required, at the expense of the owner, to
remove the wind energy system. Removal of a wind energy system that constitutes
a public nuisance shall include removal of the turbines, tower, and any above
ground improvements, including fencing. If the owner fails to remove the wind
energy system within one month, the Village Board or appointed designee shall
send a notice that the wind energy system is in violation of the Zoning
Ordinance and subject to a daily fine as provided for in this title.
   (M)   Violation: Should a wind energy system or any part thereof violate the
requirements of this section, the owner shall cease operations immediately.
Upon receipt of a complaint or the notice of a complaint from the owner, the
Village Board shall make a determination as to whether there is a violation
requiring the immediate cessation of operation. The system may resume operation
once the violation(s) have been remedied.
   (N)   Pre-Existing Wind Energy Systems:
      1.   Pre-existing wind energy systems shall be allowed to continue.
Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such pre-existing systems.
      2.   A zoning permit and any other necessary zoning and development
approvals shall be obtained to alter, enlarge, extend, replace or relocate a
pre-existing wind energy system.
      3.   If a pre-existing wind energy system is nonconforming with this
Section, it shall not be altered, enlarged, extended or relocated such that the
nonconformity of the system is increased.
      4.   Pre-existing wind energy systems that are substantially damaged or
destroyed must be rebuilt to conform to this section. (Ord.2021-04 , 6-22-2021)
10-4-16: ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All uses must comply with the performance standards established in this section
unless any federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulation
establishes a more restrictive standard, in which case, the more restrictive
standard shall apply.
   (A)   Noise: All activities and uses must comply with the Illinois State
Code, Administrative Code Subtitle H (Noise), Chapter 1: Pollution Control
Board, Part 901, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   Glare And Heat: Any activity or the operation of any use that produces
glare or heat must be conducted so that no glare or heat from the activity or
operation is detectable at any point off the lot on which the use is located.
Flickering or intense sources of light must be controlled or shielded so as not
to cause a nuisance across lot lines.
   (C)   Vibration: No earthborn vibration from the operation of any use may be
detectable at any point off the lot on which the use is located.
   (D)   Dust And Air Pollution: Dust and other types of air pollution, borne
by the wind from sources, such as storage areas, yards, roads, conveying
equipment and the like, within lot boundaries, must be kept to a minimum by
appropriate landscape, screening, sheltering, paving, fencing, wetting,
collecting, or other acceptable means.
   (E)   Discharge and Disposal of Radioactive and Hazardous Waste: The
discharge of fluid and the disposal of solid radioactive and hazardous waste
materials must comply with applicable federal, state, and local laws, and
regulations governing such materials or waste. No operation that produces
radioactive or hazardous waste material may commence without prior notice to
the Village. Radioactive and hazardous material waste must be transported,
stored, and used in conformance with all applicable federal, state, and local
laws.
   (F)   Electromagnetic Interference: Electromagnetic interference from any
operation of any use that does not comply with the rules and regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission must not adversely affect the operation of
any equipment located off the lot on which such interference originates.
   (G)   Odors: Any condition or operation which results in the creation of
odors of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the public health
and welfare, or which interferes unreasonably with the comfort of the public,
must be removed, stopped or modified so as to remove the odor.
   (H)   Fire and Explosion Hazards: Materials that present potential fire and
explosion hazards must be transported, stored, and used only in conformance
with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-
2021)
10-4-17: DUMPSTERS:
   (A)   Definition:
 
          Temporary disposal units, for use in commercial or residential waste
          uses. Dumpsters are owned by licensed disposal companies, leased or
DUMPSTER: rented to commercial or residential users. The temporary and larger
          scale use of a dumpster is separate from normal, regularly scheduled
          waste disposal services.
 
   (B)   Permit: No Village permit is required for use of a dumpster, however
user must follow all rules of licensed disposal company.
   (C)   Duration: Use of a dumpster shall be limited to two (2) weeks.
   (D)   Location: Temporary location for dumpsters shall be limited to private
property of user. Location shall not interfere with traffic, parking,
pedestrian or ADA access. Dumpsters shall not be located on Village right-of-
way, streets or parking without prior approval from Zoning Administrator. (Ord.
2021-04, 6-22-2021)
CHAPTER 5
USES
SECTION:
10-5-1: General Use Permission
10-5-2: Authorized Use Table
10-5-3: Interpretation Of Materially Similar Uses
10-5-4: Uses Preempted By State Statute
10-5-5: Principal Use Standards
10-5-6: Temporary Use Standards
10-5-1: GENERAL USE PERMISSION:
No structure or land may be used or occupied except in conformity with the
regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-
22-2021)
10-5-2: AUTHORIZED USE TABLE:
   (A)   Table 10-5A identifies the principal and temporary uses allowed within
each zoning district.
   (B)   Based On Table 10-5A Specifications:
      1.   If a use or activity is listed as 'allowable' for said district, a
zoning permit is still required. Property owner must make permit request to the
Village prior to change in use or activity. The proposed use or activity will
then be reviewed by Zoning Administrator for conformance with said ordinance. A
Zoning Permit may then be issued in accordance with chapter 10-11 of this
title.
      2.   If a use or activity is listed as requiring a special use permit, a
special use permit may be authorized by the Planning and Zoning Committee.
Property owner must first make special use permit request to the Village. The
proposed special use or activity will then be reviewed by the Planning and
Zoning Committee for conformance with said ordinances. A special use permit may
then be issued in accordance with chapter 10-11 of this title.
      3.   If a use or activity is listed as requiring temporary use permit for
said district, a temporary use permit may be authorized by the Zoning
Administrator. Property owner must make temporary use permit request to the
Village prior to temporary use or activity. The proposed temporary use or
activity will then be reviewed by Zoning Administrator for conformance with
said Ordinances. A Temporary Use Permit may then be issued in accordance with
chapter 10-11 of this title.
   (C)   If Table 10-5A contains a cell that is blank, then that use or
activity is not allowed in the district. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-5-3: INTERPRETATION OF MATERIALLY SIMILAR USES:
   (A)   It is the intent of Table 10-5A to group similar or compatible land
uses into specific zoning districts, either as permitted uses or as uses
authorized by a special use permit.
   (B)   All questions regarding a use not included in Table 10-5A shall be
presented to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall interpret
whether a use not included in Table 10-5A can reasonably be interpreted to fit
into a use category where similar uses are described, and shall record his/her
decision in writing. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-5-4: USES PREEMPTED BY STATE STATUTE:
Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, uses that are
required to be permitted in any zoning district by state statute may be
permitted in accordance with state law whether or not the use is included in
Table 10-5A.
Table 10-5A. Authorized Principal Uses
Table 10-5A Key
Zones:
R-1      R-1 Residential District
C      Commercial General District
R-2      R-2 Residential District    A   Allowable, Zoning Permit
CD      Commercial Downtown District required
R-2a      R-2a Residential District  S   Special Use Permit required
I      Industrial District               Not Permitted
R-3      R-3 Residential District
A      Agricultural District
R-4      R-4 Residential District
Principal Use/Activity                     R-1 R-2 R-2a R-3 R-4 C CD I A
Table 10-5A. Authorized Principal Uses
Table 10-5A Key
Zones:
R-1      R-1 Residential District
C      Commercial General District                                  A   Allowable, Zoning Permit
R-2      R-2 Residential District                                   required
CD      Commercial Downtown District                                S   Special Use Permit
R-2a      R-2a Residential District                                 required
I      Industrial District                                              Not Permitted
R-3      R-3 Residential District
A      Agricultural District
R-4      R-4 Residential District
Principal Use/Activity                                                    R- R- R- R- R- C CD I A
                                                                          1  2  2a 3  4
Residential buildings
   Single-family dwelling                                              A  A  A  A  A       S A
   Two-family dwelling                                                       A  A  A
   Multi-family dwelling                                                        A  A  S S
   Manufactured home park                                                       S  S         S
   Residential use of a building constructed prior to June 4, 1963 for a              S S  S
residential use and since converted to a commercial use
   Row house or Townhouse building                                              S  S  S S
   Row house or Townhouse dwelling                                              S  S  S S
   Community living facility, Category I                               A  A     A  A
   Community living facility, Category II                                       A  A
   Community living facility, Category III                                      S  S         S
   Assisted/Independent Living Facility                                S  S  A  S  S  S S    S
   Elderly Housing/Retirement Housing                                  S  S  A  S  S  S S    S
   Residential Care Facility                                                       S  S S    S
   Recovery Home                                                                S  S  S S    S
Hotels, motels, or other accommodation services
   Bed-and-breakfast inn                                               S  S     S  S  S S
   Boarding house                                                      S  S     S  S  S S
   Hotel                                                                              A A
   Motel                                                                              S S
Commercial buildings
   Adult use                                                                          S    S
   Bars, taverns, and nightclubs                                                      A A
   Beer, wine, and liquor store (Sale of alcohol)                                     A A
   Brewery (Micro) or Winery (On site consumption, sales and minor                    A A
production). Class MB/W-1 License
   Brewery or Winery (Larger scale production, distribution). Class MB/W-             A    A
2 License
   Car wash/car care center                                                           A    A
   Commercial use of a building constructed prior to June 4, 1963 for aS  S     S  S  S S  S
commercial use and since converted to residential use
   Convenience stores or centers                                                      A A  A
   Gas station                                                                        S    S
   Lumberyard and building materials                                                  S    A
   Medical marijuana dispensary                                                       S S  S
   Office or bank building, stand-alone (without drive-through facilityS              A A  A
   Office or store building with residence on top                                     A A  A
   Office building over storefronts                                                   A A  A
   Parts, accessories, or tires                                                       A A  A
   Pawnshops                                                                          A A
   Pharmacies                                                                         A A  S
   Research-and-development services (scientific, medical, and                        A A  A
technology)
   Restaurant, with incidental consumption of alcoholic beverages                     A A
   Restaurant, with no consumption of alcoholic beverages permitted                   A A
   Retail sales at garden center, greenhouse, or nursery                              A A  A S
   Services to buildings and dwellings                                                A A  A
   Shop or store building with drive-through facility                                 S S  S
   Shop or store building with no drive-through facility                              A A  A
   Shopping center                                                                    A A  A
   Tattoo parlors                                                                     A A
   Vehicle dealership - fully enclosed                                                A A
   Vehicle dealership - with outdoor storage and display                              S    S
   Vehicle repair/service - minor                                                     A S  A
   Vehicle repair/service - major                                                     S    S
   Warehouse discount store/superstore                                                S S
Industrial buildings and structures
   Assembly and construction-type plants                                                   S
   Contractor storage yard                                                            S    A
   Demolition business                                                                     S
   Laboratory or specialized industrial facility                                      S    A
   Landscape business                                                                 S    A S
   Landscape waste processing facility                                                     A S
   Light assembly plant                                                               S    A
   Light industrial structures and facilities                                         S    A
   Loft building                                                                      S    A
   Manufacturing plant                                                                     A
   Medical marijuana cultivation center                                                    S
   Mill-type factory structures                                                            A
   Recycling business                                                                      S
   Refrigerated warehouse or cold storage                                                  S
   Self-storage warehouse                                                             S    S
   Storage yard (outdoors)                                                            S    A
   Warehouse                                                                          S    S
   Welding shops                                                                      S    A
   Wholesale trade - durable goods                                                    S    S
   Wholesale trade - nondurable goods                                                 S    S
Institutional or community facilities
   Animal clinic or animal hospital with no outdoor kennel or outdoor           S  S  A A  S S
storage
   Animal clinic or animal hospital with outdoor kennel or outdoor              S  S  S S  S S
storage
   Assisted Living, adult                                              S     S        A S  S S
   Cemetery or mausoleum                                                                     S
   Churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, and other religious facilitiSs S     S  S  S S  S S
   Clubs or lodges                                                     S  S     S  S  A A    S
   College or university facility                                                     A S
   Community food services                                                            A A
   Cremation facilities                                                                    S
   Daycare center, adult                                                     S  S  S  A A  S
   Daycare center/nursery school                                                S  S  A A  S
   Exhibitions and art galleries                                                      A A
   Exhibition, convention, or conference structure                                    A S
   Funeral home                                                        S  S     S  S  S S  S S
   Hospital building                                                            S  S  S S  S S
   Kennel                                                                             S S  S S
   Medical clinic building                                                      S  S  A A  S S
   Municipal or other government building                              S  S     S  S  A A  A A
   Museum or similar facility                                                         A A
   Public parks, playgrounds, conservation or recreational areas       A  A     A  A  A A  A A
   Social assistance, welfare, and charitable services                          S  S  A A
   Trade or specialty school facility                                                 A S  S S
Public assembly structures
   Active open space, athletic field, or golf course with no stadium
lighting                                                                  A  A     A  A  A S    A
   or sports lighting
   Amusement, sports, or recreation establishment (other)                             A A    S
   Athletic field or golf course with stadium lighting or sports lightiSg S     S  S  S S    S
   Arcade                                                                             A A
   Assembly hall                                                                      A S
   Bowling, billiards, pool, etc.                                                     A A
   Covered or partially covered atriums                                               A A
   Drive-in theater                                                                          S
   Fitness, recreational sports, gym, or athletic club                          S  S  A A
   Library building                                                    S  S     S  S  A A
   Miniature golf establishment                                                       A S
   Movie theater                                                                      A A
   Performance theater                                                                A A
   School                                                              S  S     S  S  A S  S S
Transportation-related facilities
   Bus terminal                                                                       S
   Heliport or Helipad                                                                S S  S
   Local transit facility and systems, including rail trails           A  A     A  A  A A  A A
   Off-site parking facilities                                         S  S     S  S  A A  A
   Restricted landing area                                                                   S
   Taxi and limousine service                                                         S S  S
   Towing and other road services                                                     S    S
   Ultralight landing area                                                                 S S
Agricultural - business uses
   Commercial grain elevator or bins                                                       S S
   Crop production                                                                         A A
   Farm chemicals and fertilizer sales including incidental storage
   and mixing of blended                                                              S    S A
   fertilizer
   Farm equipment sales and service                                                   S    S A
   Feed and grain sales only                                                               S A
   Roadside stand for produce sales                                                   S S    S
Utility and other nonbuilding structures
   Artificial lake of one or more acres                                S  S  S  S  S  S    S S
   Electrical substation                                               S  S     S  S  S S  S S
   Fountain, sculpture, or other aesthetic structure                   S  S  S  S  S  S S    S
   Kiosks                                                                             S S
   Off-premises billboard or sign                                                     S S  S S
   Outdoor stage, bandstand, or similar structure                                     S S    S
   Radio tower, broadcasting station, or telecommunications tower               S  S  S S  S S
   Rest stops and welcome centers                                                     S S
   Sewage treatment plant                                                             S    S S
   Utility structures on right-of-way                                  A  A  A  A  A  A A  A A
   Water supply pump station or community well                         S  S  S  S  S  S S  S S
   Water tank                                                          S  S  S  S  S  S S  S S
Mining and extraction establishments
Topsoil removal                                                                               S S
Quarrying and stone cutting                                                                   S S
Temporary uses
Farmers' market                                                           S  S     S  S  S S    S
Real estate sales office/model unit                                       A  A     A  A  S A    A
Temporary contractor's office                                             A  A     A  A  A A  A A
Temporary mobile sales                                                    S  S     S  S  S S  S S
Temporary outdoor entertainment/promotional event                         S  S     S  S  S S  S S
Temporary outdoor sales                                                   S  S     S  S  A A  S S
 
(Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-09, 4-26-2022)
10-5-5: PRINCIPAL USE STANDARDS:
Where applicable, principal uses are required to comply with all use standards
of this section, whether a permitted or special use, in addition to all other
regulations of this title.
   (A)   Adult Use:
      1.   No adult use may be maintained or operated in any manner that
causes, creates, or allows public viewing of any adult material, or any
entertainment depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, from any sidewalk, public or private right-of-
way, or any property other than the lot or parcel on which the licensed
premises is located.
      2.   No portion of the exterior of an adult use may install or contain
any flashing lights, searchlights, or spotlights, or any other similar lighting
systems, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or
pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent specifically set
forth for in the sign ordinance for adult-oriented businesses.
      3.   No adult use may be operated within one thousand feet (1,000') of an
existing:
         (a)   Place of worship;
         (b)   Educational facility;
         (c)   Park/playground/public multi-use trail;
         (d)   Residential district or residential dwelling (all types);
         (e)   Designated historical or cultural district;
         (f)   Cemetery;
         (g)   Day care center;
         (h)   Forest preserve;
         (i)   Retail sales of alcohol;
         (j)   Indoor or outdoor recreation facility that holds youth
activities;
   (B)   Brewery or Winery:
      1.   Brewery (Micro) or Winery, as listed in the Authorized Principal Use
Charts, with a designation as "On site consumption, sales and minor production"
shall be interpreted as having a primary intent to serve beer or wine products
produced in lower volumes, on-site. Minor sales of packaged beer or wine
products, produced on-site, may be allowed. As defined and licensed as Class
MB/W-1 by the Village under Title 3, Section
3-3-5(B)8 of the Liquor Control ordinance.
      2.   Brewery or Winery, as listed in the Authorized Principal Use Charts,
with a designation as "Larger scale production, distribution" shall be
interpreted as having a primary intent to produce, distribute and sell larger
volumes of beer or wine products on-site. As defined and licensed as Class MB/
W-2 by the Village under Title 3, Section
3-3-5(B)8 of the Liquor Control ordinance.
   (C)   Community Living Facility:
      1.   Community living facilities must meet all federal, state, and local
requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety, and
building code requirements.
      2.   A copy of state license must be visible at all times.
   (D)   Contractor Storage Yard and Storage Yard (Outdoor):
      1.   A contractor storage yard and any outdoor storage associated with
light or general industrial uses must be completely enclosed along all lot
lines by a solid fence or wall a minimum of eight feet in height, including
ingress and egress. Fences or walls along a front yard lot line must be set
back a minimum of ten feet (10'), and comply with:
         (a)   The sight visibility triangle clearance requirements of
subsection
10-4-1(F); and
         (b)   The driveway visibility area clearance requirements of section
10-4-5.
      2.   If the contractor storage yard or outdoor storage yard is located
within the General Commercial district, or if adjacent to a residential
district or Downtown Commercial District:
         (a)   Plants that include evergreens, with additional shrubs, trees,
ornamental grasses, or perennials must be installed and maintained within the
required ten foot (10') setback along the street side frontage of the fence or
wall.
         (b)   The plants must be installed at intervals or within groupings
along the street side frontage of the fence or wall in order to ultimately
provide visual relief from the monotony of the required fence or wall.
         (c)   The plantings must be of a sufficient type, size, and height to
provide for year-round coverage of approximately half the total street side
façade of the fence or wall within a two-year period.
      3.   Where any principal building screens an outdoor storage area, the
fence and the associated setback is not required.
      4.   Storage of any kind is prohibited outside the fence or wall. No
items stored within the fence may exceed the height of the fence or wall.
      5.   The storage area should be located to the rear of the lot where
possible. Any structures must be located towards the front of the lot, in
compliance with the front yard of the underlying zoning district.
      6.   Outdoor storage areas must be surfaced with an all-weather dust-free
material and graded to drain all surface water.
   (E)   Day Care Center:
      1.   Day care centers must meet all federal, state, and local
requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety, and
building code requirements.
      2.   Open space and/or recreational areas must be provided as required by
the State of Illinois licensing requirements. The outdoor recreational areas
must be separated from parking areas and enclosed by a semi-open or closed
fence a minimum of six feet in height.
      3.   A pickup/drop off area must be provided. When a day care center
ispart of a multi-tenant retail center, the pickup/drop off area must not
interferewith vehicle circulation inthe parking lot, including blocking of the
drive aisle.
   (F)   Helipad or Heliport:
      1.   The helipad or heliport must meet all applicable standards of the
U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, and the
Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics, and must be
designed and constructed in accordance with all state and federal regulations.
      2.   All structures must meet the setback requirements of the district
where it is located.
   (G)   Manufactured Home or Mobile Home:
      1.   All inhabited manufactured homes or mobile homes s shall be located
in a manufactured home park that has received a special use permit.
      2.   No manufactured home or mobile home shall be located and used for
living, sleeping, business, commercial, or storage purposes outside of an
approved manufactured home park.
   (H)   Manufactured Home Park: The following additional requirements shall be
required for manufactured home parks as may be deemed necessary for their
proper development and the protection of the surrounding areas:
      1.   Compliance with all applicable state and county regulations
regarding sanitation and other requirements.
      2.   At least five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet of lot area
per manufactured home or mobile home shall be provided.
      3.   No manufactured home or mobile home shall be located closer to a
street, highway or right of way than the required front yard setback or closer
than twenty five feet (25') to any property line.
      4.   A clearance of not less than twenty feet (20') shall be maintained
between mobile homes or trailers on all sides.
      5.   Each manufactured home or mobile home shall abut upon a hard surface
driveway or access of not less than twenty five feet (25') in width and each
space shall have an unobstructed access to a public highway, street or alley.
      6.   The mobile home park shall occupy an area of not less than ten (10)
acres and shall be surrounded by a landscaped strip of open space fifty feet
(50') wide along the street frontage and twenty five feet (25') wide along all
other lot lines.
      7.   Any office, service, recreation or other structural facilities shall
be located at least twenty five feet (25') from the side and rear lot lines and
shall be accessible to all manufactured homes or mobile home by means of the
access drives or hard surface walkways.
   (I)   Medical Marijuana Cultivation Center: In accordance with Illinois
state law, a medical marijuana cultivation center may not be located within two
thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of:
      1.   A pre-existing educational facility, primary or secondary;
      2.   A day care center; or
      3.   Any residential zoned property.
Any subsequent amendment to Illinois state law that is more restrictive than
this standard will control.
   (J)   Medical Marijuana Dispensary: In accordance with Illinois state law, a
medical marijuana dispensary may not be located:
      1.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of a pre-existing educational
facility, primary or secondary or a day care center.
      2.   In a residential dwelling or within a residential district.
Any subsequent amendment to Illinois state law that is more restrictive than
this standard will control.
   (K)   Outdoor Market:
      1.   Temporary stalls or tables are permitted. All tents must meet
applicable fire code requirements.
      2.   Sales may involve new and/or used items. The sale of vehicles, heavy
equipment, boats, watercraft, agricultural machinery, and similar goods is
prohibited.
      3.   Any sales of food products must meet all rules and regulations, and
require approval of the Champaign County Health Department.
      4.   Individual sellers at the outdoor market need not be the same each
time the market is in operation.
   (L)   Row House Building: Special regulations regarding row house buildings
shall be as follows:
      1.   In districts where row house buildings are permitted and row house
dwellings are to be constructed (or converted from apartments) for sale, each
on its own separate lot, to individual owners, such row house buildings shall
not be subject to the minimum lot area requirements of chapter 10-3 of this
title, but instead shall be subject to the minimum requirements specified in
this section.
      2.   Minimum lot area for a row house dwelling lot shall be not less than
four thousand (4,000) square feet.
      3.   Minimum frontage of a row house dwelling lot on a public street
shall be not less than thirty feet (30') on a standard lot and not less than
fifty feet (50') on a corner lot.
      4.   No side yard shall be required along any side lot line that is
common to two attached row house dwellings, whether they be on interior or
exterior row house dwelling lots. One side yard of an exterior row house
dwelling lot where such lot is not common to that of any other attached row
house dwelling shall conform to the least width as required by Section
10-3-5 provisions for the R-3 or R-4 Residential Districts or by Section
10-3-6 provisions for the Town Center or General Commercial Districts.
      5.   A row house building must meet the front yard and rear yard
requirements as established in chapter 10-3 of this title.
      6.   A minimum lot width of forty feet (40') shall be provided for all
interior and exterior row house dwelling lots.
      7.   Row house buildings shall be developed on subdivided lots with no
more than three (3) dwelling units per building; nor shall such building exceed
one hundred twenty feet (120') in length.
      8.   The maximum lot coverage by a row house dwelling on a row house lot
shall be forty percent (40%) and not less than one thousand eight hundred
(1,800) square feet of open space shall be provided on each row house lot.
      9.   Exterior treatment of attached row houses shall be integrated.
Exterior of buildings shall be maintained in their original color and treatment
unless otherwise agreed to in writing by all affected lot owners.
      10.   An unobstructed easement shall be provided across the side and rear
eight feet of each exterior row house dwelling lot, when adjacent to an
interior row house dwelling lot, and across the rear eight feet (8') of each
interior row house dwelling lot, when adjacent to another interior row house
dwelling lot, for ingress and egress of adjacent interior row house dwelling
lot owners for access and maintenance purposes. Said access easement shall be
unobstructed and physically passable at all times. This easement shall be
incorporated into each deed transferring title to the property and any replat
of the lots involved.
      11.   A party wall agreement shall be included in the subdivision
covenants for each row house dwelling lot setting forth provisions for repair
of common walls, repair of common utility service connections, reconstruction
of the common building in the event of damage or destruction of one or all of
the dwelling units and common maintenance and repair of joint facilities.
   (M)   Ultralight Landing Area:
      1.   The helipad or heliport must meet all applicable standards of the
U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, and the
Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics, and must be
designed and constructed in accordance with all state and federal regulations.
      2.   All structures must meet the setback requirements of the district
where it is located.
   (N)   Vehicle Repair/Service, Minor and Major:
      1.   Vehicle repair/service establishments may not store the same
vehicles outdoors on the site for longer than seven (7) days once repair is
complete. Only vehicles that have been or are being serviced may be stored
outdoors.
      2.   All repair and service operations must be performed within a fully
enclosed building with closed garage doors. All equipment and parts stored
indoors.
      3.   Vehicle repair/service establishments must be screened along
interior side and rear lot lines with a solid wall or fence, a minimum of five
feet (5').
      4.   No partially dismantled, wrecked, or unlicensed vehicle may be
stored outdoors on the premises. This standard does not apply to vehicles under
repair.
      5.   The sale of used or new automobiles is prohibited.
      6.   No motor vehicles may be stored and no repair work may be conducted
in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-5-6: TEMPORARY USE STANDARDS:
Temporary uses are required to comply with the use standards of this section,
in addition to all other regulations of this title. Applicants for a temporary
use must apply for a zoning permit and/or special use permit as indicated in
Table 5A of this chapter. The following standards shall apply to temporary uses
located on private property.
   (A)   Farmers' Market:
      1.   The time frame of a farmers' market, including number of days per
week and overall duration of the event, will be determined and approved as part
of the special use permit.
      2.   A management plan is required as part of the special use permit
application that demonstrates the following:
         (a)   An established set of operating rules addressing the governance
structure of the market, hours of operation, maintenance, and security
requirements when open to the public.
         (b)   General layout of vendor stalls, visitor facilities, such as
seating areas and restrooms, and all ingress and egress points to the site.
         (c)   Provision for recycling and waste removal.
         (d)   The days and hours of internal operation, including vendor set-
up and take-down times.
   (B)   Real Estate Sales Office/Model Unit:
      1.   A real estate sales office/model unit(s) is allowed in any approved
residential subdivision or within a multi-family dwelling. Multiple model units
are allowed.
      2.   The zoning permit shall be valid for no more than one year, but may
be renewed. However, zoning permits for multi-family rental models have no
expiration.
      3.   The real estate sales office/model unit(s) must be removed and
closed within thirty (30) days after the sale of the last unit of the
development.
      4.   All activities conducted within real estate sales office/model unit
(s) must be directly related to the construction and sale of properties within
the particular development. Use as a general office of operation of any firm is
prohibited.
   (C)   Temporary Contractor's Office:
      1.   A temporary contractor's office is allowed incidental and accessory
to a construction project.
      2.   The zoning permit shall be valid for a six-month period and is
renewable for six successive periods at the same location.
      3.   The temporary contractor's office must be removed within thirty (30)
days of completion of the construction project.
   (D)   Temporary Mobile Sales:
      1.   The time frame of a temporary mobile sales use shall be determined
and approved as part of the special use permit.
      2.   The special use permit shall be evaluated based on the adequacy of
the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access, and the absence of undue
adverse impact, including noise, on other properties.
      3.   All mobile food establishments must be properly licensed by the
Champaign County Health Department.
      4.   If the mobile sales establishment operator is not the owner of the
site where the truck or trailer will be located, written permission from the
property owner must be submitted as part of the Special Use Permit application.
      5.   Sale of alcohol is prohibited.
      6.   During mobile food sales business hours, the permit holder must
provide a trash receptacle for customer use and must keep the area clear of
litter and debris at all times.
      7.   Outdoor seating may be provided for temporary mobile food sales on
the site, but no seating may be permanently installed. No seating will be
allowed that reduces the amount of parking required for the site to below this
title requirement.
      8.   A permanent water or wastewater connection is prohibited.
      9.   Electrical service may be provided only by temporary service or
other connection provided by an electric utility, or an on-board generator.
      10.   Drive-through service is prohibited.
      11.   A mobile sales establishment is limited to signs attached to the
exterior of the truck or trailer that must be mounted flat against the truck or
trailer with a maximum projection of six inches (6") and one A-frame sign.
   (E)   Temporary Outdoor Entertainment/Promotional Event:
      1.   A management plan is required as part of the special use permit
application that demonstrates the following:
         (a)   General layout of performance areas, visitor facilities, such as
seating areas and restrooms, parking areas, and all ingress and egress points
to the site.
         (b)   Provision for recycling and waste removal.
         (c)   The days and hours of operation, including set-up and takedown
times.
         (d)   A description of crowd control and security measures.
      2.   Any temporary structures must be removed within three (3) days of
conclusion of the event.
      3.   Events are limited to four (4) events per calendar year and a
maximum duration of four (4) days per event, with a minimum of thirty (30) days
between events, with the following exceptions:
         (a)   A special use permit for a carnival or circus is valid for a
period of two (2) events per calendar year no more than fifteen (15) days, with
a minimum of thirty (30) days between events.
   (F)   Temporary Outdoor Sales:
      1.   A management plan is required as part of the special use permit
application that demonstrates the following:
         (a)   An established set of operating rules addressing the governance
structure of the sales event, hours of operation, maintenance, and security
requirements.
         (b)   General layout of vendor stalls, visitor facilities, such as
seating areas and restrooms, parking areas, and all ingress and egress points
to the site.
         (c)   Provision for recycling and waste removal.
         (d)   The days and hours of operation, including vendor set-up and
take-down times.
      2.   Any temporary structures must be removed within three (3) days of
conclusion of the event.
      3.   Temporary outdoor sales events are limited to four events per
calendar year and a maximum duration of seven (7) days per event, with the
following exceptions:
         (a)   A special use permit for a seasonal sale, such as Christmas tree
lots or pumpkin patches, are limited to four (4) events per calendar year and a
maximum duration of forty five (45) days. There is no minimum time between
events.
      4.   Temporary outdoor sales of vehicles must conform to the following
additional standards:
         (a)   The special use permit shall be evaluated based on the adequacy
of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access, and the absence of
undue adverse impact, including noise, on other properties.
         (b)   A site plan is required as part of the special use permit
application that describes all ingress and egress routes for all vehicles, all
structures, and the general display area of vehicles. Dead-end parking aisles
shall be prohibited. All exits and entrances must be clearly marked.
         (c)   Repair and service of vehicles is prohibited.
         (d)   All vehicles on display must be operable.
      5.   No sales and display area is permitted in any public right-of-way or
in any required setback.
      6.   A portion or a parking area may be used for temporary outdoor sales
on a temporary basis, in terms of both display structure and goods displayed or
sold. Permanent display structures are prohibited in parking areas. No more
than ten percent (10%) of the required parking area for the existing use may be
used for the temporary outdoor sales and display. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
CHAPTER 6
[RESERVED]
CHAPTER 7
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-7-1: Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
10-7-2: Rules For Computing Parking Spaces
10-7-3: Location Of Required Parking Spaces
10-7-4: Off-Street Loading Berths
10-7-5: Minimum Improvement And Maintenance Standards
10-7-1: MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
No building shall be erected, enlarged to the extent of increasing the floor
area by twenty percent (20%) or more, or changed in use unless there is
provided on the lot or tract of land used, space for the parking of automobiles
or other vehicles in accordance with the minimum requirements indicated in
Table 10-7A, Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces.
Table 10-7A Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Table 10-7A Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Auditorium, theater, and other place of 1 parking space for each 5 seats.
public assembly
Church or temple                        1 parking space for each 5 seats in the
                                        main auditorium
Community center, library, museum, or   1 parking space for each 300 square
similar public or semipublic building   feet of floor area in the building
Daycare facility                        3 parking spaces for each 2 employees
                                        1 parking space for each 100 square
Funeral home                            feet of parlor area, plus 1 space for
                                        each vehicle maintained on the premises
                                        1 parking space for each 250 square
                                        feet of floor area devoted to retail
Gasoline and service station            sales. The area designated for cars
                                        using the pump islands may not be
                                        counted as parking spaces
Hotel and motel                         3 parking spaces, plus 1 space for each
                                        sleeping room or suite
                                        2 parking spaces for every 3 employees
                                        on the maximum shift or 1 space for
Manufacturing or industrial             each 1,000 square feet of floor area,
establishment                           whichever is greater, plus space to
                                        accommodate all trucks and other
                                        vehicles used in connection with the
                                        establishment
                                        1 parking space for each 250 square
Medical/dental clinic or bank building  feet of the gross area used for this
                                        purpose
                                        2 spaces for each dwelling unit,
                                        provided that for any unit with more
                                        than 300 square feet of bedroom area, 1
Multi-family dwellings                  additional parking space shall be
                                        provided for each additional 100 square
                                        feet, or part thereof, in excess of
                                        said 300 square feet of bedroom area
Nursing home/residential care facility/ 1 parking space for every 2 beds
elderly housing
Private club or lodge floor area        1 parking space for each 400 square
                                        feet of floor area
Restaurant, café, fast food            1 parking space for each 150 square
                                        feet
Retail                                  1 parking space for each 250 square
                                        feet of floor area
Schools - elementary                    2 parking spaces per classroom
Schools - high schools, colleges, and   10 spaces per classroom
universities
Single-family and two-family dwellings  2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Wholesale, warehouse, or similar        1 space for each 2,000 square feet of
establishment                           floor area
All nonresidential buildings, except    1 space for each 300 feet of floor area
those specified above
 
(Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-7-2: RULES FOR COMPUTING PARKING SPACES:
In computing the number of required off street parking spaces, the following
rules shall apply:
   (A)   Floor area shall mean the gross floor area of the specified use,
excluding any floor or portion thereof used for parking, as herein defined.
   (B)   Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be
the nearest whole number.
   (C)   In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the
sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately.
   (D)   Whenever a building or use constructed or established after 2005 is
changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling
units, seating capacity or otherwise, parking spaces shall be provided on the
basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior
to 2005, is reconstructed or is enlarged to the extent of twenty percent (20%)
or more in floor area, said building or use in its entirety shall then and
thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein. Any
enlargement or change in use of less than twenty percent (20%) of the gross
floor area shall be provided with additional parking based on the enlargement
or change. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-7-3: LOCATION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES:
All parking spaces required herein shall be located as follows:
   (A)   Parking In Front Yards: Parking in required front yards is permitted
in accordance with the following regulations. All parking shall be upon an
approved surface as defined in section
10-7-5 of this chapter.
      1.   In any residential district or agricultural district, parking in the
front yard is required to be located directly in front of the garage door(s),
when present, to minimize paving of the front yard. Provided that such area
devoted to parking and access thereto shall not exceed forty five percent (45%)
of total lot width.
Parking spaces provided in this manner shall not be enclosed, covered, or
otherwise obstructed. Any truck of over ¾ ton capacity shall not be parked in
such spaces.
      2.   In the Downtown Commercial District, General Commercial, or
Industrial Districts, parking spaces may be situated in a required front yard
provided that the parking lot meets the design standards for parking lots in
this chapter and provided that for such properties located on Warren Street or
Main Street, no parking space shall be permitted where the existing vehicle
must be backed into or out of said public streets.
   (B)   Parking in Side or Rear Yards: Parking in required side or rear yards
is permitted on an approved surface as defined in section
10-7-5 of this chapter.
   (C)   Recreational Vehicles, Watercraft, And Commercial Vehicles: In
residential districts, the following shall regulate the parking of recreational
vehicles, watercraft, and off the road vehicles:
      1.   No person shall park any truck in excess of eight thousand (8,000)
pounds, semitrailer or pole trailer on any lot in a residential zoning
district.
      2.   Recreational vehicles and watercraft, either of which are greater
than twenty feet (20') in length, and off the road vehicles shall be stored in
the following manner:
         (a)   Inside a carport or garage; or
         (b)   Outside behind the face of the principal building; or
         (c)   Outside in the front yard at least five feet (5') from the front
lot line provided:
            (1)   Said parking is for loading and unloading operations
completed within a twenty four (24) hour period; and
            (2)   Space is not available in the side yard, or there is no
reasonable access to either the side yard or rear yard. A lot shall be deemed
to have reasonable access to the rear yard if terrain permits and access can be
had without substantial damage to existing large trees or landscaping. A corner
lot shall be deemed to have reasonable access to the rear yard.
      3.   The length of the watercraft for the purpose of this Subsection (C)
shall not include any portion of any trailer used for transporting the
watercraft that extends beyond the watercraft itself.
      4.   No more than two commercial vehicles shall be parked on the lot at
any onetime. Commercial vehicles stored outside must be parked on an approved
driveway or parking space. Such commercial vehicles shall not exceed ¾ ton
capacity and shall be used by an occupant of the dwelling for personal or
business transportation. Commercial vehicles engaged in a lawful construction
or service operation on the site are exempt from this requirement.
   (D)   Parking Facilities Off Site; Permitted Locations:
      1.   Required off street parking facilities for residential uses must be
provided on the same lot where the residential use is located, except as
provided under special use provisions for R-3 and R-4 Districts.
      2.   Any off street parking facilities that are not provided on the same
lot as the principal use, other than single-family or two-family residential
uses in a residential zoning district, can be located by right in the same
zoning district as the principal use except that off street parking facilities
for nonresidential uses in residential zoning districts shall only be allowed
by special use permit. These lots may be located immediately adjacent to the
use or within three hundred feet (300') of the principal use.
      3.   If the principal use is or becomes a nonconforming use, expansion of
the off street parking facilities which are not located on the site of the
principal use is not permitted.
      4.   The distance specified herein and the distances specified in the
district use regulations shall be measured from the nearest point of the
parking facility to the nearest point of the lot occupied by the building or
use that such facility is required to serve.
   (E)   Required Covenants For Off Site Parking: When off street parking
facilities are provided on a lot other than the lot upon which the building or
use requiring such facilities is located, the owner of the lot upon which the
principal use is located and the owner of the lot upon which parking is
provided, shall execute a written covenant containing at least the following
terms:
      1.   In consideration of the issuance of a zoning permit for the
principal use, the lot or portion of the lot on which the parking facility is
located will be used and maintained solely for off street parking purposes for
such principal use, describing the premises for which said parking is provided.
      2.   Such covenant shall be in effect so long as the structures
comprising such principal use continue to exist without sufficient parking
elsewhere or upon the lot with the principal use.
      3.   The parking lot or portion of the parking lot shall contain
appropriate signage to indicate that certain parking spaces are reserved for
the use herein described.
      4.   The owners shall notify the Village Board if the right to use such
facilities lapsesfor any reason within twenty eight (28) days of the cessation
of the right to use.
      5.   The covenant shall not be released except with the written approval
of the Village Board.
      6.   The instrument shall be in a form acceptable to the village
attorney, and recorded with the Champaign County recorder.
   (F)   Dimensions For Parking Modules: Off street parking lots and parking
spaces shall meet the standards of Table 10-7B and Table 10-7C regarding
minimum stall depth, aisle, and space and module widths.
 
Table 10-7B Parking Space Size
Type        Width           Length
Standard    8 feet 9 inches 18 feet 6 inches
Parallel    8 feet 6 inches 22 feet
Accessibl e 16 feet         18 feet 6 inches
 
Table 10-7C Parking Module Dimension
Angle (in degrees) Space Width Stall Depth Aisle Width Module Width (Two Rows
                                                       of Parking)
Table 10-7C Parking Module Dimension
Angle (in Space Width     Stall Depth      Aisle Width      Module Width (Two
degrees)                                                    Rows of Parking)
45        8 feet 9 inches 17 feet 6 inches 14 feet          49 feet
60        8 feet 9 inches 19 feet          16 feet          54 feet
75        8 feet 9 inches 19 feet 6 inches 18 feet 6 inches 57 feet 6 inches
90        8 feet 9 inches 18 feet 6 inches 23 feet          60 feet
Parallel  8 feet 9 inches 22 feet          13 feet          30 feet
Table 10-7C Notes:
1.   Aisle widths noted are for one-way aisles except for 90 degree parking
which must provide a two-way aisle.
2.   Motor vehicle display lots are not required to park display vehicles in
accordance with these standards. Such display lots are required to meet all
other applicable standards for parking lots.
 
   (G)   Additional Provisions For Accessible Spaces: All off street parking
lots shall provide accessible parking spaces in conformance with the state of
Illinois Vehicle Code, the Americans with Disabilities Act and Illinois
Environmental Barriers Act. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-7-4: OFF-STREET LOADING BERTHS:
   (A)   General Provisions:
      1.   All loading berths shall have vertical clearance of at least
fourteen feet (14').
      2.   All loading berths shall be designed with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere
with traffic movement.
      3.   No vehicle repair or service work shall be performed on any loading
berth.
      4.   Location:
         (a)   A loading berth shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10')
from any front lot line.
         (b)   A loading berth shall be located a minimum of five feet (5')
from any side or rear lot line.
   (B)   Off-Street Loading Berths For Residential Uses Shall Be Provided As
Follows.
      1.   One loading berth shall be provided for one dwelling unit or lodging
unit on the same lot or tract of land as the dwelling served. An off-street
parking space may serve as an off-street loading berth. The parking space
designated as the loading berth must be at least twelve feet (12') wide by
forty feet (40') deep, except as noted in Table 10-7D.
 
Table 10-7D Loading Berth Requirements for Residential Uses
Number of Dwelling Units and Lodging Units Minimum Required Number and Size of
                                           Loading Berths
4 to 10                                    1 (12 x 40 square feet)
11 to 20                                   2 (10 x 40 square feet)
21 to 30                                   2 (10 x 70 square feet)
31 to 401                                  3 (10 x 70 square feet)
Table 10-7D Note:
1.   For each additional 10 dwelling units or lodging units and/or portion
thereof, one loading berth with the minimum dimensions of 10 feet x 70 feet
shall be provided.
 
   (C)   Off-street loading berths for commercial establishments shall be
provided as follows.
      1.   All loading berths shall be located on the same lot or tract of land
as the establishment served except when serving adjacent establishments when
the loading berth requirement is sufficient to serve both establishments.
      2.   Screening Requirements For Loading Berths:
         (a)   A loading berth must screened from public view by a landscape
berm, an opaque fence or wall, or screen planting with a minimum height of six
feet (6') as measured from the highest adjacent grade if the loading berth is
located:
            (1)   Within any yard abutting a residential district or Town
Center district; or
            (2)   Less than one hundred feet (100') from the building
restriction line of any lot in a residential district or any lot containing a
dwelling conforming as to use.
         (b)   If a loading berth is located adjacent to an elevated loading
dock, the loading berth must be screened from public view by a landscaped berm,
an opaque fence or wall or a screen planting with a minimum height of eight
feet (8'), as measured from the highest adjacent grade.
      3.   No loading berth shall be located within fifty feet (50') of the
nearest point of intersection of two (2) streets.
      4.   All loading berths shall be improved with a compacted base at least
six inches (6") thick and shall be surfaced with at least two inches (2") of
some all-weather dustless material.
      5.   The number and size of loading berths that shall be provided for
each commercial establishment is indicated in Table 10-7E.
Table 10-7E Loading Berth Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Uses
Floor Area of Establishment (in thousands Minimum Required Number and Size of
of square feet)                           Loading Berths
Table 10-7E Loading Berth Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Uses
Floor Area of Establishment (in thousands Minimum Required Number and Size of
of square feet)                           Loading Berths
1 - 9.9                                   1 (12 x 40 square feet)
10 - 24.9                                 2 (10 x 40 square feet)
25 - 39.9                                 2 (10 x 70 square feet)
40 - 99.9                                 3 (10 x 70 square feet)
100 - 249.91                              4 (10 x 70 square feet)
Table 10-7E Note
1.   For each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area, or portion
thereof, one additional loading berth with the minimum dimensions of 10 feet x
70 feet shall be provided.
 
   (D)   Off-Street Loading Berths For Industrial Uses Shall Be Provided As
Follows.
      1.   All loading berths must be located on the same lot or tract of land
as the industrial use served.
      2.   A loading berth must be screened from public view by a landscape
berm, an opaque fence or wall, or screen planting with a minimum height of
eight feet (8') as measured from the highest adjacent grade if the loading
berth is located:
         (a)   Within any yard abutting a residential district; or
         (b)   Less than one hundred feet (100') from the building restriction
line of any lot in a residential district or any lot containing a dwelling
conforming as to use.
      3.   No loading berth shall be located less than fifty feet (50') from
the nearest point of intersection of two (2) streets.
      4.   All loading berths shall be improved with a compacted base at least
seven inches (7") thick and shall be surfaced with at least two inches (2") of
some all-weather dustless material.
      5.   The number and size of loading berths that shall be provided for
each industrial use is indicated in Table 10-7E. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-7-5: MINIMUM IMPROVEMENT AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
   (A)   All Zoning Districts: All open parking areas provided in compliance
with this chapter shall be surfaced with a durable, dust proof surface
consisting of concrete, bituminous concrete, or compacted gravel or crushed
stone properly sealed and surface treated as approved by designated engineering
personnel of the village. The parking areas shall be maintained in a usable,
dust proof condition and graded and drained to dispose of all surface water.
Whenever lighting is provided, it shall be so hooded or shielded as to reflect
the light downward and away from abutting or neighboring property, including
public rights of way.
   (B)   Multiple Dwelling, Nonresidential, Commercial And Industrial Uses: The
location of each parking space and the direction of movement along the access
driveways shall be indicated by painting upon the surface of the lot. A
structurally sound abutment shall be installed and so placed around each side
of the parking lot to ensure that no part of an automobile either extends over
or is capable of accidentally rolling across the property line of the parking
lot. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
CHAPTER 8
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-8-1: Short Title
10-8-2: Purpose And Intent
10-8-3: Definitions
10-8-4: General Regulations
10-8-5: On-Site Signs In Residential Districts
10-8-6: On-Site Signs In The Agricultural District
10-8-7: On-Site Signs In The Downtown Commercial District Or General Commercial
District
10-8-8: On-Site Signs In The Industrial District
10-8-9: [Reserved]
10-8-10: Revocation Of Permit
10-8-11: Maintenance And Abandonment
10-8-12: Handbills, Advertising Matter
10-8-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the SIGN CODE. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-
2021)
10-8-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to harmonize the identification and
informational needs of all land uses with the health, safety and welfare of the
public. While the legitimate interests of business and industry are recognized,
it is also recognized that unrestricted signs do not benefit private enterprise
or the community at large. This chapter is specifically intended to prevent
unnecessary competition and clutter of advertising signs in their demand for
public attention. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context otherwise indicates:
                                      Any sign which uses a movement or change
ANIMATED SIGN:                        of lighting to depict continuous action
                                      or to create a continuous special effect
                                      or scene.
                                      A retractable or fixed shelter projecting
AWNING:                               from and supported by the exterior wall
                                      of a building constructed of non-rigid
                                      materials on a supporting framework.
AWNING SIGN:                          A sign painted on, printed on or attached
                                      flat against the surface of an awning.
                                      A sign that advertises goods, products or
                                      services not necessarily sold on the
                                      premises on which the sign is located and
BILLBOARD:                            is a freestanding structure or wall-
                                      mounted structure on which lettered,
                                      figured, painted or pictorial matter is
                                      displayed for advertising purposes.
                                      A temporary sign identifying an
                                      architect, contractor, subcontractor,
CONSTRUCTION SIGN:                    owner, project or material supplier
                                      associated with construction on the
                                      property on which the sign is located.
                                      An on-premise sign giving directions,
                                      instructions or facility information and
DIRECTIONAL/ INFORMATIONAL SIGN:      which may contain the name or logo of an
                                      establishment but no advertising copy,
                                      e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs.
                                      A sign with two parallel faces that can
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN:                    be read only from opposite directions. A
                                      double-faced sign shall count as two
                                      signs.
                                      A sign on which the copy changes
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER SIGN:       automatically on a lamp bank or through
                                      mechanical means (e.g., electrical or
                                      electronic time and temperature units).
                                      To build, construct, attach, hang, place,
ERECT:                                suspend or affix, and shall include the
                                      painting of wall signs.
FAÇADE:                              The entire building wall, including the
                                      parapet.
                                      A sign that contains an intermittent or
                                      sequential flashing light source used
                                      primarily to attract attention. The term
FLASHING SIGN:                        does not include electric or electronic
                                      message center signs, animated signs, or
                                      signs that, through reflection or other
                                      means, create an illusion of flashing
                                      intermittent light.
                                      Any sign supported by uprights, braces or
FREESTANDING SIGN:                    a solid base placed and anchored into the
                                      ground and not attached to any building.
                                      It shall not include portable signs.
                                      Any temporary or permanent sign erected
                                      and maintained by the village, county,
                                      state, federal, or other government
GOVERNMENT SIGN:                      entity for traffic direction or for
                                      designation of or direction to any
                                      school, hospital, historical site or
                                      public service, property or facility.
                                      The vertical distance measured from the
                                      highest point of the sign, excluding
HEIGHT (OF A SIGN):                   decorative embellishments, to the grade
                                      of the adjacent street or the surface
                                      grade beneath the sign, whichever is
                                      less.
                                      Any sign that has characters, letters,
                                      figures, designs or an outline
ILLUMINATED SIGN:                     illuminated by electric lights or
                                      luminous tubes as a part of the sign
                                      proper. See "Limited illumination".
                                      A small sign, emblem or decal informing
                                      the public of goods, facilities or
INCIDENTAL SIGN:                      services available on the premises (e.g.,
                                      a credit card sign or a sign indicating
                                      the hours of business).
                                      Lighting of a sign to identify certain
                                      evening activities for a period
LIMITED ILLUMINATION:                 commencing not earlier than two hours
                                      before the scheduled activity, and ending
                                      at the conclusion of the activity.
                                      The cleaning, painting, repair or
MAINTENANCE:                          replacement of defective parts of a sign
                                      in a manner that does not alter the basic
                                      copy, design or structure of the sign.
                                      A permanent roof-like shelter extending
MARQUEE, CANOPY AND AWNING:           from part or all of a building facade,
                                      usually above a building entrance, and
                                      constructed of durable materials.
MARQUEE, CANOPY OR AWNING SIGN:       A sign attached to or on a marquee,
                                      canopy or awning.
                                      A nonelectric on-site identification sign
NAMEPLATE:                            giving only the name, address and
                                      occupation of an occupant or group of
                                      occupants.
                                      Any sign identifying or advertising a
                                      business, person, activity, goods or
ON-SITE SIGN:                         products or services located on the
                                      premises where the sign is installed and
                                      maintained.
PARAPET:                              The extension of a false front or wall
                                      above a roofline.
                                      A temporary sign used in connection with
POLITICAL SIGN:                       a local, state or national election or
                                      referendum.
                                      A sign, designed to be moved from place
                                      to place, not permanently anchored to the
                                      ground or to a structure or building, and
PORTABLE SIGN:                        which obtains some or all of its
                                      structural integrity with respect to wind
                                      or other normally applied forces by means
                                      of its geometry or character.
                                      A sign which is attached directly to the
PROJECTING SIGN:                      building wall, and which extends more
                                      than fifteen inches (15") from the face
                                      of the wall.
                                      Any structure or portion thereof used
REAL ESTATE SIGN:                     only to advertise with pertinent
                                      information the sale, rental or leasing
                                      of the premises upon which it is located.
                                      Every sign, billboard, ground sign, wall
                                      sign, roof sign, illuminated sign,
                                      projecting sign, temporary sign, marquee,
                                      awning, canopy and street clock, and
                                      shall include any announcement,
SIGN:                                 declaration, demonstration, display,
                                      illustration or insignia used to
                                      advertise or promote the interests of any
                                      person when such announcement,
                                      declaration, demonstration, display,
                                      illustration or insignia is placed in
                                      view for the general public.
SIZE:                                 The size of the sign shall be its surface
                                      area.
                                      The entire area within a regular
                                      geometric form or combination of regular
                                      geometric forms comprising all of the
                                      display area of the sign and including
                                      all of the elements of the matter
SURFACE AREA:                         displayed. Frames and structural members
                                      not bearing advertising matter shall not
                                      be included in computation of surface
                                      area. Double-faced signs, where one face
                                      is superimposed on the other, shall be
                                      calculated on the basis of one side only.
                                      Includes any sign banner, pennant or
                                      advertising display constructed of cloth,
TEMPORARY SIGN:                       canvas, light fabric, cardboard,
                                      wallboard or other light materials, with
                                      or without frames.
UNDER-CANOPY SIGN, UNDER-MARQUEE SIGN A sign suspended beneath a canopy,
AND UNDER-AWNING SIGN:                marquee or awning.
                                      A sign which is painted on or attached
                                      directly to a fence or on the surface of
                                      masonry, concrete, frame or other
WALL SIGN:                            approved building walls, and which
                                      extends not more than fifteen inches
                                      (15") from the face of the fence or wall.
                                      (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
 
10-8-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   (A)   A zoning permit is required for the erection, construction, relocation
or alteration of any sign, except as noted in subsection (D) of this section.
   (B)   No sign shall be erected at any location where, because of its
position, size, shape, color, animation or illumination, it may interfere with
or obstruct the view of traffic, nor shall any sign be permitted which may be
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device. No other sign may
be placed within the sight visibility triangle.
   (C)   No person shall erect, display or maintain any sign which obstructs
any fire escape, building entrance or public passage or which is at a
horizontal distance less than ten feet (10') from any fire hydrant, traffic
light or fire call box.
   (D)   Signs Permitted Without Permit: The following signs are permitted in
all districts and do not require a zoning permit:
      1.   One nameplate of not more than two (2) square feet in surface area
per business, residence, or building;
      2.   Two (2) directional/informational signs of not more than two (2)
square feet in surface area each per business parcel, parking lot, or
industrial parcel;
      3.   Government signs;
      4.   Incidental signs except in a residential district;
      5.   Political signs of not more than six (6) square feet in area which
pertain to an election; such signs are exempt for a period of forty five (45)
days prior to and five (5) days subsequent to the election;
      6.   "For sale" signs of less than two (2) square feet in area and
attached to vehicles, personal possessions and articles of a noncommercial
nature;
      7.   "Garage sale," "yard sale" and other temporary sale signs when less
than two (2) square feet in area and displayed on the owner's property or on
other property with the owner's permission;
      8.   One temporary non-illuminated real estate sign not to exceed six (6)
square feet in surface area per parcel or twelve (12) square feet in surface
area if the parcel is zoned other than residential; or
      9.   Trespassing, safety or caution signs not exceeding two (2) square
feet in area.
   (E)   Signs that were lawfully erected prior to June 23, 2023, but would now
be subject to a variance requirement, or signs that were erected pursuant to a
variance granted, as provided for herein, and are in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, may be replaced with a sign that is substantially
the same as the original sign in location and dimensions upon approval by the
Village Board, without a public hearing or a hearing before the PZC.
   (F)   Signs Allowed In All Districts With A Zoning Permit: The following
signs are allowable in all districts, with Zoning Administrator review and
approved Zoning Permit, if in compliance with all provisions of this title:
      1.   Temporary signs, except as elsewhere exempted;
      2.   One on-site sign identifying a recorded subdivision, provided such
sign does not exceed twenty four (24) square feet in surface area;
      3.   One construction sign per right-of-way frontage per parcel, subject
to all of the following requirements:
         (a)   Total surface area per sign shall not exceed thirty two (32)
square feet.
         (b)   Sign height shall not exceed eight feet (8').
         (c)   Placement shall be no closer to the property line than one-half
the required setback for the district.
      4.   The sign shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a zoning
permit for the proposed construction, and shall be removed upon substantial
completion of construction.
   (G)   Signs Prohibited In All Districts: The following signs are prohibited
in all districts:
      1.   Animated or flashing signs; and
      2.   Signs that emit audible sound, odor or visible matter. (Ord. 2021-
04, 6-22-2021)
10-8-5: ON-SITE SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no sign
containing more than ten (10) square feet may be erected in any residentially
zoned area unless the party seeking to erect said sign first applies for and
receives a variance as provided in chapter 10-11.
   (B)   In subdivisions where four (4) or more undeveloped lots are owned by
the subdivision developer, a sign announcing the names of the developer,
architects, engineers, contractors, or other individuals or firms, involved
with the subdivision of property (but not including any advertisement of
anything not related to the subdivision) or announcing the layout or character
of the subdivision or the purpose for which it is intended shall be allowed
subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   These signs shall be confined to the site of the subdivision, and
shall be permitted for one year from the date of erection of the first of such
signs. If development of the subdivision is not completed within one year after
erection of the signs, the sign shall be permitted to exist an additional
period, not to exceed one year unless approved by the Village Board.
      2.   Subdivision signs shall:
         (a)   Not exceed sixty four (64) square feet in surface area;
         (b)   Not exceed a height of ten feet (10');
         (c)   Be set back from the property line a minimum of ten feet (10');
         (d)   Be in lieu of signs on individual lots; and
         (e)   Not contain any pictures or drawings other than a layout of the
subdivision or lots and company logos. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-8-6: ON-SITE SIGNS IN THE AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT:
No sign containing more than thirty two (32) square feet may be erected in the
Agricultural District unless the party seeking to erect said sign first applies
for and receives a variance as provided in chapter 10-11 of this title. (Ord.
2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-8-7: ON-SITE SIGNS IN THE DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT OR GENERAL COMMERCIAL
DISTRICT:
No sign containing more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet may be erected
in any area zoned Downtown Commercial District or General Commercial unless the
party seeking to erect said sign first applies for and receives a variance as
provided in chapter 10-11 of this title. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-8-8: ON-SITE SIGNS IN THE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
No sign containing more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet may be erected
in any area zoned Industrial unless the party seeking to erect said sign first
applies for and receives a variance as provided in chapter 10-11 of this title.
(Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-8-9: [RESERVED]:
10-8-10: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The Village Board may revoke any permit issued by it upon failure of the holder
thereof to comply with any provision of this chapter, but only after a hearing
before the PZC is held no less than fifteen (15) days after notice is given to
the permit holder. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-8-11: MAINTENANCE AND ABANDONMENT:
   (A)   Maintenance of any sign erected in the Village shall be the duty of
both the owner and occupier of the premises upon which the sign is erected. The
appearance of any sign shall not be allowed to become unsightly and in the
event that repair, cleaning, or painting of any said sign is deemed to be
necessary by the Village Board, then within sixty (60) days of notification of
such necessity by the Village Board, the said owner or occupier of said
premises shall complete said repair, cleaning or painting. In the event that
such repair, cleaning or painting is not accomplished within said time, then
said failure shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this code.
   (B)   All signs erected in the Village that no longer serve their purpose
shall be removed by the owner or occupier of the premises in question. When any
such sign is removed, such removal shall be completed with due care and with
concern for the appearance of the premises as well as safety on said premises
and nearby properties. Any supporting structures, such as sign standards or
frames shall be removed and any holes or excavations shall be filled. In the
event that such removal does not comply with this section, then notice of said
failure shall be given to the owner or occupier of the premises. If said work
is not completed in compliance with said notice within thirty (30) days of the
mailing of said notice, then said owner or occupier shall be deemed to be in
violation of the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-8-12: HANDBILLS, ADVERTISING MATTER:
   (A)   To post, paste, print, nail, or otherwise attach any handbill, sign,
poster, advertisement, or notice of any kind on any curbstone, flagstone or any
other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any tree, lamppost, post, pole,
hydrant or other public property, or upon any private wall, door or gate
(without the consent in writing of the owner of such wall, door or gate) shall
be prohibited.
   (B)   Provided, however, that provisions of this section shall not apply to
the posting of legal notices by or on behalf of the Village in the manner and
places prescribed by law.
   (C)   The Village may remove and destroy any such prohibited signs or other
prohibited materials on public property. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
CHAPTER 9
[RESERVED]
CHAPTER 10
ZONING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
SECTION:
10-10-1: Zoning Permit Required
10-10-2: Zoning Permit Application
10-10-3: Issuance Of Zoning Permit
10-10-4: Expiration Of Zoning Permit
10-10-5: Certificate Of Compliance Required
10-10-6: Certificate Of Compliance Application
10-10-7: Issuance Of Certificate Of Compliance
10-10-8: Corrective Action Order
10-10-9: Contents Of Order
10-10-10: Service Of Order
10-10-11: Stop Order
10-10-12: Emergency Measures
10-10-13: Complaints
10-10-14: Fees
10-10-15: Violation
10-10-1: ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (A)   No land shall be developed, no new use or structure shall be
established or erected, and no existing use or structure shall be enlarged,
extended, altered, relocated or reconstructed until a zoning permit has been
issued.
   (B)   Unless specifically exempted by this title, a zoning permit shall be
obtained by the owner or lessee, agent of either, or the architect, engineer,
or builder employed in connection with the proposed work from the Zoning
Administrator before starting:
      1.   To establish, occupy or change the use of a structure, accessory
structure or land either by itself or in addition to another use;
      2.   To construct or erect a new structure or accessory structure or part
thereof;
      3.   To extend or move any structure, accessory structure or part
thereof; or
      4.   To extend, expand and change or re-establish any non-conforming use.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a zoning permit unless he or
she determines that the proposed activity conforms to the applicable provisions
of this title, Titles 7 and 11 of the Village Municipal Code, or upon written
order of the Village Board, and payment of all applicable fees.
   (D)   No building construction shall begin until a zoning permit has been
issued and posted on the premises. No zoning permit shall be issued for
construction in a subdivision unless the final plat has been approved and storm
sewers, sanitary sewers and streets have been completed as to the lot for which
a permit is requested or otherwise in compliance with Title 11 of the Village
Municipal Code.
   (E)   No zoning permit is required for ordinary maintenance. (Ord. 2021-04,
6-22-2021)
10-10-2: ZONING PERMIT APPLICATION:
   (A)   There shall be submitted with all applications for zoning permits:
      1.   The location including township and tract comprising the legal
description of property;
      2.   Name and address of the applicant;
      3.   Name and address of the owner or operator of the proposed lot,
structure or use, if different from Item ii. above;
      4.   Description of the uses to be established or expanded, including the
nature of the proposed use, including type of activity, manner of operations,
number of occupants or employees, and similar matters;
      5.   Two (2) copies of a layout of plot plan drawn to scale showing the
actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon,
      6.   The exact size, shape, and location on the lot of the proposed
structure(s) and any proposed accessory structure or use to be established or
constructed at the same time as the proposed principal structure or principal
use to be established on the same lot or tract of land; and,
      7.   The size, shape and location of all existing structures, accessory
use structures and uses on the lot;
      8.   Any change in elevation or drainage on any portion of said lot;
      9.   Information about proposed water supply and sewage disposal
facilities, including a true and correct copy of any permit required by the
village of environmental protection approving such facilities;
      10.   Height, setbacks, and lot coverage of the proposed structures;
      11.   Number and size of proposed dwelling units, if any;
      12.   Location and number of proposed parking spaces or loading spaces
and access ways; and
      13.   Other information requested by the Zoning Administrator that may be
necessary to provide for the proper administration and enforcement of this
title.
      14.   And the applicable zoning permit fee.
   (B)   Zoning permit fees shall be paid based on the Village permit
application fee schedule approved by the Village Board.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall inspect the building site at the time
the structure or building is staked out, upon completion of the foundation and
upon final completion of all improvements, to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this title and of Title 7 of the Village Code. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-
22-2021)
10-10-3: ISSUANCE OF ZONING PERMIT:
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall retain the original copy of a zoning
permit and shall mark such permit whether approved or disapproved.
   (B)   One copy shall be returned to the applicant, duly signed and marked as
indicated in subsection (A) above.
   (C)   The applicant's copy shall be posted in plain sight on the premises
for which it is issued until the certificate of compliance shall have been
issued by the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-10-4: EXPIRATION OF ZONING PERMIT:
   (A)   The zoning permit may be cancelled by the Zoning Administrator during
construction or upon completion of construction if the Zoning Administrator
determines that the improvements have not been built in accordance with the
approved plans or otherwise not in compliance with the requirements of this
title, Title 7, or Title 11 of the Village Code. Written notice thereof shall
be given to the applicant together with notice that further work as described
on the cancelled permit shall not proceed until a new permit shall have been
issued.
   (B)   Zoning permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance unless
application for an extension is submitted to and approved by the Village Board.
   (C)   A zoning permit issued for the establishment of a use of land where no
structures are involved or on which land a structure accessory to the principal
use not involving any structure shall not expire.
   (D)   Upon cancellation or expiration, zoning permit renewal fees and other
requirements shall be the same as if a new application were being submitted.
(Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-10-5: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy
of any land or structure or part thereof hereafter created, constructed,
erected, changed, moved, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a certificate of compliance shall have been issued by the
Zoning Administrator, stating that the building or proposed use thereof
complies with the provisions of this title.
   (B)   No nonconforming use of land and no nonconforming use of a structure
shall be renewed, changed, altered, or extended without a certificate of
compliance having first been issued by the Zoning Administrator. The zoning
compliance certificate shall state specifically wherein such non-conforming use
differs from the regulations and standards of this title. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-
2021)
10-10-6: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE APPLICATION:
   (A)   All certificates of compliance shall be applied for coincident with
the application for a zoning permit; or in the event of a proposed change of
use without structural additions or changes, then the certificate of compliance
shall be applied for prior to the change of use.
   (B)   No zoning permit for the erection or extension, alteration of or
repairs to any building shall be issued until an application has been made for
a certificate of compliance. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-10-7: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a certificate of compliance
until it has been determined, by inspection, that the work authorized by the
zoning permit has been completed in accordance with approved plans. No zoning
permit shall be issued until an application has been made for a certificate of
compliance.
   (B)   When all work as described on the zoning permit is complete, the
applicant shall notify the Zoning Administrator. After examination of the
premises to ascertain that all work described on the zoning permit has been
conducted in compliance with the regulations and standards of this title, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue the certificate of compliance.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall retain the original copy of the
certificate of compliance.
   (D)   One copy shall be returned to the applicant, duly signed.
   (E)   There may be instances for which a zoning permit is issued with no
expiration date. Examples of such instances include:
      1.   A zoning permit issued for a use that does not involve a structure;
or
      2.   A zoning permit issued for a structure that is accessory to a
principal use-with the principal use not involving any structure.
In such instances, on each successive date of inspection of land for which the
zoning permit does not expire, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a
certificate of compliance if such use has been conducted in conformance with
the regulations and standards of this title and shall be effective only until
the next required date of inspection.
   (F)   A temporary certificate of compliance may be issued by the Zoning
Administrator for a period not exceeding six (6) months during alterations or
partial occupancy of a structure pending its completion, provided that such
temporary certificates may require such conditions and safeguards as will
protect the safety of the occupants and the public.
   (G)   Only in the case of issuance of a certificate of compliance for the
registration of a non-conforming use, shall a fee be charged for such
certificate. Such fee shall be as established by the Village Board, and shall
not be refundable. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-10-8: CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER:
Whenever the Zoning Administrator finds, by inspection or otherwise, that any
lot, structure, or use, or work thereon is in violation of this title, he shall
so notify the responsible party, and shall institute appropriate measures to
secure compliance. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-10-9: CONTENTS OF ORDER:
The order to take corrective action shall be in writing and shall include:
   (A)   A description of the premises sufficient for identification;
   (B)   A statement indicating the nature of the violation;
   (C)   A statement of the remedial action necessary to effect compliance;
   (D)   The date by which the violation must be corrected;
   (E)   A statement that the alleged violator is entitled to a conference with
the Zoning Administrator if he so desires;
   (F)   The date by which an appeal of the correction order must be filed, and
a statement of the procedure for so filing; and
   (G)   A statement that failure to obey a corrective action order shall
result in revocation of the zoning permit and may result in the imposition of
fines. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-10-10: SERVICE OF ORDER:
A corrective action order shall be deemed properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or operator of the offending lot, structure, or use if it is:
   (A)   Served upon him personally;
   (B)   Sent by certified mail to his last known address; or
   (C)   Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the affected premises. (Ord.
2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-10-11: STOP ORDER:
Whenever any work is being done in violation of a zoning permit, the Zoning
Administrator's corrective action order may state that the violation be stopped
immediately. In such case, the corrective action order is equivalent to a stop
order. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-10-12: EMERGENCY MEASURES:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, whenever the Zoning
Administrator determines that any violation of this title poses an imminent
peril to life or property, he or she may institute, without notice or hearing,
any necessary proceedings to alleviate the perilous condition. (Ord. 2021-04,
6-22-2021)
10-10-13: COMPLAINTS:
Whenever any violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint on forms provided by the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall record such complaints, promptly
investigate, and, if necessary, institute appropriate corrective action. (Ord.
2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-10-14: FEES:
   (A)   The Village Board shall establish a schedule of fees for the various
permits and procedures listed in this title. The fees are intended to defray
administrative costs connected with the processing/conducting of such permits
or procedures; the fees do not constitute a tax or other revenue-raising
device.
   (B)   Each such application, except that initiated by the Village Board, or
Zoning Administrator, shall be accompanied by a fee to be paid by the applicant
in accordance with the schedule of fees established by the Village Board. (Ord.
2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-10-15: VIOLATION:
Any person who begins construction or work on any building or improvement
requiring a zoning permit from the Village without first obtaining a zoning
permit shall be fined for such offense an amount not to exceed ten (10) times
the cost of the zoning permit. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
CHAPTER 11
ZONING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-11-1: Planning And Zoning Commission (PZC) Meetings
10-11-2: PZC Quorum
10-11-3: PZC Records And Village Board Zoning Decisions
10-11-4: Appeals
10-11-5: Variances
10-11-6: Special Use Permits
10-11-7: Amendments
10-11-1: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION (PZC) MEETINGS:
   (A)   All meetings of the PZC shall be held at the call of the PZC Chair or
the Village President and at such times as the PZC may determine. All PZC
meetings shall be open to the public.
   (B)   The PZC may adopt their own rules of meeting procedures consistent
with this title and the applicable Illinois statutes. The chair, or in his or
her absence, the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses.
   (C)   Four members of the PZC shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative
vote of at least four (4) members shall be necessary to authorize any PZC
action. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-11-2: PZC QUORUM:
The concurring vote of four members of the PZC shall be necessary to make a
recommendation to the Village Board regarding a Finding of Fact and specific
zoning request. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-11-3: PZC RECORDS AND VILLAGE BOARD ZONING DECISIONS:
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall attend all meetings and public hearings held
at the PZC and shall serve as secretary to the PZC, keeping a full record and
providing written minutes of the PZC's proceedings and actions. The written PZC
minutes shall indicate the absence of any member, the vote or abstention of
each member on each question, and any official action taken, including findings
of fact for variance or a special use requests considered. The Village Clerk
shall submit written minutes of PZC minutes to the PZC chairperson for his
approval and correction, and shall make available the corrected PZC minutes to
the Village Board prior to the next Village Board meeting.
   (B)   A copy of every recommendation of the PZC, once forwarded to the
Village Board and on file with the Village, shall be a public record.
   (C)   Village Board Decisions And Period Of Validity: No decision by the
Village Board in granting a variance or a special use permit shall be valid for
a period longer than twelve (12) months from the date of such decision unless:
      1.   An application for a zoning permit or special use permit is obtained
within such period and construction, moving, remodeling, or reconstruction is
started, or
      2.   A certificate of compliance is issued and a use is commenced.
However, the Village Board may grant additional extensions of time not
exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days, each upon written application made
within the initial twelve (12) month period without further notice or hearing,
but said right to so extend said time shall not include the right to grant
additional relief by expanding the scope of the variation.
   (D)   Finality Of Decisions Of The Village Board: All decisions of the
Village Board, shall in all instances be the final administrative determination
and shall be subject to review by a court in the manner provided by applicable
Illinois statutes. No applicant shall apply for the same or identical request
for a period of one year unless the facts and/or request have substantially
changed. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-11-4: APPEALS:
   (A)   Nature Of An Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of
the Zoning Administrator in any matter related to the interpretation or
enforcement of any provision of this title may appeal to the PZC. An appeal may
consist of a request for a determination with regard to the exact location of
any district boundary if there is uncertainty with respect thereto.
   (B)   Application, Filing, Record Transmittal:
      1.   An appeal may be taken to the PZC by any person, group or
organization, public or private, affected by a decision by the Zoning
Administrator,
      2.   An appeal shall be made on a prescribed form available from the
Village Office within forty five (45) days of the matter complained of by
filing with the Zoning Administrator and the PZC Chair a written notice
specifying the grounds for appeal. The appeal application shall describe the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and shall specify
the grounds for the appeal.
      3.   A fee for an appeal application as approved by the Village Board and
listed in the Village Schedule of Permits and Fees shall accompany each
application for an appeal.
   (C)   Stay Of Further Proceedings: An appeal stays all further action on the
matter being appealed unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the PZC
after the notice of appeal has been filed with him or her that for reasons
stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, further action shall not be stayed unless the PZC or
the Circuit Court grants a restraining order for due cause and so notifies the
Zoning Administrator.
   (D)   Appeal Procedure And Public Hearing:
      1.   Upon receipt of the notice of an appeal application, the Zoning
Administrator shall transmit to the Village Office all the documents and files
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
      2.   The PZC Chair shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing on the
appeal and inform the Village Office and Village Board of the time and place
that the hearing will be held. The Village Board designee shall arrange that
due notice of the hearing be provided, in writing, to the appellant, to the
Zoning Administrator, to PZC members, and to any other person directly
interested in the outcome of the appeal. The appellant may appear before the
PZC on the appeal and may be represented by counsel. It shall not be necessary
to publish any notice of a hearing on an appeal.
   (E)   PZC Recommendation To Village Board:
      1.   The PZC may recommend that the Village Board reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify or amend the decision or order appealed from
the extent and in the manner that they deem appropriate.
      2.   Following the hearing on the appeal at the PZC, the Village Clerk
provide the PZC recommendation on the appeal to the Village Board.
   (F)   Village Board Decision: The Village Board shall make its decision with
regard to the appeal within thirty (30) days following receipt of the PZC
recommendation. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-11-5: VARIANCES:
   (A)   A variance is a relaxation of the requirements of this title that are
applicable to a particular lot or structure.
   (B)   A so-called "use variance" that would allow a use that is neither a
permitted nor a special use in the district in question is not a variance, but
it is an amendment. Amendment requests shall be addressed only as provided for
in section
10-11-7 of this chapter.
   (C)   Application: Every application for a variance shall be filed with the
Village Office on a prescribed form. A fee for a variance application as
approved by the Village Board and listed in the Village Schedule of Permits and
Fees shall accompany each variance application.
Village Office staff shall promptly transmit said application to the PZC. The
application shall contain sufficient information to allow the PZC to make an
informed Findings of Fact and its recommendation to the Village Board. The
application shall include, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant and of the property owner, if
other than the applicant;
      2.   Location of the structure/use for which the variance is sought;
      3.   Brief description of adjacent lots, structures, and/or uses;
      4.   Brief description of the problems/circumstances engendering the
variance request;
      5.   Brief, but specific, explanation of the desired variance;
      6.   Specific section(s) of this title containing the regulations which,
if strictly applied, would cause a serious problem; and
      7.   Other pertinent information.
   (D)   Public Hearing, Notice: The PZC Chair shall fix a reasonable time for
the public hearing on each variance request upon submittal of a completed
variance application. At the hearing any interested party may appear and
testify either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney.
The Village Board shall arrange for notice of the public hearing, indicating
the time, date, and place of the hearing, and the nature of the requested
variance, to be provided not more than thirty (30) days or less than fifteen
(15) days before the hearing.
      1.   By first class mail to the applicant and to the record owner of the
subject property;
      2.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
village; and
      3.   By first-class mail to record owners of property located within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of the subject property.
   (E)   Standards For Variances:
      1.   The PZC shall not recommend any variance unless they find that the
proposed variance is consistent with the general purposes of this title, and
that the strict application of the district requirements would result in great
practical difficulties or hardship to the applicant. More specifically, the PZC
shall not decide upon a variance unless they determine, based upon the evidence
presented to them, that:
         (a)   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in
that zone;
         (b)   The plight of the owner is due to peculiar circumstances; and
         (c)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality.
      2.   The PZC may recommend a variance of the application of the
regulations imposed by this title to permit:
         (a)   The reduction of the depth or width of a required yard specified
in the chapter 10-3 district standards, or if not specified in chapter 10-3,
the reduction of the depth or width of a required yard by not more than twenty
five percent (25%) of the depth or width required by this title; and
         (b)   In the General Commercial District, to permit a reduction in the
number of off-street parking spaces required about or in connection with a use,
and for the same district to permit greater coverage than required by the
applicable regulations and to permit the use of a lot for a use otherwise
prohibited solely because of the insufficient area of the lot.
   (F)   PZC Recommendation To Village Board:
      1.   The PZC findings of fact shall clearly indicate the PZC's reasons
for recommending that a requested variance be granted or denied.
      2.   Following a public hearing at the PZC, the Village Clerk shall
provide the PZC recommendation to the Village Board on the variance request
along with the written statement of the PZC Findings of Fact on which the
recommendation is based.
   (G)   Village Board Decision: The Village Board shall decide on every
variance request within a reasonable period following the final public hearing
thereon. A copy of the Village Board decision shall be transmitted to the
applicant or appellant. The Village Board shall specify the terms of relief
recommended (if any). (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-11-6: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
   (A)   Intent: This title divides the Village into districts, and allows in
each district as a matter of right subject to issuance of a zoning permit only
those uses that are clearly compatible with one another. Certain other
principal uses, designated as a 'Special Use' and listed in Table 10-5A of this
title because of their special operational or physical characteristics, may or
may not have a detrimental impact on nearby permitted uses, depending upon
their precise location, manner of operation and other factors.
   (B)   Application:
      1.   Every applicant for a special use permit shall submit to the village
office in narrative and/or graphic form, the items of information below:
         (a)   Name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   Name and address of the owner or operator of the proposed
structure or use, if different from that noted in subsection (B)1(a) above;
         (c)   Nature of the proposed use, including type of activity, manner
of operation, number of occupants or employees, and similar matters;
         (d)   Location of the proposed use or structure, and its relationship
to existing uses of structures on adjacent lots;
         (e)   Area and dimensions of the site for the proposed structure or
use;
         (f)   Existing topography of the site and proposed finished grade;
         (g)   Existing and proposed screening, landscaping, and erosion
control features on the site, including the parking area;
         (h)   Height and setbacks of the proposed structure;
         (i)   Number and size of the proposed dwelling units, if any;
         (j)   Number and location of proposed parking/loading spaces and
access ways;
         (k)   Identification and location of all existing or proposed
utilities, whether public or private;
         (l)   Location of any signs; and
         (m)   Other pertinent information.
      2.   A fee for a special use permit application as approved by the
Village Board and listed in the Village Schedule of Permits and Fees must
accompany each special use permit application.
   (C)   Public Hearing, Notice: The PZC Chair shall fix a reasonable time for
the public hearing on each special use permit request upon the submittal of a
completed special use permit application. At the hearing, any interested party
may appear and testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent or
attorney.
The Village Board shall arrange for notice of the public hearing, indicating
the time, date, and place of the hearing, and the nature of the requested
special use permit to be provided not more than thirty (30) days or less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing:
      1.   By first class mail to the applicant and to the record owner of the
subject property;
      2.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
village; and
      3.   By first class mail to the record owners of property located within
two hundred fifty feet (250') of the subject property.
   (D)   Special Use Permit Standards: Following public input received at the
public hearing, the PZC shall make Findings of Fact with regard to each special
use permit request considered. The PZC may recommend and the Village Board, in
turn, may impose such conditions as will, in the judgement of each respective
body, with regard to and to ensure that:
      1.   The proposed special use permit is necessary for the public
convenience at that location.
      2.   The proposed design, location, and manner of operation of the
special use permit requested will adequately protect the public health, safety,
and welfare, and the physical environment.
      3.   The intensity of the proposed development does not impose any
adverse effects on surrounding property, public utilities and on the traffic
circulation on nearby streets.
      4.   The proposed special use permit is compatible with surrounding land
use.
      5.   The proposed special use permit requested conforms to the intent,
regulations, and standards of and preserves the essential character of the
district in which it is proposed to be located.
   (E)   PZC Findings Of Fact And Recommendation To Village Board:
      1.   The PZC findings of fact shall clearly indicate the PZC's reasons
for recommending that a requested special use permit be granted or denied.
      2.   Following a public hearing at the PZC, the Village Clerk shall
provide the PZC recommendation to the Village Board on the special use permit
request along with the written statement of the PZC Findings of Fact on which
the recommendation is based.
      3.   The PZC may recommend and the Village Board may prescribe special
conditions for a special use to preserve the general public health, safety and
welfare, and these terms and conditions of the special use (if any) shall be
specified in one statement.
   (F)   Village Board Decision:
      1.   The Village Board, upon receiving a the PZC Findings of Fact and
recommendation, shall act upon said recommendation within a reasonable period
of time and shall either accept or reverse the recommendation in whole or in
part or return the request to the PZC for further study.
      2.   It shall require two-thirds vote of all Village Board members to
reverse a recommendation of denial received from the PZC.
      3.   A copy of the Village Board decision shall be transmitted to the
applicant or appellant. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-11-7: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   Amendments: The Village Board may amend this title in accordance with
the provisions of this section based on Illinois Statutes (65 ILCS 5/11-13-14).
Proposed alterations of district boundaries or proposed changes in the status
of uses (permitted, special use, prohibited) shall be deemed proposed
amendments. Amendments may be proposed by the Village President, PZC, Zoning
Administrator, or an interested party.
   (B)   Filing:
      1.   Every proposal to amend this title shall be filed with the Village
Office on a prescribed form.
      2.   A fee for a text amendment or map amendment application as approved
by the Village Board and listed in the Village Schedule of Permits and Fees
must accompany each amendment application.
   (C)   Public Hearing - Notice:
      1.   The PZC Chair shall fix a reasonable time for the public hearing on
every amendment proposal requested upon submittal of a completed text or map
amendment application.
      2.   At the hearing, any interested party may appear and testify, either
in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney.
      3.   (a)   The Village Board shall arrange for notice of the public
hearing to indicate the time, date, and place of the hearing, the nature of the
proposed amendment, and, if the boundaries of a district are proposed to be
changed, the notice shall contain a description of the area for which the
change is proposed. Any notice required by this section need not include a
metes and bounds legal description, provided that the notice includes:
            (1)   The common street address or addresses and
            (2)   The property index number ("PIN") or numbers of all the
parcels of real property contained in the affected area.
         (b)   Such notice shall be given not more than thirty (30) or less
than fifteen (15) days before the hearing:
            (1)   By first class mail to the applicant, and, if with regard to
a map amendment proposal, by certified mail to the record owner(s) of the
subject property;
            (2)   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within
the village;
            (3)   If with regard to a map amendment proposal, by first class
mail to the record owner(s) of property located within two hundred fifty feet
(250') of the subject property.
   (D)   PZC Recommendation To The Village Board:
      1.   If the effect of the proposed amendment would be to alter district
boundaries or to change the status of any use, the PZC recommendation to the
Village Board may include their consideration of each of the following factors:
         (a)   Existing use and zoning of the property in question;
         (b)   Existing uses and zoning of other lots in the vicinity of the
property in question;
         (c)   Suitability of the property in question for uses already
permitted under existing regulations;
         (d)   Compatibility and suitability of the proposed use and the
property in question for the proposed use;
         (e)   The trend of development in the vicinity of the property in
question, including changes (if any) which may have occurred since that
property was initially zoned or last rezoned.
      2.   Following the public hearing at the PZC for an amendment request,
the Village Clerk shall provide the PZC recommendation regarding a decision for
an amendment request to the Village Board. The recommendation shall include PZC
reasons for their recommendation regarding adoption or denial of the proposed
amendment.
   (E)   Action By Village Board:
      1.   Following receipt of the PZC recommendation regarding a decision for
an amendment request, the Village Board shall act on every proposed amendment
within a reasonable time at a regularly scheduled Village Board meeting.
      2.   Without further public hearing, the Village Board may approve or
disapprove any proposed amendment or may refer it back to the PZC for further
consideration by simple majority vote of all the members then holding office.
   (F)   When A Two-Thirds Majority Vote Is Required: The favorable vote of at
least two-thirds of the members of the Village Board is required to pass an
amendment to this title in each of the following instances:
      1.   When passage would be contrary to the recommendation of the PZC; or
      2.   When the amendment is opposed, in writing, by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of
twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley
there from, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage proposed to be altered.
   (G)   Notice To Applicant Of Written Protest: In cases of written opposition
to an amendment of this title as prescribed in subsection (F) above, a copy of
the written protest shall be served by the protester or protesters on the
applicant for the proposed amendment and a copy upon the applicant's attorney,
if any, by certified mail at the address of such applicant and attorney shown
in the application for the proposed amendment. Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
CHAPTER 12
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
10-12-1: General Applicability
10-12-2: Nonconforming Use
10-12-3: Nonconforming Structure
10-12-4: Nonconforming Lot Of Record
10-12-5: Nonconforming Signs
10-12-1: GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   Authority To Continue: Any structure, lot, or use that lawfully
existed as a nonconformity as of the effective date of this title, and any
lawfully existing structure, lot, or use that has been made nonconforming as of
the effective date of this title and any subsequent amendments, may continue
subject to the provisions of this chapter so long as it remains otherwise
legal. A structure, lot, or use that is illegal as of the effective date of
this title, remains illegal if it does not conform to every requirement of this
title.
   (B)   Burden on Property Owner: The burden of establishing the legality of
nonconformity under the provisions of this title is the responsibility of the
property owner of the nonconforming structure or lot, or the operator of the
use.
   (C)   Safety Regulations: All police power regulations enacted to promote
public health, safety, and welfare including, but not limited to, all building,
fire and health codes apply to nonconformities. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-12-2: NONCONFORMING USE:
   (A)   Maintenance: Normal maintenance and incidental repair may be performed
on a structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use,
provided it does not create any new nonconformity or increase the intensity of
the nonconformity.
   (B)   Structural Alterations: No structural alterations are permitted on any
structure devoted to a nonconforming use, except in the following situations:
      1.   When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to restore
the structure to a safe condition upon the order of any official charged with
protecting public safety,
      2.   When the alteration is for the purpose of bringing about a
conforming use, or
      3.   When the alteration will not create any new nonconformity or
increase the intensity of any existing nonconformity.
   (C)   Expansion: A nonconforming use of a structure of land cannot be
expanded, extended, enlarged, or increased in intensity. Such prohibited
activity includes additions or enlargements of any structure devoted entirely
to a nonconforming use, and any expansion, extension, or relocation of a
nonconforming use to any other structure, any portion of the floor area, or any
land area currently not occupied by such nonconforming use.
   (D)   Relocation: A nonconforming use of a structure or land cannot be
relocated, in whole or in part, to any other location on the same lot or
parcel. The nonconforming use may only be relocated to another structure or lot
if the use conforms to all regulations of the zoning district where it is
relocated.
   (E)   Change Of Use: A nonconforming use cannot be changed to any use other
than one allowed within the zoning district where it is located. When a
nonconforming use has been changed, in whole or in part, to an allowed use, the
whole or part that conforms cannot be changed back to a use that is not allowed
in the district. A change of use occurs when an existing nonconforming use has
been terminated and another use has commenced. Any change in use in violation
of this title is deemed an abandonment of the previously existing nonconforming
use.
   (F)   Discontinuation Or Abandonment: If a nonconforming use is
discontinued, or the structure that it occupies becomes vacant and remains
unoccupied for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days, the
nonconforming use is deemed abandoned and cannot be reestablished or resumed
regardless of intent. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such land or structure
must comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which the structure
or land is located. A period of discontinuance caused by acts of God or other
events without any contributing fault by the user are not included in
calculating the length of discontinuance for this section.
   (G)   Damage Or Destruction:
      1.   In the event that any structure that is devoted in whole or in part
to a nonconforming use is structurally damaged or destroyed through no fault of
the property owner or tenant, the nonconforming use may be re-established
provided that no new nonconformities are created and the degree of the previous
nonconformity is not increased.
      2.   If the structure containing the nonconforming use is a nonconforming
structure, the structure may only be rebuilt, restored, repaired, or
reconstructed in accordance with the provisions of section
10-12-3 (Nonconforming Structure). (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-12-3: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE:
   (A)   Maintenance: Normal maintenance and incidental repair may be performed
on any nonconforming structure. No repairs or reconstruction are permitted that
would create any new nonconformity or increase the degree of the previously
existing nonconformity.
   (B)   Structural Alterations: No structural alterations are permitted on any
nonconforming structure, except in the following situations:
      1.   When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to restore
the structure to a safe condition upon the order of any official charged with
protecting public safety;
      2.   When the alteration will eliminate the nonconformity; or
      3.   When the alteration will not create any new nonconformity or
increase the degree of any existing nonconformity. For example, if a structure
is nonconforming in terms of the required front setback (i.e., does not meet
the required minimum), the structure may add a rear addition if it meets all
other bulk and setback requirements of the district.
   (C)   Relocation: A nonconforming structure cannot be relocated, in whole or
in part, to any other location on the same lot unless such relocation would
make the structure conforming. A nonconforming structure may be relocated to
another lot if the structure conforms to all regulations of the zoning district
where it is relocated.
   (D)   Damage Or Destruction:
      1.   In the event that a nonconforming structure is structurally damaged
or destroyed by the fault of the property owner or tenant, the structure, as
restored or repaired, must comply with all requirements of this title.
      2.   Damage To Nonconforming Structure Exceeding Sixty Percent (60%) Of
Replacement Value Through No Fault Of Property Owner Or Tenant: In the event
that any nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed, through no fault of
the property owner or tenant, to the extent of sixty percent (60%) or more of
its replacement value at the time, then the structure may not be restored or
rebuilt unless the structure, including the foundation, conforms to all
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located; provided however
that a legally nonconforming residential dwelling may be rebuilt and used as a
residential dwelling if restoration is completed and occupancy taken within two
(2) years from the date of damage. In such an event, a zoning permit must be
obtained to rebuild, restore, repair, or reconstruct the legally nonconforming
residential dwelling.
      3.   Damage To Nonconforming Structure Of Less Than Sixty Percent (60%)
Of Replacement Value Through No Fault Of Property Owner Or Tenant: When a
nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed, through no fault of the
property owner or tenant, to the extent of less than sixty percent (60%) of the
replacement value at the time, it may be repaired and reconstructed provided
that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing degree of the
nonconformity is not increased. A zoning permit must be obtained for such
rebuilding, restoration, repair, for reconstruction within one year of the date
of damage or destruction. In the event that the zoning permit is not obtained
within one year, then the structure cannot be restored unless it conforms to
all regulations of the district in which it is located.
      4.   The replacement value of the structure is based on:
         (a)   The sale of that structure within the previous year or, if that
is not applicable;
         (b)   An appraisal within the last two (2) years or, if that is not
available;
         (c)   The amount for which the structure was insured prior to the date
of the damage or destruction; or,
         (d)   An alternative method determined acceptable by the Village
Board.
   (E)   Removal And Replacement Exception: A legally nonconforming residential
dwelling may be removed and replaced with a new comparable nonconforming
residential dwelling upon granting of a variance by the Village Board after a
public hearing before the PZC, if the following conditions are determined by
the Village Board to exist:
      1.   That due to old age, dilapidated, or dangerous condition of the
existing structure, said structure has an adverse effect on the neighborhood
and owner, and repairs and restoration would be difficult, impractical and/or
not cost effective; and
      2.   The Village Board determines that to allow such removal and
replacement would not significantly impact the growth and development plans of
the Village as established in the Village comprehensive plan; and
      3.   Failure to receive a variance to remove and replace the said
structure would cause an undue hardship on the owner.
The removal and replacement of said structure shall be completed within one
year of the date of the granting of the variance or the variance shall be void.
(Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-12-4: NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD:
   (A)   Definition: A nonconforming lot of record is a lot of record that
lawfully conformed to the lot dimension requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located, but because of subsequent amendments to this title no
longer conforms to the applicable lot dimensions.
   (B)   Use: Notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
title, a nonconforming lot of record may be used for a permitted or special use
within the zoning district.
   (C)   Development: Development of a nonconforming lot of record must meet
all applicable public health and safety provisions of Title 7, and dimensional
or bulk regulations of the district in which it is located with the exception
of the lot dimension requirement that renders it nonconforming.
   (D)   Common Ownership Limitation: If two (2) or more lots of record have
contiguous frontage in common ownership as of the effective date of this title
and one or more of the lots does not meet the requirements for lot dimensions
as established by this title, the lots involved are considered to be a single
lot for the purposes of this title. No division of the lot is permitted that
creates a nonconforming lot and/or renders the remaining lot(s) nonconforming.
No zoning permit will be issued for the use of any lot or portion of a lot,
transferred or conveyed in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-12-5: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   (A)   Any sign lawfully existing or under construction on the effective date
of this title that does not conform to one or more of the provisions of this
title may be continued in operation and maintained indefinitely as a
nonconforming sign subject to compliance with this title.
   (B)   Routine maintenance of nonconforming signs is allowed, including
changing of copy, necessary non-structural repairs, and incidental alterations
that do not expand, extend or enlarge the nonconforming features of the sign.
However, no structural alteration, enlargement, or expansion may be made to a
nonconforming sign unless the alteration, enlargement, or expansion will result
in the elimination of the nonconforming features of the sign.
   (C)   Removal Or Modification Of Nonconforming Sign:
      1.   A nonconforming sign and its associated sign structure must be
removed or modified to comply with these regulations if:
         (a)   The structure to which it is accessory is demolished or
destroyed to an extent exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the structure's
assessed value;
         (b)   The sign and sign structure is demolished or destroyed to an
extent exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost; or
         (c)   If the business or use on the property ceases to operate for a
continuous period of three months or more.
      2.   Such nonconforming sign and sign structure subject to removal under
this paragraph must be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner or lessee
of the property. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the Zoning
Administrator must give the owner/lessee written notice of the requirements of
this subsection and the sign must be removed within thirty (30) days of such
notice.
      3.   If such sign is not removed or modified after the 30-day period, the
Village Board may take action to authorize the removal of the sign and sign
structure at the expense of the owner, agent, or person having beneficial
interest in the building or premises on which the sign is located. In addition,
the Village is authorized to institute and pursue all other available remedies
and penalties under the law. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
CHAPTER 13
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-13-1: Enforcement Duties
10-13-2: Zoning Permit Or Certificate Of Compliance Enforcement
10-13-3: Enforcement Generally
10-13-1: ENFORCEMENT DUTIES:
   (A)   Generally, it shall be the duty of the Village President to enforce
the provisions of this title.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce the
provisions related to issuance of a zoning permit or a certificate of
compliance. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-13-2: ZONING PERMIT OR CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   No zoning permit or certificate of compliance shall be granted by the
Zoning Administrator for any purpose except in compliance with the provisions
of this title.
   (B)   Any person who begins construction or work on any building or
improvement requiring a zoning permit from the Village without first obtaining
a zoning permit shall be fined for such offense an amount not to exceed ten
(10) times the cost of the zoning permit. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
10-13-3: ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY:
Unless otherwise specified in the provisions of this title, whoever violates
any of the provisions of this title shall be fined in accordance with section
1-4-1 of the Village Code. (Ord. 2021-04, 6-22-2021)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title And Purpose
11-1-2: Definitions
11-1-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This title shall be known as the LAND SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF
ST. JOSEPH which is adopted to implement the regulations authorized pursuant to
the laws of the State of Illinois and the official comprehensive plan for the
Village of St. Joseph. (Ord. 2017-5, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are herewith defined as
follows:
ALLEY: A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of
access to abutting property.
AREA GENERAL PLAN: A general plan prepared by the subdivider, or subdividers,
for the progressive development of a large landholding, or several properties
proposed to be subdivided by sections, meeting the requirements of these
regulations.
BLOCK: Property abutting on one side of a street, and lying between the two (2)
nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or between the nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway or
other definite barrier.
BOARD: Refers to, and is the same as, the Board of Trustees of the Village of
St. Joseph.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line within a lot or other parcel of land so
designated on the plat of the proposed subdivision, or as provided in title 10
of this Code, between which and the adjacent boundary of the lot, the erection
of an enclosed structure or portion thereof is prohibited. The building setback
line shall be parallel with the adjacent street right-of-way line or side or
rear yard line, except as otherwise approved by the Board.
COMMISSION: Refers to, and is the same as, the Planning and Zoning Commission
of the Village of St. Joseph.
COMMON AREA (COMMON PROPERTY): Those areas and facilities owned, designated and
intended for use by all the residents and owners of the development.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: An official advisory plan of jurisdiction formally adopted
by a municipality or the County, any part of which may be implemented by
ordinance duly enacted by the Corporate Authorities as prescribed by the
Illinois Municipal Code. Said plan shall be placed on file with the Village
Clerk and with the Champaign County Clerk.
DEDICATION: The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any general
public uses, reserving to himself/herself/itself no other rights than such as
are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which
the property has been devoted.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A contract or agreement entered into between the owner
of a property and the Village of St. Joseph, which involves a commitment by the
owner and/or the Village to contribute funds, effort, or other resources
towards the study of the feasibility and/or the actual construction of
extensions of sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers, street improvements,
or other infrastructure improvements needed or desired for the development of
the owner's property. It is generally intended that a development agreement, if
deemed necessary, be entered into during the area general plan stage of the
subdivision approval process.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner of either the permanent or temporary
use of an area of land to the public, a corporation, or person(s), for
specified uses and purposes to be designated as a "public" or "private"
easement depending upon the nature of its use. Easements shall be considered
permanent unless specified as temporary.
ENGINEER: A professional engineer, registered as such and licensed to practice
in the State of Illinois or qualified to practice as provided by the Illinois
Compiled Statutes.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision, or other parcel of land intended as a unit for
transfer of ownership or for development.
LOT, AREA: The horizontal projection (in square feet) of a parcel of land or a
body of water, or combination of both, exclusive of any portion of the right-
of-way of any public or private streets. Measurements are to be made by
standard surveying practice methods.
LOT, CORNER: A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting or abutting on
two (2) or more intersecting streets.
LOT, DEPTH: The average distance between the front and rear line of a lot
measured in the general direction of its side lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: The real or imaginary line oriented by a monument or other stable
point of reference which indicates the boundary of a lot.
LOT, WIDTH: Shall be as defined in title 10, "Zoning Regulations", of this
Code.
OUTLOT: A lot depicted on an approved development plat which normally is not a
buildable lot meeting the requirements of the Village of St. Joseph's or
Champaign County's zoning ordinances for minimum width, size or frontage
requirements. Such lots are usually remnants or unusable portions of land in a
development plat. Outlots, unless approved by the Village, may not be
developed. An outlot may include any land devoted to a common area as part of a
development.
OWNER: Any person having any legal, equitable or beneficial interest in the
land sought to be subdivided, including the plural as well as the singular, and
firm, association, partnership, private corporation, or combination of any of
them.
PLANS: All drawings, including general plans, cross sections, profiles, working
details and specifications, which the subdivider prepares or has prepared to
show the character, extent and details of the improvements required in this
title.
PLAT: A map or drawing showing the lot and street arrangement or other features
or details of the area being subdivided, as required in this title for
preliminary and final approval and recording.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: Street pavements, public walkways, monuments, water mains,
sanitary and storm sewers, street signs, drainage ditches, culverts, stormwater
detention basins, and appurtenances to the foregoing items and for use by the
public.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW): The entire dedicated tract or strip of land that is
dedicated for use by the public for circulation and/or service.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A public thoroughfare with a high degree of traffic
continuity established in the major street plan of the Village.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street which carries traffic from local and subcollector
streets to the arterial street system, including the principal entrance streets
of residential developments and the primary circulating streets within such
developments.
STREET, LOCAL: Minor streets providing direct access to abutting property which
may be devoted to residential, commercial, or other uses. Streets in this
classification are not considered part of the major thoroughfare system.
STREET, SUBCOLLECTOR: A street which collects traffic from local streets to
either a collector street or an arterial street, and is designed with more
emphasis on property access than mobility. Subcollector streets generally
include more stub connections than the collector streets.
SUBDIVIDER: See definition of owner.
SUBDIVISION OR SUBDIVIDE: Either: a) the division of a parcel of land into two
(2) or more parts, lots, tracts, sites or parcels; or b) the establishment or
dedication of a road, highway, street, alley or easement of access through a
tract of land regardless of area; provided, however, that the sale or exchange
of small parcels of land to or between adjoining property owners, where such
sale or exchange does not create any additional lots, shall not be considered
as a subdivision of land. (Ord. 2017-5, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Plat, When Required
11-2-2: Preliminary Plat
11-2-2-1: Area General Plan
11-2-3: Requisites For Final Plat Approval
11-2-4: Subdivision Restrictions
11-2-5: Modification Of Requirements
11-2-6: Changes, Amendments
11-2-7: Penalty
11-2-1: PLAT, WHEN REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or person having control of any land
within the corporate limits of the Village or within one and one-half (11/2)
miles of its corporate limits and not included within or closer to the
corporate limits of any other incorporated community, to subdivide or lay out
such land into lots, blocks, streets, avenues, alleys, public ways and grounds,
unless by a plat in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois and the
provisions of this title. Each subdivider of land shall confer with local
officials before preparing the preliminary plat, in order to become thoroughly
familiar with all the regulations and the official comprehensive plan proposals
affecting the territory in which the subdivision lies. (2005 Code)
11-2-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
Any person proposing to subdivide land shall submit to the Village Planning and
Zoning Commission, for its consideration, a preliminary plat prepared in
accordance with the specifications of chapter 4 of this title. The design and
layout of the subdivision shall conform to the requirements of chapter 3 of
this title. Following consideration of the plat, the commission shall report
its findings and recommendations in writing to the Board for its consideration
and approval or disapproval. (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-
2017)
11-2-2-1: AREA GENERAL PLAN:
The area general plan shall show property boundaries, land characteristics
including wetlands, drainage patterns, flood prone areas as identified on flood
prone area maps of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, wooded areas and
major topographic features, existing streets, existing buildings, sewer lines,
water lines and pipelines. Also to be shown in the area general plan are the
proposed layout of streets, and blocks; general provisions for proposed
sanitary sewage collection, stormwater transportation and stormwater detention;
proposed location of commercial areas, residential areas, and parks or other
public areas. The area general plan shall be prepared to a proper scale of one
inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger, and to proper accuracy.
(2005 Code)
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the area general plan at a
regular meeting for compliance with these regulations and its consistency with
the Village comprehensive plan and applicable Municipal development plans, or
parts thereof.
An area general plan may be prepared and submitted by the subdivider, for
approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission, prior to the submission of the
initial preliminary plat. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine if
either of the following conditions exists to warrant requirement of preparation
and submission of an area general plan:
   (A)   The parcel initially proposed for platting constitutes a portion of a
larger tract of land owned, or under option to purchase by the subdivider. If
the parcel of land proposed for platting exceeds five (5) acres, an area
general plan shall be required. If the parcel of land proposed for platting
does not exceed five (5) acres, an area general plan may be required if deemed
appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Board.
   (B)   The parcel initially proposed for platting constitutes a portion of a
larger land area, the development of which will be complicated by unusual
problems of drainage, street layout, utility services, land usage, or land
ownership pattern. An area general plan may be required if deemed appropriate
by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Board. (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-
2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
11-2-3: REQUISITES FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL:
Following approval of the preliminary plat by the Board, the subdivider shall:
a) install the required improvements, or b) furnish a bond for such
installation, all in accordance with the requirements of this title. Upon
approval of the improvements, or arrangements therefor, the final plat shall be
submitted in accordance with the provisions and requirements of chapter 4 of
this title. No plat or replat shall be filed for record or recorded in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Champaign County, Illinois, unless and until
the approval of the Board is endorsed thereon by the Village Clerk, and no lot
shall be sold from such plat or replat unless and until approved by the Board
and filed for record in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds in Champaign
County, Illinois, as herein provided. (2005 Code)
11-2-4: SUBDIVISION RESTRICTIONS:
Any subdivision plat approved by the Board shall contain the following
language:
In the event any restriction imposed by the subdivider on the subdivision land
at the time of the platting is changed by the consent of the required number of
owners owning the lots of said subdivision, then such change shall be
ineffective until approved by the Board of Trustees of the Village of St.
Joseph if said change concerns easements, drainage, stormwater management,
utilities, annexation, or other matter of concern to or involving the Village.
In the event such subdivision restrictions fail to contain the aforesaid
language, then by operation of law in accordance with this section,
restrictions imposed upon said subdivision shall include the above language and
no subdivision restrictions may be changed or altered in any way without the
consent of the Board. (2005 Code)
11-2-5: MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is
surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict
application of the requirements contained in this title would result in real
difficulties or substantial hardship or injustice, the Board, after report by
the commission, may vary or modify such requirements so that the subdivider may
develop his/her/its property in a reasonable manner, but so that, at the same
time, the public welfare and interests of the Village and surrounding area are
protected and the general intent and spirit of this title preserved. The
granting of variances is not consistent with the purpose of this title. It is
therefore essential that every effort be made to comply with the requirements
contained in this title. (2005 Code)
11-2-6: CHANGES, AMENDMENTS:
Any regulations or provisions of this title may be changed and amended from
time to time by the Board; provided, however, that such changes or amendments
shall not become effective until after study and report by the Village Planning
and Zoning Commission and until after a public hearing has been held, public
notice of which shall have been given in a newspaper of general circulation at
least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing. (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-
28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
11-2-7: PENALTY:
It shall be illegal to sell or offer to sell any lot, tract or property which
does not conform to the requirements and regulations of this title and every
such sale or attempt to sell shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1
of this Code. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Design Requirements And Standards
11-3-1: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS:
The arrangement of streets and lots shall give due regard to the topography and
other physical features of the property and shall meet the following
requirements and standards:
   (A)   Relation To Adjoining Street System: The arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of the existing streets
in adjoining areas (or their proper projection where adjoining land is not
subdivided) insofar as they may be deemed necessary for public requirements.
The street and alley arrangements shall not be such as to cause hardship to
owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing
convenient access to it. Offset streets shall be avoided. The angle of
intersection between minor streets and major streets shall not vary by more
than ten degrees (10°) from a right angle. Streets obviously in alignment with
existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Proposed street
names that are in conflict with existing street names shall not be approved.
   (B)   Street And Alley Width:
      1.   The minimum right of way width for arterial streets shall be eighty
feet (80'), with a minimum surface width of thirty six feet (36') between the
outside edges of the curbs.
      2.   The minimum right of way width for collector streets shall be
seventy feet (70'), with a minimum surface width of thirty six feet (36')
between the outside edges of the curbs.
      3.   The minimum right of way width for subcollector streets shall be
sixty six feet (66'), with a minimum surface width of thirty two feet (32')
between the outside edges of the curbs.
      4.   The minimum right of way width for local streets shall be sixty feet
(60'), with a minimum surface width of twenty eight feet (28') between the
outside edges of the curbs.
      5.   The village may require the developer to provide a traffic
engineering study to determine appropriate road geometry and cross section, the
cost of which shall be borne by the developer and which traffic engineering
study shall be prepared by the village engineers or other firm approved by the
village.
      6.   The village may modify requirements for surface width upon results
of traffic analysis on the village engineer's recommendation.
      7.   When a street adjoins an unsubdivided property, a half street of at
least thirty feet (30') in width shall be dedicated and whenever the property
being subdivided adjoins a half street, the remainder of the street shall be
dedicated.
      8.   Alleys may be provided in a residential block and, where provided,
shall have a dedicated width of at least sixteen feet (16'). Alleys are
required at the rear of all commercial lots unless other adequate provisions
are made for service and deliveries, and shall be at least twenty feet (20')
wide.
   (C)   Easements: Easements of at least ten feet (10') in width shall be
dedicated on each side of all rear lot lines and along side lot lines, where
necessary, for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water or
other utilities. Easements of greater width may be required along or across
lots where necessary for the extension of main sewers or other utilities or
where both water and sewer lines are located in the same easements.
   (D)   Blocks:
      1.   No block shall be longer than one thousand three hundred twenty feet
(1,320'). Where blocks are over seven hundred fifty feet (750') in length, a
walkway with a right of way of at least ten feet (10') in width may be required
through the block near the center of the block.
      2.   Courts, dead end streets or other street space may be provided if
proper access is given to all lots from a dedicated street or court. All dead
end streets shall terminate in a circular dedicated street space having a
minimum radius of sixty feet (60') with minimum surface radius of fifty feet
(50'), or other satisfactory arrangement for turning of vehicles. Dead end
streets shall not exceed seven hundred fifty feet (750') in length. A dead end
street shall be measured from the far edge of the pavement at the dead end, to
the near edge of the first intersecting street with two (2) directions of
departure (straight ahead counts as 1 direction of departure).
   (E)   Lots:
      1.   The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will
provide satisfactory and desirable building sites, properly related to
topography and to the character of surrounding development.
      2.   All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street
lines and radial to curved street lines except where a variation of this rule
will provide a better street and lot layout. Lots with double frontage shall be
avoided.
      3.   No lot shall have a depth of less than one hundred feet (100') or a
depth in excess of three (3) times its width unless approved by the board. No
lot shall have an area or width less than that required by any zoning ordinance
or resolution in effect within the area.
      4.   Corner lots shall have a width sufficient to permit the
establishment of front building lines on both the adjoining streets.
      5.   Lots at arterial and collector street intersections and at acute
angle intersections of less than eighty five degrees (85°) shall have a radius
of twenty feet (20') at the street corner. On commercial lots, a chord may be
substituted for the circular arc.
   (F)   Easements Along Streams: Whenever any stream or important surface
drainage course is located in an area being subdivided, the subdivider shall
provide an adequate easement along each side of the stream for the preservation
of the stream and its associated floodplain. Such easement shall be dedicated
to the village or other appropriate public agency. Said easement does not
relieve the developer, its successors or assigns, from the obligation of long
term maintenance of the stream or drainage course. (2005 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PRELIMINARY, FINAL PLATS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Area General Plan; Procedures For Submission
11-4-2: Preliminary Plat
11-4-3: Final Plat Submission
11-4-3-1: Subdivider To Provide
11-4-3-2: Contents Of Final Plat
11-4-3-3: Approval Of Final Plat
11-4-3-4: Disapproval Of Final Plat
11-4-3-5: Planning And Zoning Commission Recommendations
11-4-3-6: Board Action
11-4-3-7: Board Consideration
11-4-3-8: Board Disapproval
11-4-3-9: Certificate On Final Plat
11-4-3-10: Recording Of Final Plat
11-4-3-11: Procedures For Resubdividing And Replatting Lots And For Vacation Of
Plats
11-4-4: Procedures For A Minor Subdivision
11-4-1: AREA GENERAL PLAN; PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION:
Subdivider shall submit to the Village:
   (A)   Eighteen (18) copies of the area general plan and supportive materials
as required at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the Planning and
Zoning Commission meeting at which the subdivider wishes the area general plan
considered.
   (B)   A reduction of the area general plan showing information required as
submitted on an eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") sheet. (2005 Code;
amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017; Ord. 2025-02 4-8-2025)
11-4-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   (A)   Where/When Filed: Sixteen (16) copies of the preliminary plat, drawn
to a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), along
with a preliminary plat application and supportive materials as required
herein, shall be submitted to the Village Clerk or Office Manager, at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which
the subdivider wishes the preliminary plat to be considered. (2005 Code; amd.
Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
   (B)   Plat To Show:
      1.   The location of the present property lines and section lines and
streets, buildings, watercourses and other existing features within the area to
be subdivided and similar information regarding land immediately adjacent
thereto.
      2.   The proposed location and width of streets, alleys, lots, building
lines and easements.
      3.   Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision.
      4.   Existing sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, culverts and
other underground structures within the tract and tracts immediately abutting
thereto; the location and size of the nearest water main and sewer connections.
      5.   The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded and
the name of the professional engineer, the registered land surveyor, and the
landowner and subdivider platting the tract.
      6.   Contours referenced to the NGVD 29 datum or the NAVD 88 datum with
intervals of one foot (1') or less.
      7.   A north arrow, graphic scale and plan preparation date.
      8.   Plans or written statements describing the grades or profiles of the
streets, the proposed grades and facilities for all required improvements, and
the subdivider's proposal to the Village for accomplishing their installations
in accordance with chapter 5 of this title.
      9.   Stormwater management plan, describing the existing and proposed
drainage patterns, detention volume calculations, and downstream drainage
conditions that may impact site design in accordance with title 7 of this Code.
(2005 Code)
      10.   Any submittal required by this section which is not completed and
in form acceptable to the Village Engineer or Village Attorney by two (2) weeks
prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting, shall result in the
postponement of the hearing to the next meeting date. (Ord. 2007-1, 2-27-2007;
amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
   (C)   Developer To Mail: The developer shall mail, no later than thirty (30)
days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting, one print of the
preliminary plat to the following: (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017,
eff. 4-8-2017)
Any other township affected by the subdivision.
Applicable active drainage district.
Champaign County Superintendent of Highways (if not in Village limits).
Champaign County Zoning Administrator (if not in Village limits).
Illinois Department of Public Health (if on site sewage disposal systems are
proposed).
Illinois Department of Transportation (if affected by subdivision).
Local cable television companies.
Local phone companies.
Local power companies.
Local water company (if water service is to be provided by said entity).
St. Joseph Grade School District.
St. Joseph-Ogden High School District.
St. Joseph Postmaster.
St. Joseph-Stanton Fire Protection District.
St. Joseph Township Road District Commissioner (if affected by subdivision).
St. Joseph Village Attorney.
St. Joseph Village Engineers.
Any other public or quasi-public utility affected by the subdivision.
 
The prints must be accompanied by a request that written comments be submitted
to the Village of St. Joseph not later than thirty (30) days thereafter, unless
otherwise required by ordinance or law, and that no comment in the time
specified shall be deemed no adverse comment. The developer shall set forth a
statement on the preliminary plat that the prints, along with the request for
written comments, have been mailed to the various locations identified above
and shall provide evidence of same to the Village. A copy of any response which
is received by the developer or developer's engineer to any requirement of this
section, shall be submitted to the Village upon receipt. (2005 Code)
   (D)   Soil And Water Conservation District Review And Approval: Not less
than thirty (30) days before the preliminary plat is considered by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, information concerning the proposed subdivision shall be
submitted by the developer to the Soil and Water Conservation District for
comments as to: (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
      1.   Suitability of soils for building construction and problems that may
arise in the event good engineering practices are not followed.
      2.   Suitability of soils for septic tank system.
      3.   Best use of soils in the area in question.
      4.   Possible measures to be taken to control erosion and sedimentation
during site development. (2005 Code)
The developer shall submit a written opinion from the Soil and Water
Conservation District concerning the proposed subdivision to the Chairperson of
the Planning and Zoning Commission. This opinion may be in the form of a
natural resources report by the Soil and Water Conservation District. This
report will not be required for replat subdivisions, if a report has previously
been prepared by the district within the previous ten (10) years. (2005 Code;
amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
All required fees shall be paid by the subdivider directly to the Champaign
County Soil and Water Conservation District. (2005 Code)
   (E)   Illinois Department Of Natural Resources Review: Not less than thirty
(30) days before the preliminary plat is considered by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, information concerning the proposed subdivision shall be submitted
by the developer to the Illinois Department of Natural Resources for endangered
species review and consultation. A copy of the completed endangered species
consultation review form shall be submitted to the Village of St. Joseph prior
to final approval of the final plat. This report shall not be required for
replat subdivisions if a previous report has been submitted for the original
subdivision within the previous ten (10) years.
   (F)   Illinois Historic Preservation Agency: If a preliminary plat would
involve State or Federal funding, State or Federal permits, or involves
construction of new streets, not less than thirty (30) days before the
preliminary plat is considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
information concerning the proposed subdivision shall be submitted by the
developer to the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency for historic resources
review and consultation. A copy of the completed review form prepared by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency shall be submitted to the Village of St.
Joseph prior to final approval of the final plat. This report shall not be
required for replat subdivisions if a previous report has been submitted for
the original subdivision within the previous ten (10) years. (2005 Code; amd.
Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
   (G)   Waivers Requested: List of waivers being requested, if any (see
section
11-2-5 of this title). (2005 Code)
   (H)   Procedures For Review And Approval: The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall examine the preliminary plat for compliance with these regulations with
special attention given to the following: (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-
2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
      1.   Design standards and information requirements as set forth by these
regulations.
      2.   Streets and thoroughfares as related to neighborhood circulation and
existing and proposed topography.
      3.   Existing and proposed zoning, and existing and proposed land use.
      4.   The Village of St. Joseph official comprehensive plan, including the
land use plan and major street plan.
      5.   Land required for schools, parks, or other public use.
      6.   Utility methods and systems, stormwater management and drainage, and
street improvement.
      7.   Watercourses and floodplain areas.
      8.   The existence of threatened or endangered species of plants or
animals.
      9.   The existence of archaeological or historical resources.
   (I)   Approval Of Preliminary Plat:
      1.   If the commission finds that the preliminary plat satisfies the
requirements of this title, it shall recommend approval by the Board.
If the commission finds otherwise, it shall specify in writing the objections
found to such plat and may either recommend disapproval or recommend approval
conditioned upon specific changes in the plat.
One copy of the proposed plat, together with a copy of the findings of the
commission, shall be filed by the commission with the Village Clerk for
submission to the Board. One copy of the proposed plat and findings shall be
given to the person offering the proposed plat. (2005 Code)
      2.   Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the Board shall either approve or disapprove said preliminary plat.
In the event the Board disapproves the plat, the subdivider has one year from
the date of said disapproval to make changes and resubmit to the Board;
otherwise the prior recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and
Village Engineer shall become null and void. (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-
28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
      3.   Approval of the preliminary plat by the Board confers upon the
subdivider the following rights for a period of twelve (12) months from the
date of approval, subject to existing law, or ordinances or statutes:
         (a)   The subdivider may submit on or before the expiration date a
final plat for the whole or part thereof of the preliminary plat for
consideration by the Village.
         (b)   The subdivider may proceed with the installation of required
physical improvements, subject to the provisions of these regulations and with
the approval of the engineering plans and specifications by the Village
Engineer, and may proceed with the preparation of the final plat.
Approval of the preliminary plat by the Board shall be indicated on the
drawings; however, such approval and designation thereof does not assure final
acceptance of the streets, other public ways, or other public improvements for
dedication nor continuity of current zoning for the tract or its environs.
At the subdivider's request, the Board may extend the time period to which to
complete the construction if the Board finds that such an extension is
consistent with the public welfare. (2005 Code)
11-4-3: FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION:
11-4-3-1: SUBDIVIDER TO PROVIDE:
At any time within one year after receiving preliminary plat approval, and at
least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to any regular meeting of the Village
Planning and Zoning Commission, the subdivider shall submit, in completed form,
to the Village Clerk or Office Manager: (Ord. 2007-1, 2-27-2007; amd. Ord.
2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
   (A)   Sixteen (16) copies of the final plat.
   (B)   Also, the subdivider shall submit to the Village Engineer, in
completed form, three (3) copies of the engineering plans and specifications
for the subdivision on the same date as submission of the copies of the final
plat.
   (C)   Stormwater drainage calculations, design analyses, and other such
supporting documentation, in completed form, as the Village Engineer may deem
necessary for review of the engineering plans.
   (D)   Completed final plat application form, including all attachments
thereto.
   (E)   One or more copies of all other required documents, as set forth in
subsections
11-4-2(C), (D), (E), (F) and (G) of this chapter.
   (F)   Any required floodplain development permit or applicable letter of map
revision.
   (G)   Completed owner's certificate and covenants, County Clerk's tax
certificate and school district statement for approval by the Village Attorney.
   (H)   Payment of all Village fees and costs. (Ord. 2007-1, 2-27-2007)
   (I)   Any submittal which is not completed and in form acceptable to the
Village Engineer or Village Attorney by two (2) weeks prior to the Planning and
Zoning Commission meeting, shall result in the postponement of the hearing to
the next meeting date. (Ord. 2007-1, 2-27-2007; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017,
eff. 4-8-2017)
11-4-3-2: CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT:
The final plat shall contain or be accompanied by the information herein
specified and shall comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   General:
      1.   The name of the subdivision.
      2.   The certificate of a registered land surveyor.
      3.   The date of preparation, graphic scale and north arrow. The scale
and size of the plat shall be such that a fifty percent (50%) size photographic
reduction will not impair the details. Plats in several sections are
permissible. No sheet larger than twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24"
x 36") shall be submitted. The plat shall be presented at a scale of one inch
to one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger, except that a different scale may be
used if approved during the preliminary plat phase. Lettering on the full size
plat shall be all capitals of not less than one-tenth (1/10) of an inch in
height. The plat shall be legible without magnification.
      4.   The location and position of the subdivision indicated in each of
the following ways as applicable:
         (a)   By quarter section, township, range, meridian, County, and
State.
         (b)   By distances and bearings from astronomic or assumed north and
angles with reference to a corner or corners established in the United States
public land survey.
         (c)   By a written legal description of the exterior boundaries of the
land as surveyed and divided.
      5.   The plat shall comply with the current Illinois Compiled Statutes.
      6.   Information which shall appear on the plat or on subsidiary
documents:
         (a)   Location of subdivision relative to Village limits.
         (b)   In the event a private on site sewage disposal system is
proposed, for each lot, certification by a registered professional engineer
indicated on the face of the subsidiary documents that the proposed land use,
the proposed lots and the known soil characteristics of the area are adequate
for such systems.
         (c)   A signed statement by a professional engineer and the owner
stating that to the best of their knowledge and belief, the drainage and
surface water drainage will not be changed by the subdivision, or if surface
water drainage will be changed, reasonable provision has been made for
collection and diversion of such waters into public areas, or drainage which
the subdivider has the right to use, and that such surface waters will be
planned for in accordance with title 7 of this Code and generally accepted
engineering practices so as to reduce the likelihood of damage to adjoining
property because of the construction of the subdivision.
         (d)   The following notation shall appear on the face of the plat:
THE PROPERTY COVERED BY THIS SUBDIVISION IS (IS NOT) LOCATED WITHIN A FLOOD
HAZARD AREA (ZONE A), AS DETERMINED BY THE FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
(PANEL NUMBER, TITLE, AND DATE OF FEMA STUDY).
      7.   The final plat shall be drawn with ink on a stable plastic film.
   (B)   Detailed Information:
      1.   Boundary Lines: The plat shall indicate survey data sufficient to
reproduce any line or reestablish any survey monument in the development. The
plat shall clearly indicate the length of boundary lines of all streets,
alleys, blocks, lots, public grounds, easements, and rights of way. Where a
boundary line is the arc of a circle, the radius, the length of the arc, the
chord and chord bearing shall be shown. All dimensions shall be shown to
hundredths of a foot, except in the case of riparian boundaries, which may be
shown with less precision.
      2.   Abutting Streets: Abutting street lines of platted, adjoining
subdivisions shown in their correct location by broken (dashed) lines.
      3.   Description And Location: The description and location of all
subdivision and public land system survey monuments.
      4.   Numbering System: A consecutive numbering system for all lots and
blocks.
      5.   Location And Names Of Streets: Location and names of all existing or
prior platted streets or other public ways, railroads and utility rights of
way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent easements or prior platted
lots within and adjacent to the subdivision.
      6.   Minimum Setback Lines: A graphic representation of the minimum
setback lines on all lots parcels, and a notation of the distance between such
lines and the street line, or lot line.
      7.   Final Plat Accompanied By: The final plat shall be accompanied by:
         (a)   Owner's certificate and all covenants, agreements, and deed
restrictions which are to be imposed by the subdivider on future owners of lots
within the subdivision once approved.
         (b)   A notarized certification by owner and by mortgage holder of
record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other
public areas, and any restrictions as to usage, buildings, occupancy, etc.
         (c)   Certification from the county clerk that all taxes and special
assessments due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full as
required by statutes.
         (d)   A report from the soil and water conservation district.
         (e)   A completed endangered species consultation report form from the
Illinois department of natural resources, if required (see subsection
11-4-2(E) of this chapter).
         (f)   A completed Illinois historic preservation agency review report,
if required (see subsection
11-4-2(F) of this chapter).
         (g)   An erosion and sedimentation control plan showing measures
necessary to meet the objectives of this chapter throughout all phases of
construction and permanently after completion of development of the site.
         (h)   The engineering plans and specifications for the subdivision.
         (i)   Engineer's opinion of estimated costs of construction of public
improvements.
         (j)   Storm water management plan, along with necessary computations,
as set forth in title 7, chapter 4, "Storm Water Management", of this code.
         (k)   For properties not located within the village of St. Joseph, an
annexation agreement which requires and sets forth the condition of its future
annexation to the village of St. Joseph.
      8.   Performance Bond: The subdivider shall file with the board a
performance bond in favor of the village and in a form and with conditions and
surety approved by the board, which conditions shall include:
         (a)   The subdivider shall execute a performance bond in favor of the
village which guarantees that all subdivision improvements required by this
title to be built by subdivider shall be constructed as required in this title.
"Subdivision improvement" is any and all improvements required to be
constructed by this title or as a condition of final plat approval of the
subdivision.
         (b)   The subdivider shall complete construction of all subdivision
improvements in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
village engineer within two (2) years of the date the village approves the
final plat of the subdivision. At the subdivider's request, the board may
extend the time period in which to complete the construction for an additional
two (2) years if the board finds that such an extension is consistent with the
public welfare.
         (c)   This surety shall be one of the following:
            (1) Corporate surety bond as approved by village attorney.
            (2) Cash, held without interest; or if requested by developer, an
interest bearing account will be established for said funds with interest added
to principal and reported by the bank under developer's tax identification
number, and developer to pay all costs of establishing and maintaining said
account.
            (3) Irrevocable letter of credit as approved by village attorney.
The amount of the performance guarantee and surety shall be based on the
estimated value of the improvements at the time of approval of the subdivision,
ensuring the village adequate coverage to secure the satisfactory construction,
installation, and dedication of the uncompleted portions of the required
improvements. The village attorney shall approve such performance guarantee
only after a recommendation of approval of the amount of the guarantee is
received from the village engineer.
The amount of the performance guarantee with a guarantee by a corporate surety,
a certificate of deposit, cash, irrevocable bank letters of credit or other
forms of bond/surety found acceptable by the village attorney, shall be one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated value of the cost of the proposed
public improvements if construction work has not commenced. If construction of
the improvements was commenced subsequent to approval of the subdivision, but
prior to the recording of the subdivision documents, the amount of the
performance bond and surety shall be as follows:
   A. If the improvements are one percent (1%) to seventy five percent (75%)
completed, one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated cost of
completing the remaining improvements, but in no case shall the bond and surety
be less than fifteen percent (15%) of the cost of all of the public
improvements.
   B. If the improvements are more than seventy five percent (75%) completed,
two hundred percent (200%) of the estimated cost of completing the remaining
improvements, but in no case shall the bond and surety be less than fifteen
percent (15%) of the cost of all the public improvements.
Upon substantial completion of major segments of public improvements with
appropriate documentation submitted by the developer's engineer, and after
initial tentative acceptance of the completed improvements by the village, the
amount of the performance guarantee may be reduced in stages to reflect the
segments completed, but in no case shall the remaining bond be less than
fifteen percent (15%) of the cost of completing the entire improvements, all
upon approval by the board.
         (d)   (1) Upon completion of construction of all subdivision
improvements, the subdivider shall seek final acceptance of the improvements by
submitting written request for acceptance to the board.
            (2) If the board finds that all required improvements are completed
and in conformance with the requirements of this title and that all tests and
plans required to be submitted by the subdivider have been received and are
acceptable in accordance with the requirements of this title, the board shall
issue to the subdivider, written notice of the acceptance of the improvements
by the village.
            (3) Use of the improvements by the public or maintenance of the
improvements by any public entity, including, but not limited to, the village,
shall not constitute acceptance of any or all of the required improvements.
         (e)   The village shall release the subdivision improvement
performance bond and its security upon:
            (1) Satisfactory completion of all subdivision improvements
required pursuant to this title; and
            (2) Acceptance of subdivision improvements by the board; and
            (3) Receipt of properly executed maintenance bond with surety as
provided in this title; and
            (4) Written request from the subdivider.
      9.   Approval By Department Of Transportation: Approval of the final plat
by the Illinois department of transportation if the subdivision is located
across or adjacent to a state maintained highway.
      10.   Approval By County Engineer: Approval of the final plat by the
county engineer if the subdivision is located across or adjacent to a county
highway.
      11.   Approval By Township Road District: Approval of the final plat by
the township road district if the subdivision involves dedication of new
township streets or roadways, unless said roadways are the subject of an
annexation agreement with the village.
      12.   Maintenance, Bond:
         (a)   The subdivider shall maintain all subdivision improvements free
from defects for a period of two (2) years after the date the village engineer
issues a written notice of acceptance of all the subdivision improvements.
         (b)   If the village accepts part but not all of the subdivision
improvements, the part accepted must be maintained free of defects until the
expiration of the maintenance period for all subdivision improvements.
         (c)   A defect, as determined by the board with advice of its
engineer, for which the village may require repair is any:
            (1) Failure of a subdivision improvement to operate in conformance
with this title or construction plans, specifications or agreements during the
maintenance period; or
            (2) The appearance of any defect in a subdivision improvement which
is discovered during an inspection of the improvement made by village personnel
within a reasonable period of time after the subdivider's request for the
release of the maintenance bond or at any time prior to that inspection; or
            (3) The failure to design and construct a subdivision improvement
required by this title and not previously waived, the need for which is
discovered prior to the end of the maintenance period.
"Free from defects" means that all subdivision improvements are functioning in
accordance with the purpose for which they were designed and that the
improvements have not deteriorated other than to the extent of normal wear.
Nondesigned cracks on pavement or sidewalk shall not be considered normal wear.
         (d)   For a period of two (2) years after acceptance in writing of all
the subdivision improvements by the village engineer, the subdivider shall
maintain the subdivision improvements free from defects. The subdivider shall
promptly correct any defect of which the subdivider has notice or which the
village discovers, which defect occurs prior to the release of the maintenance
bond. The village engineer shall notify the subdivider of any defects
discovered by the village which occurred during this period and the subdivider
shall promptly remedy the same.
         (e)   Prior to acceptance of all completed subdivision improvements by
the board, the subdivider shall execute and provide a maintenance performance
bond in a form approved by the board, in the amount of fifteen percent (15%) of
the total cost of construction of all subdivision improvements. Said
maintenance bond shall guarantee all maintenance requirements provided in this
title. Surety on said maintenance bond shall be by one of the methods provided
in this title and shall run for a period of no less than the longer of twenty
seven (27) months or three (3) months after the request for release of the
bond.
         (f)   After expiration of the two (2) year maintenance period and
satisfactory completion of all maintenance work on subdivision improvements
required by this title, upon request of the subdivider and approval by the
board, the village shall release the subdivision maintenance performance bond
and its security in its entirety. The release of the bond and its security
shall be in writing on forms approved by the board.
      13.   Failure To Perform:
         (a)   Should the subdivider fail to perform the subdivider's
obligation to construct and maintain public improvements as required by this
title, the village may liquidate any performance security in the Village's
possession and use the proceeds to construct or maintain the improvements in
whole or in part as the Village in its sole discretion deems appropriate.
         (b)   Notwithstanding the amount of the subdivision improvement or
maintenance performance bond, the subdivider of the subdivision shall pay all
costs the Village actually incurs in designing and constructing improvements or
correcting defects in any improvements that the subdivider is required to
install and maintain pursuant to this title but which the subdivider fails to
design, construct or maintain free from defects in accordance with this title.
If the amount of money received by the Village from the subdivision improvement
performance bond or maintenance bond and its security is insufficient to pay
all such costs, the subdivider shall reimburse the Village for the remainder
within twenty eight (28) days of the date that the Village mails to the
subdivider a bill for the balance due.
Should the Village be required to institute proceedings in court or other
enforcement action in order to collect any sum due under this section or to
enforce the provisions of the subdivider's subdivision improvement or
maintenance performance bond or to collect on the security pledged in support
of said bonds, the Village shall be entitled to collect from the subdivider
reasonable attorney fees and court costs incurred by the Village. (2005 Code)
11-4-3-3: APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
If all of the above requirements have been satisfied, the Chairperson of the
Planning and Zoning Commission will present the final plat to the Planning and
Zoning Commission at the next regular meeting. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the Board: (2005
Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
   (A)   Recommend disapproval of the final plat.
   (B)   Recommend approval of the final plat.
   (C)   Recommend approval of the final plat, subject to minor modifications.
(2005 Code)
11-4-3-4: DISAPPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends disapproval of the final plat,
the reason shall be clearly set forth and communicated to the subdivider. (2005
Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
11-4-3-5: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS:
If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends to the Board approval of the
final plat, the Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall present
the final plat to the Board at its next regular meeting and inform the Board of
the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendation. At the same Board meeting,
the Village Engineer shall present his/her review of the engineering plans and
specifications for the subdivision. (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017,
eff. 4-8-2017)
11-4-3-6: BOARD ACTION:
The Board shall not give final approval to any proposed subdivision until:
(2005 Code)
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission has recommended approval or
disapproval of the final plat. (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-
8-2017)
   (B)   The Village Engineer has recommended approval or disapproval of the
subdivision improvement plans and specifications.
   (C)   The subdivider presents his guarantee in the amount and form in
accordance with these regulations and as approved by the Village Attorney.
   (D)   All statutorily required approvals by other governmental agencies have
been received in accordance with provisions of this chapter. (2005 Code)
11-4-3-7: BOARD CONSIDERATION:
The Board, after receiving recommendations from the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Village Engineer shall then consider the final plat of the
proposed subdivision. At that time, the Board shall approve or disapprove the
final plat, and the engineering plans and specifications, and shall clearly
state their reasons for their actions. (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017,
eff. 4-8-2017)
11-4-3-8: BOARD DISAPPROVAL:
In the event the Board disapproves either the plat or the engineering plans and
specifications, the subdivider has one year from the date of such disapproval
to make the corrections and resubmit to the Board; otherwise the prior
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the recommendation of
the Village Engineer shall become null and void. (2005 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-2,
3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
11-4-3-9: CERTIFICATE ON FINAL PLAT:
The following certificate shall appear on the final plat:
THE FINAL PLAT ENTITLED                              HAS RECEIVED APPROVAL BY
THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF ST. JOSEPH, ILLINOIS. THIS PLAT SHALL
BE RECORDED WITH THE RECORDER OF DEEDS, CHAMPAIGN COUNTY, ILLINOIS, WITHIN 90
DAYS OF THIS DATE, OTHERWISE THIS PLAT SHALL BECOME VOID.
                                                                            
PRESIDENT, BOARD OF TRUSTEES   DATE
                                                                            
VILLAGE CLERK    DATE
(2005 Code)
11-4-3-10: RECORDING OF FINAL PLAT:
Upon approval of the final plat, plans and specifications and receipt of all
supporting documents by the Board, the final plat may be recorded by the
subdivider with the Recorder of Deeds, Champaign County, Illinois, within
ninety (90) days of the date of approval, otherwise the final plat and approval
shall become void. (2005 Code)
11-4-3-11: PROCEDURES FOR RESUBDIVIDING AND REPLATTING LOTS AND FOR VACATION OF
PLATS:
All regulations, procedures and standards made applicable herein to original
subdividing shall also apply to the resubdividing and replatting of a plat or
parts thereof, as provided by these regulations. (2005 Code)
11-4-4: PROCEDURES FOR A MINOR SUBDIVISION:
   (A)   Purpose: The minor subdivision review and approval process is intended
to expedite and to minimize public and private costs for the review of
subdivisions which have little or no required public improvements, which have
little or no existing public improvements, which will not negatively impact
surrounding property in a manner significantly different than if the property
had not been subdivided; and thus which do not require the Planning and Zoning
Commission recommendations to make policy decisions. (Ord. 2011-7, 7-26-2011;
amd. Ord. 2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
   (B)   Eligibility Criteria: A minor subdivision is a subdivision of land
into three (3) or fewer lots which meets the following eligibility criteria:
      1.   Does not require, under these subdivision regulations, the design or
construction of any major public improvements, other than utility service
connections and on site stormwater drainage and detention.
      2.   Does not contain any major public stormwater drainage facilities,
provided however that private stormwater drainage and detention facilities
shall be provided via the provisions of title 7, chapter 4, "Stormwater
Management", of this Code.
      3.   Is in conformity with the Village of St. Joseph comprehensive plan,
and zoning ordinances of the Village of St. Joseph or County of Champaign,
whichever is applicable; and
      4.   Is otherwise in conformity with all applicable laws and regulations,
unless previously waived by the entity with jurisdiction; and
      5.   Is located within the Village of St. Joseph or is otherwise the
subject of an annexation agreement which requires and sets forth the condition
of its future annexation to the Village of St. Joseph; and
      6.   Contains lots all of which front on an existing street or roadway,
and not involving extension of any new street, roadway or easement of access.
   (C)   Application For Minor Subdivision Approval: The owner shall submit at
least thirty (30) days prior to the Board of Trustees' meeting, an application
for minor subdivision approval to the Village Clerk or Office Manager on forms
provided by the Village. The application shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
      1.   The original of a final plat which conforms to the normal final plat
requirements set forth in this title and two (2) full size copies of the final
plat and eight (8) 11-inch by 17-inch copies.
      2.   The original notarized signed owner's certificate which shall
include any and all covenants affecting the subdivision in the form generally
set forth in this title.
      3.   The original signed and sealed County Clerk's certificate that taxes
are paid in accordance with statutory requirements.
      4.   A report from the Soil and Water Conservation District in accordance
with statutory requirements, unless the subdivision is a replat of a
subdivision for which a report has been previously provided.
      5.   A completed endangered species review and consultation form from the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources, unless the subdivision is a replat of
a subdivision for which a report has been previously provided.
      6.   If State or Federal funding is involved, a review report from the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency, unless the subdivision is a replat of a
subdivision for which a report has been previously provided.
      7.   A drainage statement signed by the owner and the owner's engineer in
the form prescribed in the Illinois Plat Act.
      8.   Evidence indicating that one copy of the final plat has been mailed
(no less than 35 days prior to the Board of Trustees' meeting) to each of the
utility companies and all public or quasi-public agencies affected by the
proposed subdivision. The mailing documents must indicate that written comments
be submitted to the Village of St. Joseph not later than thirty (30) days
thereafter, and that no comment in the time specified shall be deemed no
adverse comment.
      9.   Ten (10) copies of a sketch drawing depicting the location of any
existing buildings, structures or manmade features on the proposed minor
subdivision at a scale not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" =
100'). The sketch drawing shall be of sufficient detail to verify compliance
with applicable zoning requirements. Lettering shall be not smaller than one-
twelfth (1/12) of an inch in height, and drawing shall be readily legible
without magnification.
      10.   List of waivers or deferrals requested, if any (see section
11-2-5 of this title).
      11.   A stormwater management plan shall be provided which complies with
the provisions of title 7, chapter 4, "Stormwater Management", of this Code.
(Ord. 2011-7, 7-26-2011)
      12.   In the event that the Board of Trustees decides that it would
benefit from the review and recommendations of the Planning and Zoning
Commission on a proposed minor subdivision, the Board may refer the application
and plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission to first make its review and
recommendation to the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2011-7, 7-26-2011; amd. Ord.
2017-2, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-8-2017)
      13.   In the event the Board of Trustees determines that the land
involved in the proposed subdivision involves a subdivision into only two (2)
resulting lots, does not require a subdivision plat pursuant to the Illinois
"Plat Act", 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/1 et seq., will not negatively
impact surrounding property in a manner significantly different than if the
property were not subdivided, no other significant public interest is involved,
and that the resulting lots will be in conformance with applicable zoning
regulations, then the Board of Trustees may waive the requirements of this
title, or may waive said requirements subject to stated conditions. (Ord. 2011-
7, 7-26-2011)
CHAPTER 5
MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Installation Of Part Of Improvements
11-5-2: Survey Monuments
11-5-3: Street Improvements
11-5-4: Water Lines
11-5-5: Sanitary Sewers
11-5-6: Drainage
11-5-7: Sidewalk Improvements
11-5-1: INSTALLATION OF PART OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The owner of a tract may prepare and secure approval of a preliminary plat for
the entire tract and may install the required improvements only in a portion of
such tract, but the improvements must be installed or provision made for their
installation in any portion of the area for which a final plat is approved for
recording; provided, however, that any water mains, storm sewers and other
storm water management systems, trunk sewers and any sewage treatment plants
shall be designed and built to serve all the area owned by the subdivider or
designed and built in such a manner that they can easily be expanded or
extended to serve the entire tract. (2005 Code)
11-5-2: SURVEY MONUMENTS:
   (A)   Monuments for all developments shall be set in accordance with the
provisions set forth in the Illinois plat act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes
205/1 et seq.
   (B)   All lot corners shall be monumented by survey monuments. Survey
monuments shall be a minimum of one-half inch (1/2") diameter iron pipe or
solid rod by thirty inches (30") in length with an identification cap affixed
to the top with the license number of the land surveyor setting the monument.
If disturbed or lost during construction of public improvements, such monuments
shall be replaced by, and at the expense of, the developer.
   (C)   All block corners, each end of all curves, points where curves change
radius, all angle points in a line, and two (2) opposite exterior corners of
the property platted shall be monumented with permanent monuments set in
concrete posts, the concrete having a minimum depth of thirty six inches (36")
and a minimum cross section of a five inch (5") diameter circle. Permanent
monuments shall have an identification cap affixed to the top with the license
number of the land surveyor setting the monument. If disturbed or lost during
construction of public improvements, such monuments shall be replaced by, and
at the expense of, the developer.
   (D)   All monuments shall be set such that they will not be moved by frost.
(2005 Code)
11-5-3: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   All streets and public ways shall be graded to their full width (as
specified in chapter 3 of this title) including side slopes, and to the
appropriate grade and shall be surfaced as provided in title 8, chapter 1 of
this code.
   (B)   Where storm sewers exist, concrete mountable V-type gutters with a
minimum width of twenty four inches (24") and a depth of six inches (6") shall
be installed. All improvements shall be constructed in conformance with the
requirements of title 7 of this code and shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the village engineer. (2005 Code)
11-5-4: WATER LINES:
   (A)   Where a subdivision is located within the village limits, each lot
therein shall be provided with a connection to the water utility system, said
water service to terminate not less than two feet (2') beyond the right of way
line. Fire hydrants shall also be installed in all subdivisions, within the
corporate limits, and the location of same shall be subject to review by the
village engineer and local fire department. The water supply system shall be
constructed to the standards and requirements, and be subject to the approval,
of the appropriate state and local authorities.
   (B)   In subdivisions outside the village limits, pending availability of a
public water supply, the subdivider shall demonstrate, through appropriate
tests, the likelihood of an adequate supply of potable water to every lot in
the subdivision at the time improvements are erected thereon. The installation
shall conform to standards and requirements and be subject to the approval of
the appropriate state and local authorities. (2005 Code)
11-5-5: SANITARY SEWERS:
   (A)   Where the subdivision is located within the village limits, each lot
therein shall be provided with a connection to a sanitary sewer, said sewer
connection to terminate not less than two feet (2') beyond the right of way
line. All connections to the village sewer system and the subdivision sewer
system shall comply with the provisions of title 7 of this code pertaining to
sewers and all construction of the system shall be subject to the standards and
requirements, and be subject to the approval, of the appropriate state and
local authorities.
   (B)   The village's engineers will perform:
      1.   Periodic observation of construction of sewer lines and manholes.
      2.   Observe the field measurement of installed sewer for grade and
alignment. Said field measurement shall be performed by the developer's
engineer. Developer's engineer shall notify the village's engineer of sanitary
sewer installation a minimum of twenty four (24) hours prior to the
installation of said sewer.
      3.   Observe sewer deflection and pressure tests. Developer's engineer
shall notify the village's engineer of sanitary sewer deflection and pressure
testing a minimum of twenty four (24) hours prior to said testing.
   (C)   In subdivisions beyond the village limits and within one hundred feet
(100') of the existing sanitary sewer lines, the subdivider may be required,
provided capacity exists, to install sewers in conformity with village
requirements. In such cases, until a connection can be made with the public
sewer system, the use of a primary sewage treatment plant will be permitted,
provided such disposal facilities are constructed in accordance with the
provisions of this code pertaining to sanitary sewage disposal and meet all
state requirements for sewage treatment and discharge. Otherwise, the
subdivider may install individual disposal devices for each lot at the time
improvements are erected thereon. All such individual sewage disposal systems
shall be constructed in accordance with regulations and requirements of the
appropriate department of health and under the direction and control of the
appropriate village and county authorities.
   (D)   All septic systems will be installed and maintained in accordance with
title 7 of this code and all applicable state and/or county requirements.
   (E)   Where sanitary sewers are required, the end of the sewer line shall be
installed to the appropriate boundary line as determined by the village
engineer, so as to allow for connection and extension by future adjoining
subdivisions. (2005 Code)
11-5-6: DRAINAGE:
The plat shall be laid out so as to provide proper drainage of the area being
subdivided in accordance with the provisions of title 7, chapters 3 and 4 of
this code. Preliminary plat approval shall be conditioned on subsequent
approval by the village engineer of all detailed engineering drawings, designs,
specifications, plans and calculations which shall be submitted to the village
by the developer prior to the start of work on improvements.
All detention ponds shall provide for emergency access approved by the board.
(2005 Code)
11-5-7: SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS:
Sidewalks shall be installed adjacent to all streets, and may be required along
other public ways, easements and common areas where significant pedestrian
traffic is anticipated or is to be encouraged. Sidewalks shall be graded and
surfaced as provided in title 8, chapter 1 of this code. (2005 Code)
