VILLAGE CODE
of
STOCKTON, ILLINOIS
1982
Code current through:
Ord. 789, passed 6-10-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the Village of Stockton, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 789, passed June 10, 2025. Ordinances of the
Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to
the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
   American Legal Publishing
   Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 789
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF STOCKTON,
JO DAVIESS COUNTY ILLINOIS,
AMENDING TITLE 3 CHAPTER 4 OF THE VILLAGE CODE RELATED TO PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS,
AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF STOCKTON, JO DAVIESS COUNTY, ILLINOIS, PURSUANT TO ITS STATUTORY
AUTHORITY, AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1: Title 3, Chapter 4 of the City Code of Stockton, Illinois, entitled
Peddlers, Solicitors, and
Transient Merchants is hereby amended to add the following:
 
3-4-1 PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the residents of the Village from the operations of unreliable solicitors by
requiring that solicitors be licensed.
 
3-4-2 DEFINITIONS:
APPLICANT:
  Any person that files an application for a solicitation license as provided for in this chapter.
 
PEDDLER:  Any person with no fixed place of business who goes from house to
house, from place to place, or from street to street, carrying or transporting
goods, wares, or merchandise and offering or exposing the same for sale or
making sales and deliveries to a purchaser.
 
PEDDLING:  The sale of offering for sale of property, for immediate delivery
from other than a fixed place of business on private property, including the
sale of charitable or religious books or pamphlets. Peddling shall not include
the sale of goods by charitable organizations for charitable purposes or not to
exceed one day in any calendar year.
 
PERSON:
  Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, trust, or any
combination thereof.
 
PREMISES:
  Any occupied building or structure, or any separate dwelling unit contained within any occupied
building or structure, of any type within the Village.
 
SOLICITATION OR SOLICIT:
 Engaging in any one or more of the following activities:
-   Seeking or offering
to sell, selling and delivering, peddling, bartering, exchanging, or obtaining, for profit or any kind of consideration any goods or services;
-   Distribution to the public -
 by leaving at a premise or on any public property anywhere within the Village -
any of the following items of a commercial nature: card, circular,
handbill, sample, merchandise, newspaper,
advertising material, document, or other items used in conjunction with solicitation;
-   Asking for or seeking to collect contributions of money,
gifts, or goods of any kind;
-   Selling tickets;
-
   Seeking to obtain customers for application, purchase of, or enrollment in any public utility service or
program; and
-   Going upon any public property, public street or other right-of-way,
or private property within the Village for the purpose of engaging in any of the activities described in subsections A through E of this definition.
-
   Religious proselytizing and political canvassing are not solicitation and are not regulated by the provisions of
this chapter.
 
SOLICITOR:
  A person who engages in solicitation and any person that employs or engages a person or
persons to solicit.
 
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person, firm, or corporation who engages temporarily in
the business of selling delivering goods, wares, or merchandise within the
Village, and who, in the furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or
occupies any building, structure, vacant lot, motor vehicle or trailer.
 
3-4-3 LICENSE:
A.   APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit within the Village without first having obtained a
license therefor.
Any person desiring to secure a solicitation license shall complete an application form. Notwithstanding
the fact that a group may have several peddlers or solicitors in the village at
the same time, a separate application shall be filled out for each individual
and each individual shall be required to obtain a separate license. The
application for a license shall be made under oath upon a form provided by the
Village Clerk. Each original application shall be completed by the applicant in
full and shall set forth:
 
1.   Name, address and zip code, Drivers License Number, and date of
birth of the applicant.
 
2.   If the applicant is employed by another,
the name and business address of such other person,
association, organization, company or corporation.
 
3.   A copy of a government-issued identification card
 
4.   If the applicant is a corporate entity,
evidence that the applicant is registered to conduct business in the State of
Illinois and is in good standing with the State.
 
5.   A valid Illinois Sales Tax Identification Number
 
6.   If the applicant is a charitable organization, as defined by the Illinois Solicitation for Charity Act, 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/
1 et seq., evidence that the applicant is registered with the Illinois Attorney
General.
 
7.   A statement that the applicant has
never been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, a felony,
any crime involving fraud, misrepresentation, or unauthorized entry to
property,
or a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other municipal, county or state ordinance, statute,
or regulation regulating solicitation.
 
8.   Description and license number of any motor vehicle used.
 
9.   Nature of the services, subscriptions, or goods offered
for sale, or of the cause for which contributions are sought, or of the information sought.
 
10.   Date
(s) and time for which a license is desired; provided no license will be issued for a period in
excess of 5 days.
 
11.   Signature of the applicant.
 
B.   The Village of Stockton shall conduct a background investigation on all
applicants, employees and/or agents. No permit authorized pursuant to this
article shall be issued to a person who is a registered sex offender as defined
in the Illinois Sex Offender License Act (730 ILCS 150/1, et seq) as amended.
 
C.   No license shall be issued to any individual under the age of 16.
 
D.   Such additional information as the Village of
Stockton may deem necessary to process the application.
 
E.   The application shall be submitted to the Village Clerk together with two 
(2) photographs (2 inches x 2 inches)
acceptable to the Village Clerk as a likeness for each person who will be soliciting under the requested license and
a copy of the current certificate of registration from the Illinois Department of Revenue showing
applicant’s Illinois State Sales Tax number.
The Village Clerk may request such additional identification and credentials as
may be reasonably required.
 
3-4-4 ISSUANCE AND DENIAL:
A.   Issuance: Within ten business days after receiving a complete application,
the Village Clerk shall issue a solicitation license unless the Village of
Stockton, or their designee, determines and finds that:
 
1.   Any material statements made in the application are false;
 
2.   The applicant or any persons listed on the application has, within five years prior to the date of the
application, been convicted of or pleaded guilty to 
(i) a felony or any crime involving fraud, misrepresentation, or
unauthorized entry to property under the laws of the State of Illinois, any other state, or the United States, or 
(ii)
a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other municipal, county or state ordinance, statute,
or regulation regulating solicitation; or
 
3.   The applicant or any persons listed on the application has had a previously issued solicitation permit
revoked by the Village within five 
(5) years prior to the date of the application.
 
B.   Denial:
 If an application is denied, then the Village Clerk will notify the applicant in writing of the denial,
including the reason for the denial. The notice of denial will be delivered in person at the Village Hall, or by first
class U.S. mail addressed to the address set forth in the application, or by e-
mail if the applicant has requested to receive communications by e-
mail. An application will be deemed denied on the day the notice of denial is
delivered in person or is placed in the U.S. mail, or is sent by e-
mail to the e-mail address provided by the
applicant. Any rejection may be appealed by the applicant to the Village Board at its next regularly scheduled
meeting. If an application is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant.
 
3-4-5 LICENSE FEES:
A.   The license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per person plus the cost
of a background check for each person.
 
B.   There shall be no fee for licenses for representatives of religious, political or not for profit organizations.
The Village Clerk shall have authority to decide whether any such organization falls within the meaning of this
section. The Village Clerk may refer any such question to the Village
President or to any board
member who shall make the decision.
 
3-4-6 LICENSE CARD, DISPLAY:
A.   The license shall be in the form of a card suitable for carrying on the person and shall have securely attached to
it one of the two 
(2) photographs supplied. It shall carry the name of the individual solicitor and, if applicable,
the name of the employer or licensed entity,
a brief description of the business of the licensee and the dates of the validity of the license.
 
B.   At all times when engaged in his business within the Village,
the licensee shall carry the license upon his person and shall exhibit the same on request of any police
officer, any Village official or any person solicited.
 
C.   Each license shall be and remain the property of the Village and shall be returned to the Village Clerk upon its
expiration.
 
3-4-7   RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SOLICITING AND PEDDLING:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person:
1.    To continue to engage in solicitation or peddling upon any premises or in
any dwelling house, apartment or other residence located thereon after having
been requested by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises or
residence.
 
2.   To engage in peddling or solicitation, or particular types of solicitation
or peddling, upon any premises or residence located thereon if such premises or
residence is posted against solicitation or peddling, or against certain types
of solicitation or peddling, by means of a notice, prominently displayed upon
which is printed "No Solicitors or Peddlers ", "Charitable Organization
Solicitors Only", or "Not For Profit Organization Solicitors Only"
 
For purposes of the preceding sentence, a dwelling house, apartment or other
place of
residence shall be deemed to be posted against solicitation or peddling, or
posted against
certain types of solicitation or peddling, if there is exhibited, on or near
the main entrance
to the premises or on or near the main door to any residence located thereon, a
sign which
bears one of the above.
 
3.   Who engages in solicitation or peddling to use any plan, scheme or ruse,
or to make any statements, which indicates or implies that the purpose of such
person's solicitation or peddling is other than to obtain orders for or to make
sales of goods or services.
 
4.   Who engage in peddling or soliciting to misrepresent the right of a buyer
to rescind or cancel a sale under the provisions of applicable law.
 
5.   Who engages in peddling or soliciting to cheat, deceive, or fraudulently
misrepresent, whether through himself or through an employee, while acting as a
peddler or solicitor in the village, or to barter, sell or peddle any goods,
merchandise or wares other than those specified in his or her application for a
license.
 
B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether registered/licensed under
this Chapter or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near
any door of a residence located thereon or rap or knock upon the door or create
any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in peddling, commercial soliciting, or fund
soliciting, as herein defined, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m., or other
soliciting, as defined herein, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday or at any time on a Sunday or a state or national holiday.
 
3-4-8   DO NOT KNOCK REGISTRY:
A.   The do not knock registry shall be established and maintained by the
village clerk's office. Residents may submit their property address for
inclusion on the list without charge.
 
B.   Upon approval and issuance of license, each sales person shall be provided
with a copy of the do not knock registry.
 
C.   Solicitors shall not solicit at any premises identified on the do not
knock registry.
 
 
3-4-8 EXCEPTIONS:
A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
1.   Any officer or employee of the Village, of Jo
Daviess County, of the State of Illinois, of the Federal government
or of any subdivision thereof when engaged on official business.
 
2.   The operation of such local activities as school activities, church activities or community activities.
 
3.   Those participating in a Village approved Farmer’s Market.
 
3-4-9 REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license under this
Chapter may be revoked and confiscated by the Chief of Police or by any 
Village official because of any violation of any provisions of this Chapter or
of any other
ordinance of the Village, or of any State or Federal law.
 
3-4-10 TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
A.   It shall be unlawful for transient merchants to sell or hawk goods, wares,
products or services in the Village, from house to house, place to place, or
street to street, except those persons participating in or on behalf of duly
recognized fundraising events, including but not limited to, religious,
charitable, patriotic, political, or philanthropic events or organizations.
 
B.    It shall be unlawful for transient merchants to sell or communicate door
to door, house to house, place to place, or street to street for commercial,
business, religious, political, charitable, patriotic or philanthropic purposes
after sunset or before sunrise on any day.
 
3-4-11 EXCLUSIONS:
A.   This chapter shall not apply to:
1.   Sales made by agents in the usual course of business with reputable, bona
fide dealers.
 
2.   Sales conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
 
3.   Bona fide auction sales conducted by an auctioneer duly licensed under the
statutes of the State of Illinois.
 
4.   Schwans
 
5.   Vendors at the Stockton Farmers' Market
 
6.   Vendors at Stockton Chamber of Commerce sponsored events.
 
7.   Any local or resident charity, church, school or nonprofit organization
(e.g. Stockton youth sports, Boy Scout Troops, Girl Scout Troops, etc.).
 
3-4-12 PENALTY: 
Except as otherwise provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this Code, any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-
1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
 
 
SECTION 2. In the event that any provision or provisions, portion or portions,
or clause or clauses of this Ordinance shall be declared to be invalid or
unenforceable by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall in
no way affect or impair the validity or enforceability of any of the remaining
provisions, portions, or clauses of this Ordinance that may be given effect
without such invalid or unenforceable provision or provisions, portion or
portions, or clause or clauses.
 
SECTION 3. That all ordinances, resolutions, motions, or parts thereof,
conflicting with any of the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed
to the extent of the conflict.
 
SECTION 4. That the Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish this Ordinance
in pamphlet form.
 
SECTION 5. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
 
PASSED by the Board of Trustees on a roll call vote on the 10th day of June,
2025.
 
AYES: Heidenreich, Gonnerman, Kunz, McGovern, Rowe, Kappes
 
NAYS:
 
ABSTAIN:
 
   APPROVED by me this 10th day of June, 2025
 
 
                  _________________________________
                  Mitchell L. Kappes, Village President
 
 
Attest:
 
________________________________
Stefanie Hatley, Village Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 797
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF STOCKTON, JO DAVIESS COUNTY ILLINOIS, AMENDING
TITLE 4, CHAPTER 4 ENTITLED ANIMALS
 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF STOCKTON, JO DAVIESS COUNTY, ILLINOIS, PURSUANT TO ITS STATUTORY
AUTHORITY, AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1: Title 4, Chapter 4 of the Municipal Code of Stockton, Illinois,
entitled ANIMALS is hereby amended to add the following:
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
ANIMAL: Any type of animal or fowl, both domesticated and wild, male and
female, including a dog as further defined herein.
 
BITE: To Seize or cut with teeth.
 
DOG: All members of the canine family.
 
OWNER: Any person who has a right of property in an animal or dog, keeps,
routinely feeds or harbors an animal or dog, has an animal or dog in his or her
care, acts as the custodian of an animal or dog or knowingly permits an animal
or dog to remain on or about the premises occupied by such person.
 
4-4-2: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
  A   Cruel acts and conditions enumerated.
       1   It shall be unlawful for any person:
          a   To willfully or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure or torture,
strike, hit or beat with a stick, board, chain, club or other object; mutilate,
burn, or scald with any substance; or drive over any domesticated animal, or
cruelly set an animal upon another animal, except that reasonable force may be
employed to drive off vicious or trespassing animals;
          b   By any means to make accessible to any animal, with the intent to
cause harm or death, any substance which has in any manner been treated or
prepared with harmful or poisonous substances. It is not the intent of this
division (A)(1)(b) to prohibit the use of poisonous substances for the control
of vermin of significance to the public health;
          c   To fail, refuse or neglect to provide any animal in his or her
charge or custody as owner or otherwise with proper food, drink, shade, care,
or shelter. Any animal kept outside shall be provided with structurally sound
weatherproof enclosure, large enough to accommodate the animal;
          d   To drive or work any animal cruelly;
          e   To abandon any animal within the village limits. For the purposes
of this division (A)(1)(e), "abandon" means for the owner or keeper to leave
an animal without demonstrated or apparent intent to recover or resume custody;
to leave an animal for more than 12 hours without providing adequate food and
shelter for the duration of the absence; or to turn out or release
an animal for the purpose of causing it to be impounded;
          f   To leave any animal confined in a vehicle for more than 20
minutes in extreme weather conditions, defined as less than 30 degrees
Fahrenheit or more than 80 degrees Fahrenheit;
          g   To transport an animal in the trunk of a vehicle;
          h   To cause, instigate, stage, or train any animal to fight or
permit any fight between any animal and another animal or human;
          i   Except a licensed veterinarian, to crop animal ears or
dock animal tails; or
          j   To give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or bird as a prize
for, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such
vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the
offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.
       2   Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a
domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be
possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's
owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator
shall at once report the accident to the Police Department or to the local
humane society.
    B   Exceptions. Nothing in division (A) of this section shall:
       1   Be deemed to prohibit any action by a licensed veterinarian done in
accordance with accepted standards of veterinary medicine, or any action taken
by a law enforcement officer pursuant to the interests of public health and
safety.
       2   Be interpreted as prohibiting any act done in self-defense or done
to defend another person.
4-4-3: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind to
run at large in the village. 
4-4-4: DISTURBING PEACE OR QUIET:
    A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess, or harbor
any animal that, by habitual and continuous barking, howling, yelping, bawling
or other loud noise, annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
health, peace, repose and/or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensibilities within the village.
1. For the purpose of this chapter, “habitual and continuous barking, howling,
yelping,
bawling or other loud noise” is defined as:
 
a. occurring in excess of 10 minutes at any one time , or an aggregate of 20
minutes per 60 minutes of time frame; or
b. excessive, continuous or untimely barking, molesting passersby, chasing
vehicles, habitually attacking other domestic animals, trespassing upon school
grounds, or trespassing upon private property.
       2.   Any initial violation of this subsection A shall be punishable by
imposition and payment of a fine as provided for in section 1-4-1 of this code.
    B.   Any animal that subsequently disturbs the peace or quiet after the
animal has been found in violation of subsection A of this section is declared
hereby to be a public nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded at any time
by a police officer or animal control officer.
    C.   Upon finding a violation of subsection B of this section, the court
may, in addition to the payment of the penalties provided under section 1-4-
1 of this code, order the person to take sufficient action to immediately abate
the nuisance.
4-4-5: KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
The members of the police department or any other person in the village as
appointed by the Village President is authorized to kill any
dangerous animal when it is necessary for the protection of any person or
property.
4-4-6: DISEASED ANIMALS:
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an infectious disease
shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any public place whereby
the health of man or beast may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal be
shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof except under the
supervision of the health officer.
It is hereby made the duty of the health officer to secure such disposition of
any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the
communication or spread of contagion or infection, except in cases where the
state veterinarian is empowered to act.
4-4-7: HOUSING:
No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is or may
be kept to become unclean or unwholesome, and it shall be unlawful to keep any
cattle, horses, live swine, sheep, goats, or poultry anywhere in the village.
4-4-8: DOG, CAT OR OTHER ANIMAL WASTE:
    A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to promptly remove and
dispose of, in a sanitary manner, feces left by a dog, cat or other animal on
property, public or private, other than that of the owner or handler of
such animal.
    B.   It shall be a specific defense to a charge of violating subsection A
of this section that the animal is a certified working dog trained to assist
disabled individuals and that the person charged has a disability which
prevents the individual from promptly removing the excrement and disposing of
it in a sanitary manner.
    C.   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction, be fined no less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for
a first offense and no more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a
second or a subsequent offense.
 
4-4-9: MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DOGS OR CATS ALLOWED:
A.   In the Village limits, it shall be unlawful to own, possess or house more
than four dogs or cats over six months of age. (i.e. 3 dogs and 1 cat, 2 dogs
and 2 cats)
B.   Exceptions: This provision does not apply to licensed breeders or pet
groomers performing these services.
 
4-4-10: FIGHTS:
No person shall instigate, cause, procure or in any way aid, abet, encourage or
assist any fights between animals, either in a public or private place.
 
4-4-11: INTERFERENCE:
It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with the Animal Control
Officer in the performance of his or her duties.
 
4-4-12: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
A.   Cats. It is unlawful for any cat to run at large upon a public street,
sidewalk, alley or other public place or upon any private property other than
that of the owner of such cat and create a nuisance or disturbance. If a cat
does run at large and create a nuisance or disturbance, the owner or keeper of
such cat shall be in violation of this chapter. In addition, the cat may be
impounded; provided, however, any vicious cat, which has bitten a human being
and cannot be safely captured, may be slain by the Animal Control Officer or by
a police officer.
 
B.   Livestock and poultry. No person shall permit any cattle, horses, swine,
sheep, goats or poultry to run at large within the corporate limits of the
village. No person shall picket or tie any such animal in any of the streets of
the village for the purpose of grazing or feeding. Any such animal running at
large or improperly tied shall be impounded by the Animal Control Officer;
provided, however, any vicious animal which has bitten a human being and cannot
be safely captured may be slain by the Animal Control Officer or a police
officer.
4-4-13: BURIAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or possessor of any animal which may die
within the village to leave the animal unburied for more than twelve (12) hours
after its death, or for anyone to bring and leave the carcass of any dead
animal within the village. It shall be unlawful for anyone to bury any animal
upon public property within the village. If an animal is buried on the owner's
private property it shall be buried at a minimum depth of three feet (3').
 
4-4-14: LEAVING A DOG OR ANIMAL IN AN UNATTENDED VEHICLE:
No person shall leave a dog or animal on an unattended vehicle without adequate
ventilation, sanitary conditions, or in such a manner as to subject the dog or
animal to extreme temperatures which adversely affect the animal’s health or
safety.
 
 
 
4-4-15: REMOVAL OF DOGS OR ANIMALS FROM VEHICLES:
An animal control officer or police officer may use reasonable force to enter a
motor vehicle and remove a dog or animal which has been left in the vehicle in
violation of section 4-4-14. A person removing a dog or animal under this
chapter shall use reasonable means to contact the owner of the dog or animal to
arrange for its return home. If the person is unable to contact the owner, the
person may take the dog or animal to an animal shelter.
 
  4-4-16: HARBORING STRAY ANIMALS:
    A.   Stray Dogs and Cats: Stray dogs and cats are a menace to public health
and endanger bird and other life, and the running at large of any dog or cat
within the limits of the Village is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
prohibited. Any dogs or cats not equipped with a tag around their collar
identifying the owner thereof, or any cat without a bell or other device
capable of making a noise shall be deemed a stray dog or cat.
 
B.   A person who habitually feeds any cat, dog, or other domestic or wild
animal, not owned by him or her, on a regular or irregular basis, or cares for
or actively seeks the attention of said cat, dog or other domestic or wild
animal at or upon his or her property or within the Village shall be guilty of
harboring a stray animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor a stray
or unowned or unclaimed domestic or wild animal in the Village.
 
4-4-17: STRAY AND FERAL CATS:
The Village finds and declares that the proliferation of stray cats and feral
cats pose a potential danger to the health, safety, and general welfare of the
public.
 
4-4-18: RESPONSIBILITIES IMPOSED ON THOSE WHO FEED STRAY OR FERAL CATS:
    A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to feed stray or feral cats, if
such feeding causes a nuisance to neighbors or creates a condition contrary to
the health, safety, and welfare of the community.
 
  B.   Any person who undertakes to feed stray or feral cats shall assume
responsibility and be liable for any damage to persons or property caused by
the cats. In addition, such person shall be liable for and assume
responsibility for seeing that the stray and feral cats are:
       1.   Neutered or spayed to prevent procreating;
       2.   Immunized against rabies and vaccinated in compliance with the laws
of the state of Illinois;
       3.   Appropriately “tipped” on an ear to signify that they have been
neutered/spayed and immunized.
4-4-19: IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION FEES:
Any animal found in the village in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be impounded by any police officer or such person as may be
designated by the village board and placed in the village pound or other
suitable place, including placement within the custody of the Jo Daviess County
Animal Control, pursuant to the rules and regulations of said Animal Control.
The police department will make every attempt to notify the owner. if known,
that the animal is in the police departments custody. The police department
will then notify the Jo Daviess County Animal Control.
If the owner cannot be located Animal Control will transport the animal to a
third-party shelter such as a humane society.
The owner or custodian who redeems an animal from a shelter shall be liable for
the boarding or impoundment charges. Any fees paid by the Village of Stockton
for animal control services shall be payable to the Village of Stockton by the
owner of the animal within 30 days of the Village of Stockton billing the
owner.
Any animal which appears to be suffering from rabies or other dangerous disease
shall not be released but may be destroyed as soon as compatible with the
health laws of the village. 1 
It shall be lawful for the chief of police to kill any vicious animal at large
within the limits of the village, which cannot be taken up and impounded.
  Notes:
 
1 1. See title 6, chapter 1 of this code.

4-4-20: CARE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
Animals which are kept in the village pound shall be humanely treated and fed.
Such pound shall be under the charge of the chief of police or a person he
appoints, who shall be responsible for the care and custody of the same.
Unredeemed animals shall be turned over to the Jo Daviess County Animal
Control.
4-4-21: ANIMAL BITES:
All incidents of bites by a dog or cat suffered by a human shall immediately
notify the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall report all bite incidents
to Animal Control in the time sequence required by that agency. Depending upon
the circumstances in each case, the following procedure shall apply:
Licensed dog or cat:
The owner or harborer of a properly vaccinated biting dog or cat shall have the
dog or cat examined by a licensed veterinarian, who shall submit a report to
the Chief of Police within 24 hours of the incident.
The biting dog or cat may be impounded upon the owner's or harborer's premises.
"Impoundment" shall mean within a structure or secure enclosure or upon leash
only upon the premises of the owner or harborer. The period of impoundment
shall be 10 days.
The owner or harborer of a properly vaccinated biting dog or cat shall have the
dog or cat examined by a licensed veterinarian again on the 10th day of
impoundment. A written report by the veterinarian that the biting dog or cat is
not affected by rabies, filed with the Chief of Police, shall terminate the
impoundment.
 
Unvaccinated dog or cat:
The owner or harborer of a biting dog or cat which has not been vaccinated
shall have it examined immediately by a licensed veterinarian, who shall submit
a report to the Chief of Police within 24 hours of the incident.
The owner or harborer will then impound the biting dog or cat in a licensed
animal hospital for the required ten-day confinement period.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of an animal involved in a
biting incident to euthanize, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of, or have
inoculated against rabies, the animal known to have bitten a person until it
has been released from confinement for observation for rabies.
The owner of said dog or cat shall be responsible for all fees and charges
incurred to meet the requirements of this section.
SECTION 2. In the event that any provision or provisions, portion or portions,
or clause or clauses of this Ordinance shall be declared to be invalid or
unenforceable by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall in
no way affect or impair the validity or enforceability of any of the remaining
provisions, portions, or clauses of this Ordinance that may be given effect
without such invalid or unenforceable provision or provisions, portion or
portions, or clause or clauses.
 
SECTION 3. That all ordinances, resolutions, motions, or parts thereof,
conflicting with any of the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed
to the extent of the conflict.
 
SECTION 4. That the Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish this Ordinance
in pamphlet form.
 
SECTION 5. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage and approval.
 
PASSED by the Board of Trustees on a roll call vote on the 9th day of December,
2025.
 
AYES: Kunz, McGovern, Rowe, Kappes, Heidenreich, Gonnerman
NAYS:      
ABSENT:
 
APPROVED THIS 9th day of December, 2025.
 
                  ___________________________________
MITCHELL L. KAPPES, Village President
ATTEST:
________________________________
STEFANIE HATLEY, Village Clerk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 798
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF STOCKTON, JO DAVIESS COUNTY ILLINOIS, AMENDING
TITLE 4, CHAPTER 5 ENTITLED DOGS
 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF STOCKTON, JO DAVIESS COUNTY, ILLINOIS, PURSUANT TO ITS STATUTORY
AUTHORITY, AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1: Title 4, Chapter 4 of the Municipal Code of Stockton, Illinois,
entitled DOGS is hereby amended to add the following:
4-5-1: RUNNING AT LARGE:
    A.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or any person in control of any dog
to permit, or cause to be permitted, his or her dog to run at large in the
village at any time, or to fail to use reasonable care in restraining any dog
that he or she keeps, harbors or otherwise maintains, or that is under his or
her control, from running at large.
    B.   Any dog found running at large is declared hereby to be a public
nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded by any police officer
or animal control officer. In addition, the owner or any person in control of
any dog found running at large shall be liable for the penalties as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code.
    C.   A dog found to be in violation of subsection A of this section must be
microchipped at the owner's expense, if not already microchipped, within
twenty-one (21) days after being reclaimed.
    D.   A dog found to be in violation of subsection A of this section a
second time must be spayed/neutered at the owner's expense, if not already
spayed/neutered, within twenty-one (21) days after being reclaimed.
4-5-2: CONTROL:
It shall be unlawful to permit any dog to go upon any public street, alley or
sidewalk or other public place unless such dog is under control pursuant to
section 4-5-1 of this chapter.
4-5-3: "DANGEROUS" OR "VICIOUS" DOGS DEFINED; RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR
KEEPERS:
    A.   Definitions: A "dangerous" or "vicious" dog shall include any or all
of the following, except police dogs or guard dogs acting under the supervision
of a police officer or certified trained dog handler:
       1.   Any dog which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks
a human being or a domestic animal without provocation or justification; or
       2.   Any dog which, without provocation or justification, approaches in
a threatening or terrorizing manner, any person or domestic animal upon the
streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places within the Village; or
       3.   Any dog which is trained to attack or cause injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals, or any dog which has a
history of attacking or propensity to attack people or domestic animals without
provocation or justification.
       4.   For purposes of this subsection a domestic animal means
an animal of a tamed species commonly kept as household pets.
    B.   Responsibilities Of Owners Of Dangerous Dogs:
       1.   Any person owning a vicious or dangerous dog must register the dog
with the Stockton Police Department and pay a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for such registration.
       2.   Upon registering a vicious or dangerous dog, the owner shall
display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his or her premises warning that
there is a vicious dog on the premises. The sign shall be visible and legible
from the sidewalk and/or street.
       3.   If the animal is kept outdoors in a nonfenced yard, the owner shall
properly confine the dog in a pen or structure with secure sides and a secure
top. If the bottom is not secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded in
the ground no less than two feet (2'), such that the dog cannot dig its way
out. The pen shall be no less than six feet (6') high and contain no less than
fifty (50) square feet of ground space. All pens shall comply with applicable
provisions of the Village's Zoning Ordinance, as well as being located at least
twenty-five feet (25') from any neighboring residence or one-half (1/2) the
distance from the outdoor facility and the residence, whichever is greater, so
as not to be offensive to neighboring residents.
       4.   No person owning or harboring a dangerous or vicious dog shall
permit such dog to go beyond the confined area of such person's premises unless
the dog is securely leashed and muzzled. The leash shall not be longer than six
feet (6'). Retractable or flexi leads are not allowed. The leash shall be
controlled by an adult or by a person physically capable of controlling the
dog.
       5.   The owner must provide proof at the time of registration that:
          a.   The homeowner's insurance policy for the residence in which the
dangerous dog is housed contains a rider or a liability clause for dangerous
dogs;
          b.   The dog's rabies vaccination status is current;
          c.   The dog is licensed by the County for the current year; and
          d.   The dog is microchipped with a permanent ID.
       6.   Once a dog is deemed to be dangerous, it shall be neutered or
spayed so as not to propagate vicious characteristics that may be inherent in
the progeny of the dangerous dog.
    C.   Appeal Procedure: Within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice
of the Police Department’s decision that a dog is dangerous, the owner of the
dog may appeal the decision to the Village Board. The owner of the dog shall
send notice of his/her intent to appeal by certified mail to the Chief of
Police with a copy to the Village Clerk. If such an appeal is filed, it shall
be heard within three (3) weeks of its filing. After such hearing, the Village
Board, within seven (7) days of the close of the appeal hearing, may affirm or
reverse the order of the Chief of Police by written decision filed with the
Village Clerk and provided to the dog owner.
    The determination of the Village Board shall be final and binding. The dog
shall be kept either in a secure enclosure or shall be impounded at
an animal shelter during the appeal process. Any and all costs for the appeals
process and the impounding of the dog shall be borne by the owner.
    D.   Violations and Penalties; Enforcement:
       1.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. Further, each day
for which a violation occurs and each violation of any provision of this
section shall constitute a separate offense.
       2.   The Stockton Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this
section.
       3.   Two (2) violations of subsection A1 of this section shall result in
mandatory euthanasia of the dangerous dog. However, the Police Department may
determine that the dog shall be euthanized after only one attack, depending on
its severity.
 
4-5-4: RABIES INOCULATIONS:
   A.   Inoculations Required: Every owner, except animal shelters, animal
impounding facilities and laboratory animal facilities, of a dog four (4)
months or more of age shall cause such dog to be inoculated with rabies vaccine
by a licensed veterinarian at such intervals as approved by the Illinois
department of agriculture. The rabies vaccine shall be licensed by the United
States department of agriculture and approved by the Illinois department of
agriculture.
    B.   Rabies Tag: Any dog which is kept or maintained in the village shall
display the rabies tag on the collar of such dog at all times.
SECTION 3. That all ordinances, resolutions, motions, or parts thereof,
conflicting with any of the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed
to the extent of the conflict.
 
SECTION 4. That the Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish this Ordinance
in pamphlet form.
 
SECTION 5. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage and approval.
 
PASSED by the Board of Trustees on a roll call vote on the 9th day of December,
2025.
 
AYES: Heidenreich, Gonnerman, Kunz, McGovern, Rowe, Kappes
NAYS:      
ABSENT:
 
APPROVED THIS 9th day of December, 2025.
                  ___________________________________
MITCHELL L. KAPPES, Village President
ATTEST:
________________________________
STEFANIE HATLEY, Village Clerk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE #799
 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A RETURN TO WORK POLICY FOR
EMPLOYMENT WITH THE VILLAGE OF STOCKTON
 
WHEREAS, the Village of Stockton, Illinois, is authorized, pursuant to 65 ILCS
5/10-1-5, to adopt reasonable rules and regulations governing the employment,
practices, conduct, and activities of its employees; and,
   WHEREAS, THE Board of Trustees for the Village of Stockton, Illinois, has
determined that a return-to-work program for injured employees enables injured
employees to return work, within their treating doctor’s prescribed
limitations, in temporary, limited, or light-duty assignments while they
recover; and,
   WHEREAS, the Board of Trustees for the Village of Stockton, Illinois , has
further determined that such a return-to-work program allows injured employees
to maintain employment security, seniority and benefits, and may help the
Village complete important tasks while the employee is recuperating from an
injury; and,
   WHEREAS, the Board of Trustee for the Village of Stockton, Illinois, has
deemed it to be necessary and prudent and in the best interest of its employees
and in the best interest of the citizens of the Village of Stockton to
establish a return-to-work policy.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF STOCKTON, ILLINOIS, THAT:
   Section 1: Recitals. The preliminary paragraphs set forth above are
incorporated herein as part of this Ordinance.
   Section 2: Adoption of Policy. The Return-To-Work Policy, a copy of which is
attached hereto as Exhibit “A” and incorporated herein by this reference as if
fully set forth, is hereby adopted and approved.
   Section3: Amendment of Policy. This Ordinance is and shall be deemed the
policy of the Village of Stockton and may be amended only by the majority vote
of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Stockton, Illinois.
   Section 4: Repeal. All prior Ordinances or Resolutions of the Village of
Stockton, Illinois contrary to the terms and conditions of this Ordinance shall
be deemed to be repealed as of the effective date of this Ordinance.
   Section 5: Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect
after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form in a manner
provided by law.
   Section 6: Severability. In the event that any section, clause, provision,
or part of this Ordinance shall be found and determined to be invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, all valid parts that are severable from the
invalid parts shall remain in full force and effect.
 
Presented, passed and approved this 9th day of December, 2025
 
AYE: Kunz, McGovern, Rowe, Kappes, Heidenreich, Gonnerman
NAY:
ABSENT:
 
APPROVED:
 
                  ______________________________
                  Mitchell Kappes, Village President
 
 
ATTEST:
 
______________________________
Stefanie Hatley, Village Clerk
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Intent
1-1-3: Acceptance
1-1-4: Amendments
1-1-5: Code Alterations
1-1-6: Distribution of Copies
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Village Code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of Stockton. This
Village Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the STOCKTON VILLAGE
CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the Board of Trustees and
shall be kept up to date as provided in Section
1-1-4 of this Chapter under the direction of the Village Attorney, acting for
said Village Board of Trustees. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this Village Code by title in any legal document. (1982 Code)
1-1-2: INTENT:
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this
Village Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent of the
Village President and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out. (1966 Code,
§25.106)
1-1-3: ACCEPTANCE:
This Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code. (1982 Code)
1-1-4: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Procedure: Any ordinance amending this Village Code shall set forth the
title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and
this shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement
pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this
Village Code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be
immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be
prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this Village Code.
Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be made
available for insertion in each individual copy of this Village Code.
   B.   Fee: There should be a fifty dollar ($50.00) ordinance change fee
charged to any individual, group or corporation requesting that an ordinance or
ordinances or subsection(s) thereof be changed, modified, altered or amended in
any manner. The individual, group or corporation requesting said change shall
pay this fee upon Board action.
   C.   Reference to Code: Any additions or amendments to this Code, when
passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Village President and
Board of Trustees to make the same a part of this Village Code shall be deemed
to be incorporated in this Code so that a reference to the Stockton Village
Code shall be understood to include them.
   D.   Penalties: In case of amendment of any section of this Village Code
containing the provisions for which a penalty is provided in another section,
the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the
amended section or the amending section, whether re-enacted in the amendatory
ordinance or not, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein.
   E.   Recording Amendments:
      1.   The Village Clerk shall keep a separate book containing every
amendment or addition passed to this Code, with a reference on each copy of
such amendment or addition as to the place in the record or ordinances where
the original ordinance may be found.
      2.   The abovementioned records shall be kept in addition to the record
of ordinances which the Clerk is required to keep by Statute. 1
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/3-10-7.
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Village Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages
may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by
the Village Board. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of this Village Code shall make
every effort to maintain this code in an up to date and efficient manner. Said
Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the Village and shall be returned
to the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the Village
Board. (1982 Code)
1-1-6: DISTRIBUTION OF COPIES:
All of the printed copies of this Village Code belonging to the Village shall
be deposited with the Village Clerk. He shall deliver one copy thereof to the
Village President and each member of the Board of Trustees, and copies to such
other persons as the President and Board of Trustees may direct. (1966 Code,
§25.302)
The Village President and Board of Trustees shall have the power to extend or
reciprocate courtesies of other municipalities by presenting them with a copy
of this Code, bound at the expense of the Village, as to them seems suitable.
(1966 Code, §25.303)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Pending Suits
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed by the Village President and Board
of Trustees prior to the adoption of this Village Code are hereby repealed,
except such as are referred to herein as being in force or are by necessary
implication herein reserved from the repeal (subject to the saving clauses
contained in the following sections), from which are excluded the following
ordinances: appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise and other ordinances; ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances, ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the Village; ordinances establishing social security; and all special
ordinances, and special assessment ordinances. (1966 Code, §25.401)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinances relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public
ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, services or rates of public utilities
shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Village Code or by virtue
of the preceding section, excepting as this Code may contain provisions for
such matter, in which case, this Village Code shall be construed as amending
such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1966 Code,
§25.402)
1-2-3: PENDING SUITS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against the former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued, or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claims arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceedings, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may, by consent of the party affected, be applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or by
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this or the preceding section shall be construed as
abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of
the Village herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or
altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any
person, or as waiving any right of the Village under any section or provision
of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Village Code. (1966
Code, §25.403)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this Village Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of
Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1982 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this Village Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this Village Code by words importing the singular
number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and
females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be applied to any section
of this Village Code which contains any express provision excluding such
construction or where the subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Village has been
changed in the content of this Village Code to "Title", "Chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the Village's ordinances is not
meant to amend the passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the Board of Trustees of the Village.
CODE: The Municipal Code of Stockton, and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The County of Jo Daviess, State of Illinois.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words, "of the
Village of Stockton".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation. (1982 Code)
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the Village shall begin on May 1 of each year
and end on April 30 of the following year. (1966 Code, §7.503)
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MAYOR: See Village President.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed. 1
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the Village
of Stockton".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of
a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every description of money, goods, chattels, effects,
evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary
obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred,
increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest
therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, this term shall be understood
to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
STREET: This term shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
VILLAGE: The Village of Stockton, County of Jo Daviess, State of Illinois.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The President of the Village may be referred to as "Mayor"
or "President" of the Village. 2
WHOLESALER and WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, such
terms shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles
or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: These terms may include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it
shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to
write, by his proper mark.
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 730 ILCS 5/5-1-14.
2 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/1-1-2.1.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Village Code are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify
or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1982 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-4: Village Jail
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this code, any person found to have
been in violation of any of the terms and/or provisions of this code shall be
fined a minimum amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense,
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second offense and up to seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the third and any subsequent offense if the
offender wishes to pay the village clerk. If the offender seeks court
adjudication, the fine range will be no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. A penalty for each offense
may include a requirement that the offending party perform some reasonable
public service work such as, but not limited to, picking up litter or
performing maintenance activities in, on or upon public facilities. A violation
under this code may be established by the preponderance of the evidence. (Ord.
626, 9-13-2016)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a
continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced. (1982 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1982 Code)
1-4-4: VILLAGE JAIL:
   A.   Establishment: The place in the village heretofore established and used
as the jail, or any other place which may be hereafter used for that purpose,
is hereby declared to be the village jail. (1966 Code §7.401)
   B.   Keeper: The chief of police shall be the keeper of the jail and shall
have custody over all persons confined therein and of all property pertaining
thereto. (1966 Code §7.402)
   C.   Prisoners: The jail shall be used for the incarceration of all persons
arrested for violating any law of the state of Illinois, the United States or
for violating any village ordinance until such persons shall be lawfully
brought before a proper village officer for a hearing or until such person
shall be lawfully transferred to some other place of incarceration or otherwise
lawfully released. (1966 Code §7.403)
   D.   Escape: It shall be unlawful for any person to escape, attempt to
escape or to assist any prisoner to escape or attempt to escape from jail.
(1966 Code §7.404)
   E.   Communications With Prisoners: It shall be unlawful for any person to
communicate with any prisoner held in the jail without the permission of the
chief of police or the police officer in charge. (1966 Code §7.405)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election, Term Of Office
1-5-2: Bond, Oath, Salary
1-5-3: Duties
1-5-4: Designation Of Duties
1-5-5: President Pro Tem
1-5-1: ELECTION, TERM OF OFFICE:
The Village President shall be elected to office for a term of four (4) years,
and he shall be the President of the Board of Trustees, as is provided by
statute 1 .
The term of the President shall commence at the first regular or special
meeting of the Board of Trustees in the month of May following the proclamation
of the results of the regular April Municipal election at which said President
was elected. The term of the President elected at a special Municipal election
shall commence at the first regular or special meeting of the Board of Trustees
in the month following the proclamation of the results of the special Municipal
election at which said President was elected. (Ord. 376, 9-8-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3-5-1.
1-5-2: BOND, OATH, SALARY:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Village President shall give
a bond with sureties to be approved by the Board of Trustees, conditioned upon
his faithful performance of his duties, in the sum of three thousand dollars
($3,000.00). He shall take the oath of office as prescribed by statute 1 , and
shall receive such compensation as may be set from time to time by the Village
Board 3 . (1966 Code, §1.004)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/3-14-3.
3 3. See Chapter 6 of this Title.
   
1-5-3: DUTIES:
   A.   The Village President shall be the chief executive officer of the
Village and shall perform all such duties as may be required of him by statute
or ordinance.
   B.   He shall have supervision over all of the executive officers of the
Village, and over all of the employees of the Village.
   C.   He shall have the power and authority to inspect all books and records
kept by any Village officer or employee at any reasonable time. (1966 Code,
§1.002)
1-5-4: DESIGNATION OF DUTIES:
Whenever there is a question as to the respective powers or duties of any
appointed officer of the Village, this shall be settled by the Village
President; and he shall have the power to delegate to any such officer any duty
which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform
the duty 1 . (1966 Code, §1.003)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  1-9-9 of this Title.
1-5-5: PRESIDENT PRO TEM:
During the temporary absence or disability of the Village President, the Board
of Trustees shall elect one of its number to act as President Pro Tem, who
during the absence or disability of the President shall perform the duties
pertaining to the office. (1966 Code, §1.005)
CHAPTER 6
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election, Terms And Functions
1-6-2: Oath, Salary
1-6-3: Meetings
1-6-4: Village President
1-6-5: Ordinances
1-6-6: Rules Of Order
1-6-1: ELECTION, TERMS AND FUNCTIONS:
The Board of Trustees, consisting of six (6) members, shall be elected to
office for a four (4) year term, according to the method provided by statute 1
.
The terms of elected Trustees shall commence at the first regular or special
meeting of the Board of Trustees in the month of May following the proclamation
of the results of the regular April Municipal election at which said Trustees
were elected. This provision shall not apply to terms of appointed officers or
those elected at a special Municipal election.
Said Board shall be the Legislative Department of the Village government, and
shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be delegated by statute.
(Ord. 375, 9-8-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-5.
1-6-2: OATH, SALARY:
The members of the Board of Trustees shall take the oath of office prescribed
by statute 1 , and shall receive such compensation, paid quarterly, for all
regular meetings, special meetings and committee meetings at the established
rate as set forth in the minutes. (Ord. 269, 6-3-1986)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-25.
1-6-3: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The Village Board shall hold its regular meetings in
the Village Hall on the second Tuesday of each month at seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. and no notice of such regular meetings shall be required. (Ord. 647, 12-
12-2017)
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the Village
President or any three (3) Trustees upon at least twenty four (24) hours'
notice to all members and the President; provided, that if all of the Trustees
are present at a special meeting, no notice of such meeting shall be necessary
and such notice shall be deemed waived.
   C.   Place Of Meetings: The meeting place of said Board shall be at the
Village Hall, unless otherwise ordered by the Board. (1966 Code §2.103)
   D.   Meetings Open To The Public: All meetings of the Board of Trustees
shall be open to the public as provided by statute 1 . (1966 Code §2.209)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
1-6-4: VILLAGE PRESIDENT:
   A.   Presiding Officer: The Village President shall be the presiding officer
of all regular and special meetings of the Board of Trustees and at all times
when the Board meets as a Committee of the Whole. (1966 Code §2.104)
   B.   Deciding Vote: The Village President shall not vote on any ordinance,
resolution or motion except: 1) where the vote of the Trustees has resulted in
a tie; 2) where one-half (1/2) of the Trustees have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution or motion even though there is no tie vote. In both
instances specified, the Village President shall vote. Nothing in this
subsection shall deprive a President Pro Tem from voting in his capacity as
Trustee, but he shall not be entitled to another vote in his capacity as
President Pro Tem. (1966 Code §2.105)
1-6-5: ORDINANCES:
   A.   Approval, Veto: All resolutions and motions: 1) which create any
liability against the village, or 2) which provide for the expenditure or
appropriation of its money, or 3) to sell any village property, and all
ordinances passed by the village board shall be deposited with the village
clerk. If the village president approves of them, he shall sign them. Those of
which he disapproves, he shall return to the village board, with his written
objections, at the next regular meeting of the village board occurring not less
than five (5) days after their passage. The village president may disapprove of
any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolution or motion making
an appropriation. If the village president fails to return any ordinance or any
specified resolution with his written objections within the designated time, it
shall become effective despite the absence of his signature. (1966 Code §2.106)
   B.   Reconsideration, Passing Over Veto: Every resolution and motion
specified in subsection A of this section, and every ordinance, which is
returned to the board of trustees by the village president shall be
reconsidered by the board of trustees. If, after such reconsideration, two-
thirds (2/3) of all the trustees elected to the village board shall agree to
pass an ordinance, resolution or motion, notwithstanding the president's
refusal to approve the same, then it shall become effective. The vote on the
question of passage over the president's veto shall be by yeas and nays, and
shall be recorded in the journal. (1966 Code §2.107)
1-6-6: RULES OF ORDER:
   A.   Order Of Business: The order of business of the board of trustees shall
be as follows:
      1.   Approval of minutes of prior meeting.
      2.   Presentation of petitions, claims, and officers' reports.
      3.   Reports of standing committees.
      4.   Reports of special committees.
      5.   Communications to the board.
      6.   Unfinished business.
      7.   New business.
      8.   Adjournment. (1966 Code §2.201)
   B.   Rescinded Action: No vote or action of the board of trustees shall be
rescinded at any special meeting of the board of trustees unless there be
present at such special meeting as many members of the board of trustees as
were present at the meeting when such vote or action was taken as provided by
statute 1 . (1966 Code §2.202)
   C.   Resolutions: Any resolutions submitted to the board of trustees shall
be reduced to writing before being voted upon on request of any two (2) members
of the board. (1966 Code §2.203)
   D.   Addressing Meetings: No person other than the president or a member of
the board of trustees shall address that body at any regular or special meeting
except upon consent of a majority of the members present at any meeting. Upon
the consent of a majority of the members present, citizens’ comments shall be
limited to five (5) minutes per speaker and not more than thirty (30) minutes
as an item.
   E.   Robert's Rules Of Order: "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern the
deliberations of the board of trustees, except when in conflict with any of the
foregoing rules. (1966 Code §2.205)
   F.   Quorum: A majority of the trustees or three (3) trustees and the
village president shall constitute a quorum to do business. (1966 Code §2.206)
   G.   Committees:
      1.   The following shall be the standing committees of the board of
trustees:
         Economic development/subdivision
         Finance and purchasing
         Personnel
         Police
         Streets, sidewalks, forestry, building and grounds
         Water, sewer and garbage
All committees shall consist of three (3) persons, with the first person
nominated acting as chairperson.
      2.   All committee members shall be appointed by the village president.
(1966 Code §§ 2.201 - 2.206; amd. Ord. 272, 9-2-1986; Ord. 583, 5-14-2013; Ord.
754, 12-12-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-55.
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE CLERK
SECTION:
1-7-1: Appointment, Term
1-7-2: Bond Required
1-7-3: Vacancies In Office
1-7-4: Duties
1-7-1: APPOINTMENT, TERM:
The village clerk shall be appointed by the village president, by and with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees, and shall serve for a four (4)
year term and until his or her successor is qualified, as provided by statute 1
. (Ord. 259, 1-1-1985)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3-5-9.
1-7-2: BOND REQUIRED:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the village clerk shall execute
a bond in an amount not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), conditioned
upon the faithful performance of his duties. (1966 Code, §3.002; amd. 1982
Code)
1-7-3: VACANCIES IN OFFICE:
In case the office of village clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the
village president and board of trustees shall appoint a successor as provided
by statute 1 . (1966 Code, §3.011)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/3-5-9.
1-7-4: DUTIES:
The village clerk shall have and perform the following duties:
   A.   Signatures: He shall seal and attest all contracts of the village and
all licenses, permits and such other documents as shall require this formality.
(1966 Code, §3.003)
   B.   Money Collected: He shall turn over all money received by him on behalf
of the village to the village treasurer 1  promptly upon receipt of the same;
and with such money he shall give a statement as to the source thereof. (1966
Code, §3.004)
   C.   Accounts: He shall keep accounts showing all money received by him and
the source and disposition thereof; and such accounts as may be required by
statute or ordinance. (1966 Code, §3.005)
   D.   Records: In addition to the records of ordinances and other records
which the clerk is required by statute to keep, he shall keep a register of all
licenses and permits issued; and the payments thereof; a record showing all of
the officers and regular employees of the village and such other records as may
be required by the village. (1966 Code, §3.006)
   E.   Seal: He shall be the custodian of the village seal 2 , and shall affix
its impression on documents whenever required. (1966 Code, §3.007)
   F.   Documents: He shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the
village which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer. (1966
Code, §3.008)
   G.   Indices: He shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and
records kept by him, so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had.
(1966 Code, §3.009)
   H.   Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, the clerk
shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by statute or
ordinance of the village. (1966 Code, §3.010)
 
Notes
1 3. See section
  1-8-5 of this title.
2 1. See chapter 12 of this title.
CHAPTER 8
APPOINTIVE VILLAGE OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Village Attorney
1-8-2: Health Officer
1-8-3: Water And Sewer Superintendents
1-8-4: Superintendent Of Streets
1-8-5: Village Treasurer
1-8-6: Public Works Coordinator
1-8-1: VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
   A.   Creation Of Office: There is hereby created the office of village
attorney, an executive office of the village, who shall be appointed by the
village president by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
(1966 Code, §4.101)
   B.   Duties: The village attorney shall perform the following duties:
      1.   Suits And Actions: He shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or
actions at law or equity to which the village may be a party, or in which it
may be interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the
village on behalf of the village, or in the capacity of such person as an
officer of the village. (1966 Code, §4.102)
      2.   Judgments: He shall see to the full enforcement of all judgments or
decrees rendered or entered in favor of the village, and all similar or
interlocutory orders. (1966 Code, §4.103)
      3.   Advice: He shall be the legal adviser of the village and shall
render advice on all legal questions affecting the village whenever requested
to do so by any village official. Upon request by the president or by the board
of trustees, he shall reduce any such opinion to writing. (1966 Code, §4.104)
      4.   Special Assessments: He shall see to the completion of all special
assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings. (1966 Code, §4.105)
      5.   Ordinances And Documents: He shall draft or supervise the
phraseology of any contract, lease or other document or instrument, to which
the village may be a party; and upon request by the board of trustees, to draft
ordinances covering any subjects within the power of the village. (1966 Code,
§4.106)
   C.   Additional Counsel: The president and board of trustees may retain or
authorize the employment of other counsel to give advice or render service to
the village. (1966 Code, §4.107)
1-8-2: HEALTH OFFICER:
   A.   Creation Of Office: There is hereby created the office of health
officer who shall be appointed by the president by and with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees. (1966 Code, §4.201)
   B.   Duties:
      1.   Generally: The health officer shall be an enforcing officer of the
board of health 1 , and shall see to the enforcement of all rules of said
board, and shall see to the enforcement of quarantine 2 . He shall give to the
board of trustees information and advice concerning the health of the village,
and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the president
and board of trustees. (1966 Code, §4.202)
      2.   Analysis: He shall make or cause to be made analysis of any food or
drink alleged to be tainted or unwholesome 3  and to analyze the drinking water
of the village whenever requested to do so by the president and board of
trustees. (1966 Code, §4.203)
      3.   Inspections: He shall assist in the enforcement of all ordinances of
the village relating to the sale or storage of food and drink intended for
human consumption 4 , and shall make or cause to be made such tests and
analyses and inspections as may be necessary for this purpose. (1966 Code,
§4.204)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
  2. See section
2 6-1-1 of this code for provisions regarding contagious diseases. 65 ILCS 5/7-
  4-1.
3 3. See section
  6-2-1 of this code.
4 4. See section
  6-2-1 of this code.
1-8-3: WATER AND SEWER SUPERINTENDENTS:
   A.   Water Superintendent:
      1.   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of water
superintendent, an executive office of the village. The water superintendent
shall be appointed by the president by and with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees.
      2.   Duties And Responsibilities: The water superintendent shall be in
charge of the operation and maintenance of the village's water distribution
system (see title 8, chapter 6 of this code). The duties and responsibilities
of this office, among other things, shall be as outlined in a job description
for this position as adopted by the board of trustees and modified from time to
time.
   B.   Sewer Superintendent:
      1.   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of sewer
superintendent, an executive office of the village. The sewer superintendent
shall be appointed by the president by and with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees.
      2.   Duties And Responsibilities: The sewer superintendent shall be in
charge of the operation and maintenance of the village's wastewater treatment
facility and sewer system. The duties and responsibilities of this office,
among other things, shall be as outlined in a job description for this position
as adopted by the board of trustees and modified from time to time. (Ord. 427,
1-13-2004)
1-8-4: SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS:
   A.   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of superintendent of
streets, an executive office of the village. The superintendent of streets
shall be appointed by the president by and with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities: The superintendent of streets shall keep
the streets and alleys clean, free from obstructions and in good repair (see
various titles and chapters of this code that pertain to public ways and
property). The duties and responsibilities of this office, among other things,
shall be as outlined in a job description for this position as adopted by the
board of trustees and modified from time to time. (Ord. 427, 1-13-2004)
1-8-5: VILLAGE TREASURER:
   A.   Appointment, Term: The village treasurer shall be appointed by the
village president, by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees,
and shall serve for a four (4) year term and until his successor is qualified,
as provided by statute 1 . (1966 Code, §4.501)
   B.   Bond: The treasurer shall give bond conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his duties and to indemnify the village for any loss due to
neglect of duty or wrongful act on his part. The treasurer's bond shall be an
amount of money that is not less than three (3) times the latest federal census
population or any subsequent census figure used for motor fuel tax purposes.
Such bond shall be filed with the village clerk as required by statute 2 .
(1966 Code, §4.502; amd. 1982 Code)
   C.   Duties:
      1.   Generally: The treasurer shall perform such duties as may be
prescribed for him by statute 3  or by village ordinance. He shall receive all
money paid to the village, either directly from the person paying the same or
from the hands of such other officer as may receive such money, and he shall
pay out money only on vouchers or orders properly signed by the village clerk
and the village president.
He shall be collector for all money due under special assessments and he shall
keep a separate and complete record of all money so received. (1966 Code,
§4.503)
      2.   Accounts: He shall keep such books and accounts as may be required
by the president and shall keep them in the manner required by the president
and board of trustees. (1966 Code, §4.504)
      3.   Reports: He shall make monthly reports to the president and board of
trustees showing the state of finances of the village 4 , and the amounts
received and spent during the month, which reports shall be filed. He shall
make an annual report after the close of the fiscal year, as required by
statute 4 with the total amount of all receipts and expenditures of the village
and his transactions as treasurer during the preceding year. (1966 Code,
§4.505)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3-8-1.
2 1. 65 ILCS 5/3-14-3.
3 2. 65 ILCS 5/3-10-1 et seq.
4 3. See chapter 10 of this title.
4 4. 65 ILCS 5/3-10-5.
1-8-6: PUBLIC WORKS COORDINATOR:
   A.   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of public works
coordinator, an executive office of the village. The public works coordinator
shall be appointed by the president by and with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities: The public works coordinator shall direct
and oversee all aspects of the public works department. The coordinator shall
help plan, organize, implement and supervise activities related to the water,
sewer and street departments. The duties and responsibilities of this office,
among other things, shall be as outlined in a job description for this position
as adopted by the board of trustees and modified from time to time. (Ord. 512,
6-30-2009)
CHAPTER 9
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-9-1: Effect Of Provisions
1-9-2: Appointment Of Officers
1-9-3: Term Of Office, Vacancies
1-9-4: Bond And Oath
1-9-5: Salaries
1-9-6: Expense Allowance, Elected Officials
1-9-7: Public Works Laborers, Prevailing Wage Rate
1-9-8: Termination Of Office
1-9-9: Assignment Of Duties
1-9-10: Monies Received
1-9-11: Records
1-9-12: Arrests
1-9-13: Inspections By Village Officers
1-9-14: Impersonation
1-9-15: Interference With Officers
1-9-16: Residency
1-9-17: Sexual Harassment
1-9-1: EFFECT OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply alike to all officers and employees
of the Village, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or
position or the time of the appointment of the officer or employee. (1966 Code
§7.101)
1-9-2: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS 1 :
All officers other than elective officers shall be appointed by the Village
President, by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees, as is provided by
statute 2 ; provided, that all employees shall, in the absence of any
provisions to the contrary be appointed or selected by the President. (1966
Code §7.102)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 8 of this title.
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/3-8-1.
1-9-3: TERM OF OFFICE, VACANCIES:
Every appointive officer of the Village shall hold office until May 1 following
his appointment or until his successor is appointed and qualified, unless it is
otherwise provided by ordinance of the Village. In case of a vacancy in any
such place, it shall be filled in the same manner in which appointments or
selections are made, in the absence of provision to the contrary. (1966 Code
§7.103)
1-9-4: BOND AND OATH:
Every officer or employee shall, if required by the President and Board of
Trustees, upon entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond in such
amount and with such sureties as may be determined by the said President and
Board of Trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of
his office or position. Every officer shall also, before entering his duties,
take the oath prescribed by statute 1 . (1966 Code §§7.105, 7.109)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3-14-3.
1-9-5: SALARIES:
All officers and employees of the Village shall receive such salaries as may
from time to time be provided by Village ordinance or resolution. (1966 Code
§7.106)
1-9-6: EXPENSE ALLOWANCE, ELECTED OFFICIALS:
All elected officials of the Village may submit claims to the Village for
actual mileage driven on Village business at a rate to be established annually
by the Board of Trustees and may also submit claims to the Village for actual
telephone or other expenses incurred on behalf of the Village. (Ord. 176, 2-3-
1976; amd. 1982 Code)
1-9-7: PUBLIC WORKS LABORERS, PREVAILING WAGE RATE:
To the extent and as required by an Act regulating wages of laborers, mechanics
and other workmen employed in any public works by the State, County, Village or
any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under contract for
public works 1 , approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general prevailing
rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workmen
engaged in the construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of
the Village is hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of
wages for construction work in Jo Daviess County area as determined by the
Department of Labor of the State of Illinois as of June 1979, a copy of that
determination being incorporated herein by reference. The definition of any
terms appearing in this section which are also used in the aforesaid act shall
be the same as in said act.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general prevailing
rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except public
works construction of the village to the extent required by the aforesaid act.
The village clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any
interested party in the main office of the village this determination of such
prevailing rate of wages.
The village clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer and
to any association of employers and to any person or association of employees
who have filed, or file their names and addresses, requesting copies of any
determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of workmen
whose wages will be affected by such rates. (Ord. 198, 8-7-1979)
 
Notes
1 2. 820 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
1-9-8: TERMINATION OF OFFICE:
Every officer and employee of the village, upon the expiration of his term for
any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his successor all books and records
which may be the property of the village, and if no successor has been
appointed within one week after the termination of office, such property shall
be delivered to the village clerk or village treasurer. (1966 Code, §7.111)
1-9-9: ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES:
The village president shall have the power to assign to any appointive officer
any duty which is not assigned by ordinance to some other specific officer; and
shall determine disputes or questions relating to the respective powers or
duties of officers 1 . (1966 Code, §7.107)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-5-4 of this title.
1-9-10: MONIES RECEIVED:
Every officer of the village shall, at least once each month, turn over all
money received by him in his official capacity, to the village treasurer 1
with a statement showing the source from which the same was received. (1966
Code, §7.104)
 
Notes
1 2. See section
  1-8-5 of this title.
1-9-11: RECORDS:
All records kept by any officer of the village shall be open to inspection by
the village president or any member of the board of trustees at all reasonable
times, whether or not such records are required to be kept by statute or
village ordinance. (1966 Code, §7.108)
1-9-12: ARRESTS:
The village president, members of the board of trustees, as well as every
member of the police department, are hereby declared to be conservators of the
peace with such powers to make arrests as are given to conservators of the
peace by statute 1 . (1966 Code, §7.110)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3-9-4.
1-9-13: INSPECTIONS BY VILLAGE OFFICERS:
Any officer or employee of the village, who is authorized to enforce
ordinances, may make such inspections as may be necessary to see to the
enforcement of such village ordinances.
Whenever such officer or employee shall have reason to believe that there
exists on or in any premises in the village any nuisance dangerous to public
health, any fire hazard, any structural defect likely to result in injury to
person or property, or any electric wiring or equipment in such condition as to
present a fire hazard or danger to persons, he shall ask permission of the
occupant of such premises, or the owner or custodian thereof, if the premises
is unoccupied, to inspect the same. (1966 Code, §7.114; amd. 1982 Code)
1-9-14: IMPERSONATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate, without lawful authority,
any village officer or employee. (1966 Code, §7.112; amd. 1982 Code)
1-9-15: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any officer or employee of the
village while engaged in the duties of his office or employment. (1966 Code,
§7.113; amd. 1982 Code)
1-9-16: RESIDENCY:
All employees of the Village of Stockton shall, within six (6) months of the
employee's date of hire and continuing during the term of their employ, reside
in the Village or within twenty five (25) miles from the corporate limits
thereof. As used herein, "resident" shall mean a person who resides at a
physical location within the specified area on a permanent basis with the
intention to remain for an indefinite time. (Ord. 586, 8-13-2013)
1-9-17: SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
The Policy Prohibiting Sexual Harassment, on file in the Village and made a
part hereof as if fully set forth, is hereby adopted. (Ord. 648, 1-9-2018)
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
SECTION:
1-10-1: Appropriations
1-10-2: Tax Levy
1-10-3: Indebtedness
1-10-4: Contracts
1-10-5: Bills, Payroll
1-10-6: Payment By Treasurer
1-10-7: Audit
1-10-8: Surety Bonds
1-10-1: APPROPRIATIONS:
During the first quarter of each fiscal year, as required by statute 1 , the
village president and board of trustees shall enact an appropriation ordinance
in which shall be itemized all anticipated expenditures to be met during the
coming year, other than those payable from bond issues. This ordinance shall be
published as required by law within ten (10) days after its enactment. (1966
Code, §7.201)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-2-1; "fiscal year" defined in section
  1-3-2 of this title.
1-10-2: TAX LEVY:
No sooner than ten (10) days after the publication of the appropriation
ordinance a tax levy ordinance shall be enacted, as required by law, levying
such taxes as may be needed to meet the anticipated expenses of the coming
year, together with such taxes as may be required to meet outstanding bond
issues, or for purposes payable from special taxes properly authorized.
A certified copy of the tax levy ordinance shall be filed with the county clerk
not later than the second Tuesday in September. Such ordinance shall show the
total appropriated for each item, and the amount of tax levied therefor. (1966
Code, §7.202)
1-10-3: INDEBTEDNESS:
No indebtedness shall be incurred, excepting such indebtedness as may be
payable solely from the proceeds of a duly authorized bond issue or from a
designated specified source, unless there is a prior appropriation out of which
such indebtedness could be paid, as provided by statute 1 . Provided, that
during the first quarter of any fiscal year, before the enactment of the
current appropriation ordinance, the village may operate under the
appropriation ordinance of the preceding year. (1966 Code, §7.203)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-1-6.
1-10-4: CONTRACTS:
The village president, or any other person designated by the board of trustees,
may sign on behalf of the village any contracts authorized by the president and
board of trustees. No contracts may be entered into without the authority of
the president and board of trustees. (1966 Code, §7.204)
1-10-5: BILLS, PAYROLL:
All bills payable by the village, other than for the payment of salaries
established by the village president and board of trustees, shall be submitted
to the president and board of trustees for approval before payment. (1966 Code,
§7.205)
1-10-6: PAYMENT BY TREASURER:
The village treasurer shall pay out money in payment of all bills, or for
salaries, or for any other purposes other than the retirement of principal or
interest on bonds or tax anticipation warrants only upon warrants signed by the
president and the village clerk as provided by statute 1 . Such warrants shall
designate the terms to be paid and the funds from which they are to be paid.
(1966 Code, §7.206)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/8-1-8.
1-10-7: AUDIT:
As soon as practicable at the close of each fiscal year, and no later than six
(6) months thereafter, there shall be an audit of all accounts of the village
made by a competent person authorized to act as an auditor under the laws of
Illinois, to be designated by the president and board of trustees. Copies of
such audit report shall be filed with the village clerk and with the director
of the state department of revenue and in such other places as may be required
by law. (1966 Code, §7.207)
1-10-8: SURETY BONDS:
Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the village is required as a prerequisite
to exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the issuance of a
license or permit or for the exercise of any special privilege, the surety on
such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do business in this
state as a surety company, in the absence of specific provision to the contrary
by ordinance.
Whenever in its opinion additional sureties or an additional surety may be
needed on any bond to indemnify the village against loss or liability because
of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties or for any other reason,
the president and board of trustees may order a new surety or sureties to be
secured for such bond. If such new surety or sureties are not procured within
ten (10) days from the time such order is transmitted to the principal of the
bond, or his assignee, the president and board of trustees shall declare the
bond to be void, and thereupon such principal or assignee shall be deemed to
have surrendered the privilege or position as condition of which the bond was
required. (1966 Code, §7.506)
CHAPTER 11
VILLAGE ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-11-1: Elections
1-11-1: ELECTIONS:
Elections for Municipal offices shall be held as provided by Statute, and at
the time prescribed by Statute 1 . (1966 Code, §7.505)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 10 ILCS.
CHAPTER 12
CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION:
1-12-1: Seal Established
1-12-1: SEAL ESTABLISHED:
The seal of the Village shall be the seal heretofore adopted and used as the
Village Seal, consisting of a disk with the words "Village of Stockton, Jo
Daviess County, Illinois," on the outer edge thereof and the words "Village
Seal" in the center 1 . (1966 Code, §7.501)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  1-7-4 of this Code for Village Clerk as custodian of Seal.
CHAPTER 13
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-13-1: Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association, Membership
1-13-2: Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, Membership
1-13-3:    Electronic Attendance Of Meetings
1-13-1: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL LEAGUE RISK MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION, MEMBERSHIP:
The Village Board hereby authorizes and approves participation in the plan of
the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association and directs the
Village President and Clerk to execute the intergovernmental cooperation
contract with participation in the plan to be for a minimum of three (3) years
after the plan goes into effect.
The Village Treasurer is hereby directed to transmit to the Illinois Municipal
League Risk Management Association a sum of money equal to one-tenth of one
percent (0.1%) of the 1977 equalized assessed valuation of all taxable property
within the Village as determined by the Illinois Department of Local Government
Affairs, which shall cover the cost of its initial contribution to the
association and thereafter to pay its assessments based upon the latest
equalized assessed valuation of all taxable property within the Village as
determined by said Department, or its successors, all in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the contract and bylaws of the association. (Ord. 203,
1-1-80)
1-13-2: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND, MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   The Village of Stockton, Jo Daviess County, Illinois does hereby elect
to participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, effective January 1,
1992.
   B.   The standard for IMRF participation shall be a position normally
requiring performance of duty for one thousand (1,000) hours per year.
   C.   The Clerk is directed to promptly file a certified copy of this
Ordinance with the Board of Trustees of the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund.
(Ord. 317, 9-3-91)
1-13-3: ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE OF MEETINGS:
   A.   Rules Statement. It is the decision of the Village of Stockton that any
member of the Village Board may attend any open or closed meeting of the
Village Board via electronic means (such as by telephone, video or Internet
connection) provided that such attendance is in compliance with these mies and
any applicable laws.
   B.   Prerequisites. A member of the Village Board may attend a meeting
electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
      1.   The member should notify the Village Clerk at least four (4) hours
before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary communications
equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical
arrangements will result in denial of a request for remote attendance.
      2.   The member must assert one of the following three reasons why he or
she is unable to physically attend the meeting,
         a.   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability; or
         b.   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the Village of Stockton; or
         c.   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
         d.   The member cannot attend because of an unexpected childcare
obligation.
   C.   Authorization to Participate.
      1.   The Village Clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance
request, shall inform the Village Board of the request for electronic
attendance.
      2.   After establishing that there is a quornm physically present at a
meeting where a member of the Village Board desires to attend electronically,
the presiding officer shall state that (i) a notice was received from a member
of the Village Board in accordance with these Rules, and (ii) the member will
be deemed authorized to attend the meeting electronically unless a motion
objecting to the member's electronic attendance is made, seconded and approved
by two-thirds of the members of the Village Board physically present at the
meeting. If no such motion is made and seconded or if any such motion fails to
achieve the required vote by the members of the Village Board physically
present at the meeting, then the request by the member to attend the meeting
electronically shall be deemed approved by the Village Board and the presiding
officer shall declare the requesting member present. After such declaration by
the presiding officer, the question of a member's electronic attendance may not
be reconsidered.
   D.   Adequate Equipment Required. The member participating electronically
and other members of the Village Board must be able to communicate effectively,
and members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the
meeting site. Before allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the Village
Board shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the
meeting site.
   E.   Minutes. Any member attending electronically shall be considered an
off-site attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting if the
member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state
specifically whether each member is physically present or present by electronic
means.
   F.   Rights of Remote Member. A member permitted to attend electronically
will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting and participate
in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all
general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and adhered to.
The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered and counted as
to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any member attending electronically
shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded
by the Village Clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A
member attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case
of any member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his
or her leaving and returning.
   G.   Committees, Boards and Commissions. These rules shall apply to all
committees, boards and commissions established by authority of the Village
Board. (Ord. 740, 4-11-2023; amd. Ord. 749, 8-8-2023)
CHAPTER 14
ETHICS ACT
SECTION:
1-14-1: Officials And Employees Ethics Act
1-14-1: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
   A.   The regulations of section 5-15 1  and article 10 2 of the "state
officials and employees ethics act", 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq., (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this section) are hereby adopted
by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the village
to the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
   B.   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the village, is
hereby prohibited.
   C.   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the village under the act, is hereby prohibited.
   D.   The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by
any officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited.
   E.   For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall
be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
   F.   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act.
   G.   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any other
existing policies that regulate the conduct of village officers and employees.
To the extent that any such other existing policies are less restrictive than
this section, however, the provisions of this section shall prevail in
accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a).
   H.   Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the village.
   I.   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the village if the act is found unconstitutional
by the Illinois supreme court.
   J.   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not
address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by
this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
section relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 428, 5-11-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 – 10-40.
CHAPTER 15
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
1-15-1: Title
1-15-2: Scope
1-15-3: Definitions
1-15-4: Notices
1-15-5: Late Payment
1-15-6: Payment Application
1-15-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
1-15-8: Audit Procedure
1-15-9: Appeal
1-15-10: Hearing
1-15-11: Interest And Penalties
1-15-12: Abatement
1-15-13: Installment Contracts
1-15-14: Statute Of Limitations
1-15-15: Voluntary Disclosure
1-15-16: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
1-15-17: Review And Lien Procedure
1-15-18: Application
1-15-19: Severability
1-15-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in
connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
ACT: The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act".
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village's president and board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's treasurer, is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
property tax code or fees collected by the village other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
VILLAGE: The village of Stockton, Jo Daviess County, Illinois. (Ord. 406, 2-13-
2001)
1-15-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local
tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
   A.   First-class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
   B.   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate
postage prepaid. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-6: PAYMENT APPLICATION:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for
the applicable period. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared not validly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
   B.   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four (4) or less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in
error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not
paid the amounts directly to the village.
   C.   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   Date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled
check or receipt for the payment;
         d.   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator
of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of five percent (5.0%) per annum, based
on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days
elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund
check or the grant of a credit. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   B.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
   C.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question,
the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   D.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   E.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   F.   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   G.   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-9: APPEAL:
   A.   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   B.   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator
of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the
basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition
for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five
(45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   C.   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local
tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   D.   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   E.   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five
(45) day period. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-10: HEARING:
   A.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section
1-15-9 of this chapter, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal.
   B.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not
exceed fourteen (14) days.
   C.   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear
testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or
assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   D.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   A.   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be five
percent (5.0%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365)
days and the number of days elapsed.
   B.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed, and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to five percent (5%) of the total tax
due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file
penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of
the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   A.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   B.   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
   C.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-17: REVIEW AND LIEN PROCEDURE:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   A.   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   B.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record, and
   C.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be
controlling. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
1-15-19: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter shall be held to be
invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of
such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 406, 2-13-2001)
CHAPTER 16
CLAIMS UNDER PSEBA
SECTION:
1-16-1: Purpose
1-16-2: Definitions
1-16-3: Application Procedure
1-16-4: Administrative Composition
1-16-5: Administrative Hearing
1-16-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method for
determining the eligibility of a full-time employee for the benefits enumerated
under PSEBA through an administrative process, including if necessary, an
administrative hearing. (Ord. 654, 6-12-2018)
1-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms will have the following
meanings:
CATASTROPHIC INJURY: An injury, the direct and proximate consequences of which
permanently prevent an individual from performing any gainful work.
GAINFUL WORK: Full- or part-time activity that actually is compensated or
commonly is compensated.
INJURY: A traumatic physical wound (or a traumatized physical condition of the
body) directly and proximately caused by external force (such as bullets,
explosives, sharp instruments, blunt objects, or physical blows), chemicals,
electricity, climatic conditions, infectious disease, radiation, virii, or
bacteria, but does not include:
   A.   Any occupational disease; or
   B.   Any condition of the body caused or occasioned by stress or strain.
These definitions are derived from the Federal Public Health and Welfare Act,
which was enacted in 1944 and amended in 1984. (Ord. 654, 6-12-2018)
1-16-3: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
As noted by the court in Englum, "while the [Act] contained substantive
requirements for section 10 eligibility, the [Act] contained no procedural
requirements for determining whether a former employee met the substantive
criteria". This chapter and the application procedure of this section
establishes guidance on the proper procedural requirements for public safety
officers seeking PSEBA benefits in the Village.
   A.   Public safety officers, or family member(s) of an injured or deceased
public safety officer, ("applicant") must file a full and complete PSEBA
application in writing within thirty (30) days of filing a pension claim with
the Village or within thirty (30) days of the date of the adoption of this
chapter in the event that an applicant has filed for a PSEBA claim prior to the
date of adoption of this chapter, whichever is later, if the applicant is
seeking benefits under PSEBA. The Village shall notify applicant if the PSEBA
application is incomplete and applicant shall have five (5) days to remedy
their application. Failure to timely file the full and complete application
shall result in a forfeiture of the benefits under PSEBA by failure to properly
submit a complete application.
   B.   A complete PSEBA application includes the following:
      1.   The name of the applicant, date of hire, detailed information
regarding the incident, including information relating to how the injury was
sustained in the line of duty (date, time, place, nature of injury, and other
factual circumstances surrounding the incident giving rise to said claim);
      2.   The applicant's firsthand knowledge explaining, to the Village's
satisfaction, how the injury/death directly resulted from:
         a.   Response to fresh pursuit;
         b.   Response to what is reasonably believed to be an emergency;
         c.   An unlawful act perpetrated by another; or
         d.   Participation during the investigation of a criminal act;
      3.   A signed PSEBA medical authorization release which authorizes the
collection of information related to the incident including, but not limited
to, disability pension proceedings, workers' compensation records, and medical
records and specifies the name and address for pertinent health care provider
(s);
      4.   A signed PSEBA general information release specifying the name and
signature of the applicant or her/his authorized representative along with
legal proof of said representation and name and signature of witness
authorizing the collection of information pertinent to the incident review
process;
      5.   The name(s) of witnesses to the incident;
      6.   The name(s) of witnesses the applicant intends to call at the PSEBA
hearing;
      7.   Information and supporting pension documentation filed with the
appropriate Pension Board;
      8.   Information supporting the PSEBA eligibility requirements; and
      9.   Other sources of health insurance benefits currently enrolled in or
received by the applicant and/or family members if the applicant is deceased.
   C.   The PSEBA application must be submitted to the Village's Chief of
Police in its entirety.
   D.   The PSEBA application must be sworn and notarized to certify the
truthfulness of the content of the information. A review of the application
shall not occur until the application is complete.
   E.   On the date that the PSEBA application is deemed complete by the
Village, the completed application shall then be submitted to the Village as
the preliminary record, and a copy of the same shall be date stamped and
provided to the applicant.
   F.   Upon receipt of a complete application for PSEBA benefits, the Village
shall set the matter for an administrative hearing before a Hearing Officer to
make a determination on whether to grant the applicant PSEBA benefits based on
the result of the administrative hearing.
   G.   The applicant will be given written notice of the date for the
scheduled administrative hearing to be served not less than ten (10) days prior
to the commencement of the hearing. If the applicant, upon receiving written
notice of the administrative hearing, cannot attend said date, the applicant
must contact the Hearing Officer in writing within seven (7) days after being
served. The Hearing Officer shall establish an alternative hearing date which
is within thirty (30) days of the original hearing date. Failure to appear at
the administrative hearing shall result in denial of PSEBA benefits. (Ord. 654,
6-12-2018)
1-16-4: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
The administrative hearing shall be scheduled and conducted by a Hearing
Officer whose authority and limitations are as follows:
   A.   Authority Of The Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer shall have all of
the authorities granted to her/him under common law relative to the conduct of
an administrative hearing, including the authority to:
      1.   Preside over Village hearings involving PSEBA;
      2.   Administer oaths;
      3.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under PSEBA;
      4.   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production
of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
      5.   Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence;
      6.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
in evidence introduced at the hearing; and
      7.   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a
written finding of fact, decision and order.
   B.   Hearing Officer: The Village President, with the advice and consent of
the Village Board, is hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold the
position of Hearing Officer for each hearing on PSEBA benefits that shall come
before this Village. In making said selection, the following information should
be considered, at a minimum:
      1.   The individual's ability to comply with the job description as set
forth herein; and
      2.   The individual shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the
State of Illinois and have knowledge of and experience in Employment and Labor
Law, general civil procedure, the rules of evidence and administrative
practice. (Ord. 654, 6-12-2018)
1-16-5: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
The system of administrative hearings for the determination of eligibility for
benefits under PSEBA shall be initiated either by the Village or by the
applicant after the submission of a full and complete PSEBA application. An
administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate and determine whether the
applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. If the applicant is found
eligible, the benefits shall be consistent with the Act.
   A.   Record: The Village shall ensure that all hearings are attended by a
certified court reporter and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by
said certified court reporter and a copy be provided to the applicant within
twenty eight (28) days of the date of the administrative hearing.
   B.   Procedures: The Village and the applicant shall be entitled to
representation by counsel at said administrative hearing and present witnesses,
testimony and documents, may cross-examine opposing witnesses, and may request
the issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the
production of relevant documents.
   C.   Evidence: The Illinois Rules of Evidence shall apply to the extent
practicable unless, by such application, the Hearing Officer determines that
application of the rule would be an injustice or preclude the introduction of
evidence of the type commonly relied upon by a reasonably prudent person in the
conduct of her or his affairs. Such determination shall be in the sole
discretion of the Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer must state on the record
her or his reason for that determination.
   D.   Final Determination: A written determination by the Hearing Officer of
whether the petitioning applicant is eligible for the benefits under PSEBA
shall constitute a final administrative determination for the purpose of
judicial review under the common law writ of certiorari.
   E.   Burden Of Proof: At any administrative hearing, the applicant shall
have the obligation and burden of proof to establish that the applicant is
eligible and qualified to receive PSEBA benefits. The standard of proof in all
hearings conducted under this chapter shall be by the preponderance of the
evidence.
   F.   Administrative Records: All records pertaining to the administrative
process shall be held in a separate file under the applicant's name with the
Village. (Ord. 654, 6-12-2018)
CHAPTER 17
MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
1-17-1: Tax Imposed; Rate
1-17-2: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
1-17-3: Severability
1-17-1: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the Village at the rate of
three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of
that business.
   B.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
section 8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-22. (Ord. 673,
9-10-2019)
1-17-2: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be remitted by such retailer to
the Illinois Department of Revenue (Department). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
   B.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department. The
Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of
this article. (Ord. 673, 9-10-2019)
1-17-3: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this
chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall
not affect other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that can be
given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 673,
9-10-2019)
CHAPTER 18
SALE OF EXCESS REAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
1-18-1: Purpose
1-18-2: Methods Of Disposal
1-18-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to enact an ordinance that gives the Village
authority to sell excess Village real property using one of three statutory
methods when it deems said property is no longer necessary or in the best
interests of the Village to own. (Ord. 761, 1-9-2024)
1-18-2: METHODS OF DISPOSAL:
   A.   Method One. In accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-76-2 the Village is
authorized to sell excess real property by passage of an ordinance and
publishing the sale for three weeks in a paper of general circulation within
the Village soliciting sealed bids. Thereafter, the board by % votes may accept
the highest bid, reject all bids or accept the bid it deems is in the best
interest of the village.
   B.   Method Two. In accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-76-4.1 the Village is
authorized to sell excess real property by passage of a resolution after
obtaining an appraisal of said real estate by either an MAI appraiser or an
Illinois licensed appraiser, publishing the proposed sale in a paper of general
circulation within the Village and then selling the property for not less than
80% of appraised value.
   C.   Method Three. In accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-76-4.2 if efforts of the
Village to sell excess property using Method One or Method Two are unsuccess
ful within 6 months of the Village adopting an Ordinance (Method One) or
Resolution (Method Two), the Village may authorize the sale though village
staff, listing the property with a realtor or by public auction. To use this
Method the Village must publish its intent for three weeks in a paper of
general circulation and the publication must be at least 30 days prior to sale.
(Ord. 761, 1-9-2024)
CHAPTER 19
MUNICIPAL GROCERY OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
1-19-1: Incorporation Of Recitals
1-19-2: Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax Imposed
1-19-3: Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
1-19-4: Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer Both Taxes
1-19-5: Clerk To File Ordinance With Illinois Department Of Revenue
1-19-6: Effective Date
1-19-7: Repeal Of Conflicting Provisions
1-19-8: Severability
1-19-9: Headings/Captions
1-19-10: Publication
1-19-1: INCORPORATION OF RECITALS:
   A.   The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, provides that the
corporate authorities of each municipality may pass all ordinances and make all
rules and regulations proper or necessary, to carry into effect the powers
granted to municipalities, with such fines or penalties as may be deemed
proper;
   B.   The Village of Stockton is a non-home rule Illinois municipality
pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, as amended;
   C.   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
provides that, beginning on January 1, 2026, all Illinois municipalities may
impose a tax "upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at
retail in the municipality" (the "Municipal Grocery Tax") (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   D.   The Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax may be imposed "at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from these sales" (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24); and
   E.   Any Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   F.   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
requires any municipality imposing a Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation
Tax under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24) to
also impose a Service Occupation Tax at the same rate, "upon all persons
engaged, in the municipality, in the business of making sales of service, who,
as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer groceries" as "an
incident to a sale of service" (the "Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax")
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   G.   Any Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   H.   The Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Stockton
believe that it is appropriate, necessary and in the best interests of the
Village of Stockton and its residents, that the village levy a Municipal
Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax as permitted by Section 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24); and
   I.   The Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Stockton
believe that it is appropriate, necessary and in the best interests of the
Village of Stockton and its residents, that the village levy a Municipal
Grocery Service Occupation Tax as permitted by Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24). (Ord. 772, 9-10-2024)
1-19-2: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in this municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
chapter is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-24). (Ord. 772, 9-10-2024)
1-19-3: MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in Section
1-19-2, above. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24). (Ord. 772, 9-10-2024)
1-19-4: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 772, 9-
10-2024)
1-19-5: CLERK TO FILE ORDINANCE WITH ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE:
As required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this chapter
with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before October 1, 2025. (Ord.
772, 9-10-2024)
1-19-6: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The taxes imposed by this chapter shall take effect on the later of:
   A.   January 1, 2026;
   B.   The first day of July next following the adoption and filing of this
chapter with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
April 1; or
   C.   The first day of January next following the adoption and filing of this
chapter with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
October 1. (Ord. 772, 9-10-2024)
1-19-7: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
All ordinances, resolutions and policies or parts thereof, in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter are, to the extent of the conflict, expressly
repealed on the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 772, 9-10-2024)
1-19-8: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter that can be
given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid
provision or invalid application of this chapter is severable. (Ord. 772, 9-10-
2024)
1-19-9: HEADINGS/CAPTIONS:
The headings/captions identifying the various sections and subsections of this
chapter are for reference only and do not define, modify, expand or limit any
of the terms or provisions of the chapter. (Ord. 772, 9-10-2024)
1-19-10: PUBLICATION:
The Clerk is directed by the corporate authorities to publish this chapter in
pamphlet form. This chapter shall be in full force and effect after its passage
and publication in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4. (Ord. 772, 9-10-2024)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
2-1-1: Appointment
2-1-2: General Duties
2-1-3: Quarantine, Vaccination
2-1-1: APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the Board of Health for the Village, which Board shall
consist of three (3) members who shall be appointed by the Village President,
by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. (1966 Code,
§6.101)
2-1-2: GENERAL DUTIES:
The Board of Health shall have the powers and perform the duties assigned to it
by Statute or Village ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to
enforce all ordinances of the Village which relate to public health, or relate
to nuisances. 1
Said Board shall make all necessary rules and regulations for the protection of
the health of the inhabitants of the Village and to guard against the spread of
contagious diseases, and to prevent, by all necessary rules, the induction of
disease, contagious or otherwise, within the corporate limits of the Village. 2
(1966 Code, §6.102)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 6, Chapter 2 of this Code.
2 2. See Title 6, Chapter 1 of this Code.
2-1-3: QUARANTINE, VACCINATION:
The Board of Health is hereby authorized to make such reasonable rules as may
be necessary regarding quarantine and vaccination, for the prevention and
spread of contagious disease, and to quarantine premises where such diseases
occur for such time as may be necessary to protect public health.
The Board shall have the power to prevent persons from entering or leaving
premises on which a case of contagious or epidemic disease occurs or is found,
and to placard the same with signs indicating the nature of such disease and
the existence of the quarantine. (1966 Code, §6.103)
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY (ESDA)
SECTION:
2-2-1: Establishment
2-2-2: Coordinator
2-2-3: Functions
2-2-4: Service as Mobile Support Team
2-2-5: Agreements with Other Political Subdivisions
2-2-6: Emergency Action
2-2-7: Compensation
2-2-8: Reimbursement by State
2-2-9: Purchases and Expenditures
2-2-10: Oath
2-2-11: Office
2-2-12: Appropriation; Levy of Taxes
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Stockton ESDA to prevent, minimize, repair and
alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack,
sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or man-made disaster, in
accordance with "The Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975" 1 .
This ESDA shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional members as may
be selected by the Coordinator.
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
2-2-2: COORDINATOR:
The Coordinator of the Village ESDA shall be appointed by the Village President
and shall serve until removed by same. The Coordinator shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of
the ESDA, subject to the direction and control of the Village President as
provided by Statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the
Coordinator, the Village President or any person designated by him, shall be
and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this
Chapter.
2-2-3: FUNCTIONS:
The Village ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the Village as shall
be prescribed in and by the State ESDA plan and program prepared by the
Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate
limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other
political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as
provided by "The State ESDA Act of 1975".
2-2-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the Village ESDA organization may be designated as
members of a mobile support team created by the Director of the State ESDA as
provided by law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the Coordinator
of the Village ESDA organization.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a Village employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall receive
the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to
such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the Village, while so serving, shall receive from the State
reasonable compensation as provided by law.
2-2-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities
or political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the Village board and by the State
Director of ESDA.
2-2-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State
of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the
Village ESDA to cooperate fully with the State ESDA and with the Governor in
the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
2-2-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the Village, if
called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the time
spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held; members who are not such Village employees or officers shall receive for
such training time such compensation as may be established by the Village
President.
2-2-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The Village Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the State to the Village for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA prescribed by the State Director of ESDA, compensation for
services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside
the Village in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of ESDA, as
provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the State incident to ESDA
activities as provided by law.
2-2-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The Village Board, on recommendation of the Village Coordinator of ESDA, may
authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the Village in a
position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any
nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety,
protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of
such disaster, or from man-made or natural disaster.
In the event of enemy-caused or other disaster, the Village Coordinator of ESDA
is authorized, on behalf of the Village, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the
exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to Village contracts or obligations as authorized
by "The State ESDA Act of 1975", provided that if the Village Board meets at
such time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by
that body.
2-2-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe the following
oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:
"I                   , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am affiliated with the Stockton ESDA organization, I will not
advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State
by force or violence".
2-2-11: OFFICE:
The Village President is authorized to designate space in a Village building,
or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Village President for the Village
ESDA as its office.
2-2-12: APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES:
The Village Board may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the manner
provided by law, and may levy in addition for ESDA purposes only, a tax not to
exceed five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed
value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by
"The State ESDA Act of 1975". (1982 Code)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LICENSES AND PERMITS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Application for License or Permit
3-1-2: Person Subject to License
3-1-3: Fees
3-1-4: License Year
3-1-5: Forms, Signatures
3-1-6: Investigations
3-1-7: Posting License
3-1-8: Change of Location
3-1-9: Building and Premises
3-1-10: Inspections
3-1-11: Nuisances
3-1-12: Unwholesome Businesses Prohibited
3-1-13: Refusal to Grant, Revocation and Suspension of Licenses
3-1-14: Notice in the Case of License Denial or Revocation
3-1-15: Hearings
3-1-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by Village ordinance shall
be made in writing to the Village Clerk, in the absence of provision to the
contrary. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or
license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee
to be paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as
may be needed for the proper guidance of the Village officials in the issuing
of the permit or license applied for. (1966 Code, §15.001)
3-1-2: PERSON SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this Village Code a license is required for the maintenance,
operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or
engaging in any activity or occupation, any person shall be subject to the
requirement if, by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds
himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business or occupation in the Village. (1966 Code, §15.002)
3-1-3: FEES:
In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses
or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is made to
the Village Clerk. When an applicant has not engaged in the business until
after the expiration of part of the current license year, the license fee shall
be prorated and the fee paid for each fraction thereof during which the
business has been or will be conducted. Except as otherwise provided, all
license fees shall become a part of the Corporate Fund. (1966 Code, §15.013)
3-1-4: LICENSE YEAR:
The Village Clerk shall mail to all licensees of the Village a statement of the
time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if an annual one, three
(3) weeks prior to the date of such expiration. Provided, that a failure to
send out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive such notice
shall not excuse the licensee from a failure to obtain a new license, or a
renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operation without a
license. (1966 Code, §15.005)
All annual licenses shall be terminated on the last day of the calendar year of
the Village, where no provision to the contrary is made. (1966 Code, §15.011)
3-1-5: FORMS, SIGNATURES:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the Village Clerk, and each license or permit
issued shall bear the signature of the Village President and Clerk in the
absence of any provision to the contrary. (1966 Code, §§15.003, 15.004)
3-1-6: INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where ordinances of
the Village necessitate inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the Village Clerk shall refer such application to the
officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time
of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation
or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten
(10) days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. The Health Officer
shall make or cause to be made an inspection in regard to such licenses in
connection with the care and handling of food and preventing of nuisances and
the spread of disease, for the protection of health. 1  The Chief of Police
shall make or cause to be made any such inspections relative to the
construction of buildings or other structures. 2 All other investigations,
except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the Chief of Police or by
some other officer designated by the President and Board of Trustees. (1966
Code, §15.012)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 6, Chapters 1 and 2 of this Code.
2 2. See Title 9 of this Code for building regulations.
3-1-7: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the
Village to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used
for such business at all times. A licensee who is not conducting a business
from fixed premises shall have his license on his person when conducting
business. (1966 Code, §15.014; amd. 1982 Code)
3-1-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act
may be changed, provided ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the Village
Clerk, in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided, that the
building requirements of the Village ordinances are complied with. (1966 Code,
§15.007; amd. 1982 Code)
3-1-9: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall
be issued for any thing or act if the premises and building to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the ordinance requirements of the Village.
(1966 Code, §15.006)
3-1-10: INSPECTIONS:
Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance
provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit
thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the
Village who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable
time that admission is requested.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to
secure conformance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations
thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee of the Village whose business is
governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the
Village requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity
for such analysis, upon request.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the President may
revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the
Village who refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to
make such inspection or take such samples, to make the inspection, or take an
adequate sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or
employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection.
Provided, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand
is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of
the Village, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it
is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample. (1966 Code, §15.009)
3-1-11: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to
a nuisance in fact. (1966 Code, §15.008)
3-1-12: UNWHOLESOME BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain any blacksmith shop, foundry, or
livestock stockyards within the Village limits or to operate or maintain any
rendery, tallow chandlery, soap factory, glue factory, tannery, packing plant,
slaughterhouse, or any unwholesome business or any business or factory causing
noxious odors within the Village limits or within one mile thereof.
3-1-13: REFUSAL TO GRANT, REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSES:
   A.   The Village President may refuse to grant any license, and the Village
Board may revoke any license issued under this Title during the term of such
license, for failure by any applicant or licensee to comply with any provision
of this Code or any Statutes of the State of Illinois relating to the business,
occupation or activity for which a license application has been made or for
which a license has been granted; provided, however, that no license shall be
denied or revoked hereunder until notice has been given to the applicant or
licensee as hereinafter provided in Section
3-1-14, a reasonable time has elapsed to enable the applicant or licensee to
comply with the provisions of this Code and applicable State Statutes, and the
applicant or licensee has been given the opportunity to present his case at a
hearing as hereinafter provided in Section
3-1-15. Such denial or revocation of a license may be in addition to any fine
imposed. No person whose license has been revoked as herein provided shall be
eligible for a new license during the period for which the revoked license was
originally issued.
   B.   The Village President may suspend, for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days, any license issued under this Title during the term of such license
upon conviction of the licensee of violation of any provision of this Code or
any Statutes of the State of Illinois relating to the business, occupation or
activity for which such license was issued.
   C.   The Village President may suspend, for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days, without prior warning, notice or hearing, any license issued under
this Title during the term of such license for the failure of any licensee to
comply with any provision of this Code or any Statutes of the State of Illinois
relating to the business, occupation or activity for which such license was
issued if, in the judgment of the Village President, such failure constitutes
an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
   D.   Any person whose license is suspended shall immediately discontinue the
business, occupation or activity for which the license was issued.
   E.   Any person whose license is suspended may, at any time, either petition
in writing, the Village President for a hearing or make written application to
the Village President for reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the
license. Any such hearing shall be held as soon as possible and shall be
conducted by and before the Village President at a time and place designated by
him. Based upon the record of such hearing, the Village President shall make a
finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order
considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be
furnished by the Village President to the person whose license was suspended.
If a written application is made to the Village President for reinspection for
the purpose of reinstatement of the license; then, within ten (10) days
following receipt by the Village President of such application, together with a
written statement signed by the applicant that in the applicant's opinion the
conditions causing suspension of the license have been corrected, the Village
President shall cause a reinspection to be made. If, after such reinspection,
the applicant is found to comply with all applicable provisions of this Code
and Statutes of the State of Illinois, his license shall be reinstated.
3-1-14: NOTICE IN THE CASE OF LICENSE DENIAL OR REVOCATION:
When the Village President or the Village Board discovers that any of the
applied provisions of this Code or any Statutes of the State of Illinois have
not been complied with or have been violated, the Village President shall
notify the applicant or licensee in writing of such noncompliance or violation.
Such notification shall:
   A.   Set forth the specific nature of the noncompliance or violation
discovered.
   B.   Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction
of such noncompliance or violation.
   C.   State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter may result in a denial or an immediate
revocation, as the case may be, of the license.
   D.   State that an opportunity for appeal from any notice or inspection
findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the
Village President and Village Board within the period of time established in
the notice for correction.
Any such notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when it has been
delivered personally to the applicant or licensee or when it has been sent by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
residence or business address of the applicant or licensee.
3-1-15: HEARINGS:
The hearings on license denial or revocation matters shall be conducted by the
Village Board at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the record of
such hearings, the Village President and Village Board shall make a finding and
shall sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order considered at the
hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the
applicant or licensee by the Village President and Village Board. (1982 Code)
CHAPTER 2
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
3-2-1: General Provisions
3-2-1-1: Application of Provisions
3-2-1-2: License Required, Fees
3-2-1-3: Street Shows
3-2-1-4: Miniature Golf Courses
3-2-2: Public Dances
3-2-2-1: License Required, Fees
3-2-2-2: Application for License
3-2-2-3: Investigations
3-2-2-4: Premises
3-2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
3-2-1-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Section, except as to licensing and fees, shall apply to
all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the Village,
whether specifically licensed in another section or chapter of this Code or
not. (1966 Code, §16.101)
3-2-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEES:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the
public and for admittance to which a fee is charged, without having first
obtained a license therefor; provided that the provisions of this Section shall
not be held to apply to those amusements which are specifically licensed by any
other ordinance of the Village.
Application for such license shall be made to the Village Clerk, and shall
comply with all of the general provisions of the ordinances of the Village
relating to such application. For such licenses, the following fees shall be
paid:
Menageries   $ 5.00 per day
Carnivals   $10.00 per day
Exhibitions   $ 5.00 per day
Other Amusements   $ 5.00 per day
(1966 Code, §16.102)
3-2-1-3: STREET SHOWS:
No permit shall be granted or given for any carnival, exhibition, show, dance
or other amusement to be given on any public street or sidewalk or in such
place that the only main accommodation for the public or the audience will be
in a public place, except on order of the Village President and Board of
Trustees. (1966 Code, §16.103; amd. 1982 Code)
3-2-1-4: MINIATURE GOLF COURSES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any miniature golf course in
the Village for admittance to which a fee is charged without having first
secured a license therefor as is herein provided.
   B.   Application for such license shall be made in compliance with the
general provisions relating to applications for licenses as set forth in
Chapter 1 of this Title, and to the zoning regulations of the Village.
   C.   The annual fee for such license shall be twenty dollars ($20.00).
   D.   It shall be unlawful to keep any miniature golf course in the Village
open for business or to permit the same to be used or patronized at any time
between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of
any night. (1966 Code, §16.105)
3-2-2: PUBLIC DANCES:
3-2-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEES:
It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct a public dance in the Village
without having first obtained a license as is herein provided. The annual fee
for public dances to be held on one premises shall be fifty dollars ($50.00),
and the fee for a single dance where no annual license is obtained shall be ten
dollars ($10.00). (1966 Code, §§16.501, 16.503; amd. 1982 Code)
3-2-2-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for such license shall be made in conformance with the provisions
of Chapter 1 of this Title relating to licenses, and shall specify the location
of the proposed dances and the person or organization sponsoring the same.
No such license shall be issued to a person who is not a person of good moral
character, nor to a corporation or organization which is not represented by a
person of good moral character. (1966 Code, §16.502)
3-2-2-3: INVESTIGATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to make or cause to be made an
investigation into the character of each applicant and report the results of
such investigation to the Village President and Board of Trustees. (1966 Code,
§16.504)
3-2-2-4: PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful to conduct a public dance in any hall or place which is
not equipped with sufficient and adequate exits of four feet (4') or more in
width; and no hall or building which is not provided with at least two (2)
exits of four feet (4') or more in width shall be used for such purposes. (1966
Code, §16.506)
CHAPTER 3
LIQUOR REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-3-3: License Required
3-3-4: Applications For Licenses
3-3-5: Persons Not Qualified
3-3-6: Term of Licenses
3-3-7: Examination of Applicant
3-3-8: License Classifications and Fees
3-3-9: Disposition of Fees
3-3-10: Hours of Operation
3-3-11: Transfer of License
3-3-12: Location Restrictions
3-3-13: Premises Requirements and Restrictions
3-3-14: Employees
3-3-15: Minors
3-3-16: Violations
3-3-17: Persons of Nonage, Identification Cards
3-3-18: Possession of Liquor in Motor Vehicle or Open Container
3-3-19: Peddling
3-3-20: Revocation or Suspension of Licenses and Fines
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except as hereinafter provided, words and phrases used in this Chapter shall be
used in the sense given them in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3.01 through
5/1-3.27.
3-3-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   A.   Village President as Commissioner: The Village President is hereby
authorized to be the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and shall be charged
with the administration of the 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq.,
and Village ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor. The
Village President may appoint a person or persons to assist him in the exercise
of the powers and performance of his duties as Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
   B.   List of Licenses: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep or
cause to be kept a complete record of all such licenses issued by him and will
provide the Village Clerk, Treasurer and Chief of Police with copies thereof.
   C.   Entry Powers: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner hereby is given the
power to enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time
upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions
of said State statutes, local ordinances or any rules or regulations adopted by
him or by the Illinois Liquor Commission have been or are being violated, and
at such time to examine the premises of said licensee in connection therewith.
3-3-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale in the Village
any alcoholic liquor without having first obtained a license for each location,
place or premises where such person is located to sell the same.
3-3-4: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES:
   A.   All applications for licenses shall be verified in writing on the form
provided by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner signed by the applicant if an
individual or by an officer or authorized agent accompanied by a certified copy
of a resolution authorizing application if a corporation and if a partnership
by all of the partners.
   B.   All applications for renewal of license shall be made on or before
thirty (30) days prior to the date of expiration thereof.
   C.   Each application shall be accompanied by money order, cash or cashier's
or certified check in the amount of the fee for the license applied for, which
fee shall be returned to the applicant if such application is denied.
   D.   All applications shall contain the following:
      1.   The applicant's name, address, citizenship, date of birth, social
security number, position and percentage of ownership in the applicant
business; and the name, address, citizenship, date of birth, social security
number, position and percentage of ownership in the applicant business of every
sole owner, partner, corporate officer, director, manager and any person who
owns five percent (5%) or more of the shares of the applicant business entity
or parent corporation(s) of the applicant business entity.
      2.   In case of a partnership, the date of formation of the partnership;
if applicable, the date of filing and a copy of the "assumed name" registration
certificate of the business filed with the County Clerk; in the case of an
Illinois corporation, the date of incorporation and a copy of its articles of
incorporation and if a foreign corporation, a copy of its certificate of
authority to transact business in this State.
      3.   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time of
the application.
      4.   If applicant is applying for a license for off-premises consumption
only (see subsection
3-3-8A2), a diagram of the space to be used for liquor display is to accompany
said application indicating that such display is in a highly visible and
controllable location. Applicants for on-premises consumption must provide
proof of liability, including "dram shop" insurance.
      5.   A statement whether the applicant has made application for any
liquor license other than for the subject premises and the disposition thereof.
      6.   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in the provisions of this Chapter or rules and regulations of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes or rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
      7.   A statement whether any previous license has ever been suspended or
revoked.
      8.   A statement that the applicant will conduct his business in
accordance with applicable Federal and State laws.
3-3-5: PERSONS NOT QUALIFIED:
No license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not a resident of the Village.
   B.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   C.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States. (Ord. 300, 11-21-
1989)
   D.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, unless the commissioner determines that such person has been successfully
rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set forth
in such person's application and the commissioner's investigation. The burden
of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant. (Ord. 315, 9-
3-1991)
   E.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is the keeper
of a house of ill fame.
   F.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   G.   A person who, having obtained a license, had same revoked for cause.
   H.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license under a first
application.
   I.   A partnership, unless each of the members of such partnership shall be
qualified to obtain a license.
   J.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock
of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the village.
   K.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   L.   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued.
   M.   Any law enforcing public official, village president, or any member of
the board of trustees; and no such official shall be interested directly in the
manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor except that license may
be granted to such official in relation to premises which are not located
within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the
issuance of such license is approved by the appropriate licensing authority.
   N.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of a federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or shall
have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer for any such violation.
(Ord. 300, 11-21-1989)
3-3-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
Each such license shall terminate on December 31 next following its issuance.
The fee to be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months
which have expired in the year prior to the issuance of the license. (Ord. 300,
11-21-1989)
3-3-7: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT:
The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause
to be examined, under oath, any application for a license or for a renewal
thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been
served as provided for in statute, and to examine or cause to be examined the
books and records of any such applicant or licensee, to hear testimony and take
proofs for his information in the performance of his duties, and for such
purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of the state.
For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the local liquor
control commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on
his behalf. (Ord. 300, 11-21-1989)
3-3-8: LICENSE CLASSIFICATION AND FEES:
   A.   Class A:
      1.   The class A-1 license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor
on the specified premises to the general public for both on premises or off
premises consumption.
      2.   The class A-2 license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor
on the specified premises to the general public for off premises consumption
only.
The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ord. 300, 11-21-1989)
   B.   Class B:
      1.   The Class B license shall be known as a one day liquor license.
Applicants shall be legally recognized religious, charitable or not for profit
organizations or a recognized organization organized for nonpecuniary purposes
acceptable to the Liquor Commissioner. Applicants are subject to the same
review and investigation as provided in this chapter of any other applicant or
licensee.
Such licenses shall be issued in connection with a fair, carnival, bazaar,
street dance, picnic, reception, outdoor outing or such other fundraising or
similar special event open to the public which shall be the principal reason
for the gathering or activity and the consumption of alcoholic beverages being
incidental thereto. All alcoholic beverage consumption authorized by the
license hereunder shall be consumed within the limits of a designated enclosed
or fenced area, owned or utilized by the applicant/licensee, and as clearly set
forth in the license application so that the Liquor Commissioner, general
public and law enforcement officers can easily determine the limits of such
area.
All alcoholic beverages shall be dispensed in returnable or disposable bottles,
cups or cans and adequate containers shall be provided for disposal or
recycling of same.
The Liquor Commissioner, Chief of Police or other law enforcement officer may
order the sale, dispensing and consumption of alcoholic beverages at any
special event halted if, in his or her judgment, any of the provisions of this
chapter are being violated or the public peace is likely to be endangered.
      2.   A Class B licensee may lawfully sell alcoholic beverages from six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the date of its license to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on
the following day. (Ord. 608, 6-9-2015)
      3.   The Class B license shall be issued upon approval of the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner. (Ord. 669, 6-11-2019)
      4.   The license fee for a Class B license shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00). At the time of application, the prospective Class B licensee shall
provide evidence of "dramshop" liability insurance for both the licensee and/or
the owner of the premises where the alcoholic beverages are to be sold/
consumed.
      5.   All regulations that are part of this chapter shall apply in the
same manner and degree as they apply to all other classes of license described
herein.
      6.   No more than one such license shall be issued for a specific date or
particular time period unless in the judgment of the Liquor Commissioner
issuing multiple licenses for a given event will prove to be in the best
interests of the Municipality. Applicants for this license may obtain no more
than four (4) such licenses in any calendar year. (Ord. 608, 6-9-2015)
   C.   Class C:
      1.   The Class C, one day, license shall authorize the sale and
consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensee's premises a day at a time.
      2.   An applicant shall be the owner of a business, or principal
shareholder of an incorporated business, that has been operating and actively
doing business within the Village for at least a one year period prior to such
application being made.
      3.   The annual application fee for a Class C, one day, license shall be
twenty five dollars ($25.00). The fee for each day's use of such license shall
be fifty dollars ($50.00). For a one day use only during a calendar year, the
application fee shall be waived.
      4.   a. The Class C, one day, license shall be issued only by approval of
the Board of Trustees at a regularly scheduled meeting.
         b.   At least twenty four (24) hours prior to each use of such
license, the licensee shall notify the Village Clerk during regular Village
Hall office hours of such planned use and pay the fee specified above.
      5.   At the time of application, the prospective Class C licensee shall
provide evidence of liability insurance(s), including "dramshop" coverage, for
both the prospective licensee and the owner of the premises where the alcoholic
liquor is to be sold and consumed.
      6.   All regulations that are part of this chapter shall apply in the
same manner and degree as they apply to all other classes of licenses and
licensees described herein. (Ord. 316, 9-3-1991)
3-3-9: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
All such fees shall be paid to the village clerk at the time application is
made and shall be forthwith turned over to the village treasurer. In the event
the license applied for is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the
general corporate fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by
the village president and board of trustees for proper action. (Ord. 300, 11-
21-1989)
3-3-10: HOURS OF OPERATION:
All licensees may lawfully be open for the sale and consumption of alcoholic
liquor or the carryout sale of packaged alcoholic beverages Monday through
Sunday from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. until one o'clock (1:00) A.M. The lawful
sale and service of alcoholic liquor on New Year's Eve on licensed premises
shall be extended by one hour to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on New Year's Day.
At all other times the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on licensed
premises or the carryout sale of packaged alcoholic beverages is prohibited.
(Ord. 560, 12-13-2011)
3-3-11: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for one year unless sooner
revoked as provided in this chapter, and shall not constitute property, nor
shall it be subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not
descend by the laws of testate or intestate distribution, but shall cease upon
the death of the licensee; provided, that the executors or administrators of
the estate of any deceased licensee, when such estate consists in part of
alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of
alcoholic liquor under orders of the appropriate court, and may exercise the
privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of
such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such
license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of such licensee.
There shall be a two hundred dollar ($200.00) liquor license change fee charged
to any licensee requesting his license by changed, modified, altered or amended
in any manner after its issuance. The licensee requesting said change shall
promptly pay this fee upon Board action. (Ord. 300, 11-21-1989; amd. Ord. 686,
3-10-2020)
3-3-12: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for the retail sale of any alcoholic liquor within
one hundred feet (100') of any church, school, hospital, home for the aged,
indigent or veterans, or any military or naval station; provided, that this
prohibition shall not apply to clubs, restaurants, food shops or other places
where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on, if
such place of business not exempted shall have been established for such
purpose prior to the taking effect of this chapter; nor to the renewal of a
license for the sale of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred feet
(100') of any church where such church has been established within such one
hundred feet (100') since the issuance of the original license. (Ord. 300, 11-
21-1989)
3-3-13: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Sanitary Conditions: All premises used for the sale of alcoholic
liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition, in full compliance with State statutes and County and
Village ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or
sale of food or alcoholic liquor for human consumption 1 .
   B.   Access From Licensed Premises To Dwelling Quarters: Except in the cases
of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any
premises which has any access which leads from such premises to any other
portion of the same building or structure used for dwelling or lodging purposes
and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for any use by the public.
This provision shall not prevent any connection between such premises and such
other portion of the building or structure which is used only by the licensee,
his family and personal guests.
   C.   View From Street: In premises in which the sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises is licensed, other than in restaurants, hotels or
clubs, or any bowling alley other than one situated on the first or ground
floor, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be
permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside
such premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such
licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times. No booth,
screen, partition or other obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or
lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which
shall prevent a full view of the entire interior of such premises, and the
entire space used by the public must be so located that there shall be a full
view of the same from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where alcoholic
liquor is sold for consumption on the premises shall be continually lighted
during business hours by natural or artificial white lights so that all parts
of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view into
any such licensed premises required by the foregoing provisions shall be
wilfully obscured or obstructed by the licensee, such license may be revoked in
the manner herein provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this
subsection, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to
require the filing of plans, drawings and photographs showing the clearance of
the view as above required.
   D.   Prohibited Types Of Entertainment: It is unlawful for any licensee to:
      1.   Provide any service or performance to patrons, by means of live
entertainment, video, or film, or by any other means, in such a manner as to
expose to public view, with less than fully opaque covering:
         a.   Part or all of male or female genitals, pubic hair, buttocks,
perineum, anal region or pubic region;
         b.   Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates part or all of the male or female genitals, pubic hair, buttocks,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region;
         c.   Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof.
      2.   Provide any service or performance to patrons, by means of live
entertainment, video or film, or by any other means, in such a manner as to
expose to public view:
         a.   The performance of acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, or
deviate sexual conduct;
         b.   The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of the
genitals, buttocks, or female breast.
      3.   Promote the commission of any of the above listed unlawful acts
whether or not said acts take place on the licensed premises.
A violation of this subsection will constitute an unlawful act subjecting the
offender to the penalties of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or suspension or revocation of
license as provided herein. (Ord. 300, 11-21-1989)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 6, Chapter 2 of this Code.
3-3-14: EMPLOYEES:
Every person in charge of licensed premises shall keep himself and his
employees in a clean condition and cleanly clothed and no person who has any
communicable, infectious or contagious disease shall engage in or be employed
in or about such business or premises. (Ord. 300, 11-21-1989)
3-3-15: MINORS:
   A.   No person shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years or to any intoxicated person or to any
person reasonably known to be under legal disability or in need of mental
treatment. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor,
shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the
age of twenty one (21) years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony
or service.
   B.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall misrepresent his
age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in
the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold.
   C.   In places where alcoholic liquor is sold there shall be displayed at
all times in a prominent place a printed card which shall be supplied by the
Village Clerk and which shall read substantially as follows:
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UP TO $500.00 UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF
STOCKTON IF YOU ARE UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE AND PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR
MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC
LIQUOR.
   D.   In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner may revoke or suspend the liquor license for any violation of this
Section.
   E.   No parent or guardian of any minor child shall knowingly permit such
minor child to violate any of the provisions of this Section. No representation
by any minor or other person shall excuse or relieve any licensee under this
Chapter from any of the obligations or restrictions of this Chapter or from the
penalties for the violations thereof.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor license to
permit any employee under the age of eighteen (18) years to perform any
services directly connected with the dispensing or service of alcoholic liquor
or beverages. (Ord. 719, 11-9-2021)
3-3-16: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Licensee Fine: Any holder of a liquor license, his agent or employee
who shall violate the provisions of the foregoing Section shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every offense.
   B.   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this Chapter by any officer, director, manager or
other agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act
of such employer or licensee and said employer or licensee shall be punishable
in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him
personally. Any person convicted under this subsection shall be subject to a
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500,00) for each offense.
3-3-17: PERSONS OF NONAGE, IDENTIFICATION CARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age, to purchase or accept a gift of
alcoholic liquor or to have alcoholic liquor in his possession.
If a licensee, his agents or employees believes or has reason to believe that a
sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the nonage of the
prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand
presentation of some form of positive identification, containing proof of age,
issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties.
No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use the
identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged identification
card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information. No person
shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor in
violation of this Section.
3-3-18: POSSESSION OF LIQUOR IN MOTOR VEHICLE OR OPEN CONTAINER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or have any
alcoholic or intoxicating liquor or beverage in or upon or about the driver's
or passenger's compartment of any motor vehicle, except in the original package
with the seal unbroken. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport,
carry, possess or have any alcoholic or intoxicating liquor or beverage in or
upon or about any public street, public alley, public sidewalk, public park,
public parking lot, or other publicly-maintained way, or privately-owned and/or
maintained parking lot provided for public use within the Village, except where
such alcoholic or intoxicating liquor or beverage is in its original package
with the seal unbroken. Any person convicted under this Section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
3-3-19: PEDDLING:
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the Village.
3-3-20: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSES AND FINES:
   A.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend any license
if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of
Illinois State law or any ordinances or resolutions of the Village or any
applicable rule established by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or the
Illinois Liquor Commission. In lieu of suspension or revocation, the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner may instead levy a fine on the licensee for such
violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each violation; each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in fines
under this Section may be imposed against any licensee during any license year.
Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into the City's General Corporate Fund.
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend a license if the
subject premises are used for or become a place of congregation of undesirable
persons or purposes.
   B.   No such license shall be so revoked or suspended and no licensee shall
be fined except after a public hearing by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
with a three (3) day prior written notice to the licensee affording the
licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
Notice of such hearing shall indicate the time and place of such hearing, the
particular charge and a copy of this Section. Such notice shall be served by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by leaving a copy of said notice
with the licensee or with a person at the licensee's licensed place of
business. Notice shall be deemed made when served.
   C.   If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe that any
continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten
the welfare of the community, he may, upon the issuance of a written order
stating the reason for such conclusion, and without notice or hearing, order
the licensed premises closed for not more than ten (10) days, giving the
licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such
licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses
on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other
business or businesses.
   D.   If he determines, after such hearing, that the license should be
revoked or suspended or that the licensee should be fined, the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner shall, within five (5) days after such hearing, state the
reason or reasons for such determination in a written order and either the
amount of the fine, the period of suspension or that the license has been
revoked, and serve a copy of such order within the five (5) days upon the
licensee.
   E.   Any licensee determined by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to
have violated any of the provisions of Illinois State Law, or any ordinance or
resolution of the Village, or any rule or regulation established by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner or the Illinois Liquor Commission, shall pay to the
Village the cost of the hearing before the Local Liquor Control Commissioner on
such violation. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall determine the costs
incurred by the Village for said hearing, including, but not limited to: court
reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney's fees, the cost
of preparing and mailing or serving notices and orders and all other
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the Village, or such lesser sum as the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner may allow.
   F.   The licensee shall pay said costs to the Village within thirty (30)
days of the notification of the costs by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a
violation of this Section, and may be cause for license suspension or
revocation.
   G.   In the event of an appeal to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission,
payment is due forty (40) days after entry of an order affirming the
determination of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   H.   A review of the decision of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall
be as provided for in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-9 and shall be limited
to a review of the official record of the proceedings of the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner. (Ord. 300, 11-21-89)
CHAPTER 4
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Purpose
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: License
3-4-4: Issuance And Denial
3-4-5: License Fees
3-4-6: License Card, Display
3-4-7: Restrictions Applicable To All Soliciting And Peddling
3-4-8: Do Not Knock Registry
3-4-9: Exceptions
3-4-10: Revocation Of License
3-4-11: Transient Merchants
3-4-12: Exclusions
 
3-4-13: Penalty
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the residents of the Village from the
operations of unreliable solicitors by requiring that solicitors be licensed.
(Ord. 789, 6-10-2025)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPLICANT: Any person that files an application for a solicitation license as
           provided for in this chapter.
APPLICANT:   Any person that files an application for a solicitation license as provided for
             in this chapter.
             Any person with no fixed place of business who goes from house to house, from
PEDDLER:     place to place, or from street to street, carrying or transporting goods, wares,
             or merchandise and offering or exposing the same for sale or making sales and
             deliveries to a purchaser.
             The sale or offering for sale of property, for immediate delivery from other than
             a fixed place of business on private property, including the sale of charitable
PEDDLING:    or religious books or pamphlets. Peddling shall not include the sale of goods by
             charitable organizations for charitable purposes or not to exceed one day in any
             calendar year.
PERSON:      Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, joint venture,
             corporation, trust, or any combination thereof.
PREMISES:    Any occupied building or structure, or any separate dwelling unit contained
             within any occupied building or structure, of any type within the Village.
             Engaging in any one or more of the following activities:
             1.   Seeking or offering to sell, selling and delivering, peddling, bartering,
             exchanging, or obtaining, for profit or any kind of consideration any goods or
             services;
             2.   Distribution to the public - by leaving at a premise or on any public
             property anywhere within the Village - any of the following items of a commercial
             nature: card, circular, handbill, sample, merchandise, newspaper, advertising
             material, document, or other items used in conjunction with solicitation;
SOLICITATION 3.   Asking for or seeking to collect contributions of money, gifts, or goods of
OR SOLICIT:  any kind;
             4.   Selling tickets;
             5.   Seeking to obtain customers for application, purchase of, or enrollment in
             any public utility service or program; and
             6.   Going upon any public property, public street or other right-of-way, or
             private property within the Village for the purpose of engaging in any of the
             activities described in subsections 1 through 5 of this definition.
             Religious proselytizing and political canvassing are not solicitation and are not
             regulated by the provisions of this chapter.
SOLICITOR:   A person who engages in solicitation and any person that employs or engages a
             person or persons to solicit.
             Any person, firm, or corporation who engages temporarily in the business of
TRANSIENT    selling delivering goods, wares, or merchandise within the Village, and who, in
MERCHANT:    the furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building,
             structure, vacant lot, motor vehicle or trailer. (Ord. 789, 6-10-2025)
 
3-4-3: LICENSE:
   A.   Application: It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit within the
Village without first having obtained a license therefor. Any person desiring
to secure a solicitation license shall complete an application form.
Notwithstanding the fact that a group may have several peddlers or solicitors
in the Village at the same time, a separate application shall be filled out for
each individual and each individual shall be required to obtain a separate
license. The application for a license shall be made under oath upon a form
provided by the Village Clerk. Each original application shall be completed by
the applicant in full and shall set forth:
      1.   Name, address and zip code, Drivers License Number, and date of
birth of the applicant.
      2.   If the applicant is employed by another, the name and business
address of such other person, association, organization, company or
corporation.
      3.   A copy of a government-issued identification card
      4.   If the applicant is a corporate entity, evidence that the applicant
is registered to conduct business in the State of Illinois and is in good
standing with the State.
      5.   A valid Illinois Sales Tax Identification Number.
      6.   If the applicant is a charitable organization, as defined by the
Illinois Solicitation for Charity Act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/1 et
seq., evidence that the applicant is registered with the Illinois Attorney
General.
      7.   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of, or
pleaded guilty to, a felony, any crime involving fraud, misrepresentation, or
unauthorized entry to property, or a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or any other municipal, county or state ordinance, statute, or
regulation regulating solicitation.
      8.   Description and license number of any motor vehicle used.
      9.   Nature of the services, subscriptions, or goods offered for sale, or
of the cause for which contributions are sought, or of the information sought.
      10.   Date(s) and time for which a license is desired; provided no
license will be issued for a period in excess of five (5) days.
      11.   Signature of the applicant.
   B.   The Village of Stockton shall conduct a background investigation on all
applicants, employees and/or agents. No permit authorized pursuant to this
article shall be issued to a person who is a registered sex offender as defined
in the Illinois Sex Offender License Act (730 ILCS 150/1, et seq) as amended.
   C.   No license shall be issued to any individual under the age of sixteen
(16).
   D.   Such additional information as the Village of Stockton may deem
necessary to process the application.
   E.   The application shall be submitted to the Village Clerk together with
two (2) photographs (2 inches x 2 inches) acceptable to the Village Clerk as a
likeness for each person who will be soliciting under the requested license and
a copy of the current certificate of registration from the Illinois Department
of Revenue showing applicant's Illinois State Sales Tax number. The Village
Clerk may request such additional identification and credentials as may be
reasonably required. (Ord. 789, 6-10-2025)
3-4-4: ISSUANCE AND DENIAL:
   A.   Issuance: Within ten (10) business days after receiving a complete
application, the Village Clerk shall issue a solicitation license unless the
Village of Stockton, or their designee, determines and finds that:
      1.   Any material statements made in the application are false;
      2.   The applicant or any persons listed on the application has, within
five (5) years prior to the date of the application, been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to: (i) a felony or any crime involving fraud,
misrepresentation, or unauthorized entry to property under the laws of the
State of Illinois, any other state, or the United States; or (ii) a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other municipal, county or
state ordinance, statute, or regulation regulating solicitation; or
      3.   The applicant or any persons listed on the application has had a
previously issued solicitation permit revoked by the Village within five (5)
years prior to the date of the application.
   B.   Denial: If an application is denied, then the Village Clerk will notify
the applicant in writing of the denial, including the reason for the denial.
The notice of denial will be delivered in person at the Village Hall, or by
first class U.S. mail addressed to the address set forth in the application, or
by e-mail if the applicant has requested to receive communications by e-mail.
An application will be deemed denied on the day the notice of denial is
delivered in person or is placed in the U.S. mail, or is sent by e-mail to the
e-mail address provided by the applicant. Any rejection may be appealed by the
applicant to the Village Board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. If an
application is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 789,
6-10-2025)
3-4-5: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   The license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per person plus the
cost of a background check for each person.
   B.   There shall be no fee for licenses for representatives of religious,
political or not for profit organizations. The Village Clerk shall have
authority to decide whether any such organization falls within the meaning of
this section. The Village Clerk may refer any such question to the Village
President or to any board member who shall make the decision. (Ord. 789, 6-10-
2025)
3-4-6: LICENSE CARD, DISPLAY:
   A.   The license shall be in the form of a card suitable for carrying on the
person and shall have securely attached to it one of the two (2) photographs
supplied. It shall carry the name of the individual solicitor and, if
applicable, the name of the employer or licensed entity, a brief description of
the business of the licensee and the dates of the validity of the license.
   B.   At all times when engaged in his business within the Village, the
licensee shall carry the license upon his person and shall exhibit the same on
request of any police officer, any Village official or any person solicited.
   C.   Each license shall be and remain the property of the Village and shall
be returned to the Village Clerk upon its expiration. (Ord. 789, 6-10-2025)
3-4-7: RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SOLICITING AND PEDDLING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person:
      1.    To continue to engage in solicitation or peddling upon any premises
or in any dwelling house, apartment or other residence located thereon after
having been requested by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises
or residence.
      2.   To engage in peddling or solicitation, or particular types of
solicitation or peddling, upon any premises or residence located thereon if
such premises or residence is posted against solicitation or peddling, or
against certain types of solicitation or peddling, by means of a notice,
prominently displayed upon which is printed "No Solicitors or Peddlers ",
"Charitable Organization Solicitors Only", or "Not For Profit Organization
Solicitors Only."
      For purposes of the preceding sentence, a dwelling house, apartment or
other place of residence shall be deemed to be posted against solicitation or
peddling, or posted against certain types of solicitation or peddling, if there
is exhibited, on or near the main entrance to the premises or on or near the
main door to any residence located thereon, a sign which bears one of the
above.
      3.   Who engages in solicitation or peddling to use any plan, scheme or
ruse, or to make any statements, which indicates or implies that the purpose of
such person's solicitation or peddling is other than to obtain orders for or to
make sales of goods or services.
      4.   Who engage in peddling or soliciting to misrepresent the right of a
buyer to rescind or cancel a sale under the provisions of applicable law.
      5.   Who engages in peddling or soliciting to cheat, deceive, or
fraudulently misrepresent, whether through himself or through an employee,
while acting as a peddler or solicitor in the village, or to barter, sell or
peddle any goods, merchandise or wares other than those specified in his or her
application for a license.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether registered/licensed under
this Chapter or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near
any door of a residence located thereon or rap or knock upon the door or create
any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in peddling, commercial soliciting, or fund
soliciting, as herein defined, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m., or other
soliciting, as defined herein, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday or at any time on a Sunday or a state or national holiday.
(Ord. 789, 6-10-2025)
3-4-8: DO NOT KNOCK REGISTRY:
   A.   The do not knock registry shall be established and maintained by the
village clerk's office. Residents may submit their property address for
inclusion on the list without charge.
   B.   Upon approval and issuance of license, each sales person shall be
provided with a copy of the do not knock registry.
   C.   Solicitors shall not solicit at any premises identified on the do not
knock registry. (Ord. 789, 6-10-2025)
3-4-9: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Any officer or employee of the Village, of Jo Daviess County, of the
State of Illinois, of the Federal government or of any subdivision thereof when
engaged on official business.
      2.   The operation of such local activities as school activities, church
activities or community activities.
      3.   Those participating in a Village approved Farmer's Market. (Ord.
789, 6-10-2025)
3-4-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license under this Chapter may be revoked and confiscated by the Chief of
Police or by any Village official because of any violation of any provisions of
this Chapter or of any other ordinance of the Village, or of any State or
Federal law. (Ord. 789, 6-10-2025)
3-4-11: TRANSIENT MERCHANTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for transient merchants to sell or hawk goods,
wares, products or services in the Village, from house to house, place to
place, or street to street, except those persons participating in or on behalf
of duly recognized fundraising events, including but not limited to, religious,
charitable, patriotic, political, or philanthropic events or organizations.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for transient merchants to sell or communicate
door to door, house to house, place to place, or street to street for
commercial, business, religious, political, charitable, patriotic or
philanthropic purposes after sunset or before sunrise on any day. (Ord. 789, 6-
10-2025)
3-4-12: EXCLUSIONS:
A.   This chapter shall not apply to:
   1.   Sales made by agents in the usual course of business with reputable,
bona fide dealers.
   2.   Sales conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
   3.   Bona fide auction sales conducted by an auctioneer duly licensed under
the statutes of the State of Illinois.
   4.   Schwans.
   5.   Vendors at the Stockton Farmers' Market.
   6.   Vendors at Stockton Chamber of Commerce sponsored events.
   7.   Any local or resident charity, church, school or nonprofit organization
(e.g. Stockton youth sports, Boy Scout Troops, Girl Scout Troops, etc.). (Ord.
789, 6-10-2025)
3-4-13: PENALTY:
Except as otherwise provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code, any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 789, 6-10-2025)
CHAPTER 5
OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS
(Rep. by Ord. 522, 11-10-2009)
CHAPTER 6
TRAILER COACH PARKS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: License Required; Plans
3-6-3: License Fee
3-6-4: Character Of Applicant
3-6-5: Trailer Park Requirements
3-6-6: Permanent Use
3-6-7: Exceptions
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
TRAILER COACH: Any vehicle or similar portable structure constructed so as to
permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling by one or more persons.
TRAILER COACH PARK: An area of land on which two (2) or more occupied trailer
coaches are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue, together with any
building, structure or enclosure used as part of the equipment of such park.
(1966 Code, §19.601)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; PLANS:
It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain or operate any trailer coach park
in the village without first having obtained a license therefor. Applications
for such licenses shall be made in writing to the village clerk in compliance
with chapter 1 of this title relating to license applications, and shall
contain the name of the applicant, the location of the proposed park, and the
number of trailers to be accommodated. (1966 Code, §19.602)
Each such application shall be accompanied by a plat or sketch showing the size
and location of the trailer park, including all buildings, structures and
enclosures. (1966 Code, §19.603)
3-6-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for such licenses shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 331, 6-
1-93)
3-6-4: CHARACTER OF APPLICANT:
No such license shall be issued to anyone but a person of good character, nor
to any corporation if any officer thereof is not a person of good character. It
shall be unlawful to hire or keep as manager, superintendent or person in
charge of a trailer coach park, any person who is not a person of good
character, or any person who has been convicted of a felony. (1966 Code,
§19.605)
3-6-5: TRAILER PARK REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Supervision: Each trailer coach park, while operated, shall be in the
charge of a responsible attendant or caretaker at all times, who shall be
responsible, with the licensee, for compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter relating to the conduct of such parks. (1966 Code, §19.606)
   B.   Spaces: Each trailer coach park shall be allotted a site of not less
than one thousand (1,000) square feet. No trailer coach shall be parked closer
than five feet (5') to the side lot lines of a trailer coach park, if the
abutting property is improved property, or closer than ten feet (10') to a
public street, alley or building. Each individual trailer site shall abut or
face on a driveway or clear unoccupied space of not less than twenty feet (20')
in width, which space shall have unobstructed access to a public highway or
alley. There shall be an open space of at least ten feet (10') between the
sides of every trailer coach and at least five feet (5') between the ends of
every trailer coach. (1966 Code, §19.607)
   C.   Water Supply: An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and
domestic purposes from the Municipal water supply shall be supplied to meet the
requirements of said trailer coach park. Said water shall be obtained from
faucets only, conveniently located in said park. No common drinking cups shall
be permitted. A water meter shall be installed on each trailer in each such
park. (1966 Code, §19.608)
   D.   Sanitary Facilities: Each trailer coach park shall provide toilets,
baths and showers which shall comply with the provisions of the Village
ordinances relating thereto, with separate accommodations for men and women,
except where all trailers are independent units. (1966 Code, §19.609)
   E.   Garbage: It shall be the duty of the owner, his agent or caretaker, to
provide for the collection and removal of garbage or other waste material and
to otherwise maintain the park in a clean and sanitary condition. (1966 Code,
§19.610)
   F.   Lights: Trailer parks shall be kept properly and adequately lighted at
all times so that the grounds shall be safe for occupants and visitors. (1966
Code, §19.611)
   G.   Plumbing and Sewer Facilities: Installation of plumbing and sewer
facilities shall comply with the provisions of the State Plumbing Code 1 .
(1966 Code, §19.612)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 225 ILCS 320/40 et seq.
3-6-6: PERMANENT USE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any trailer coach used
for human habitation upon any plot of ground in the Village, except in a
licensed trailer camp.
   B.   This Section shall not apply to any trailer coaches which may have been
maintained and used for human habitation upon a site other than a licensed
trailer camp, upon and prior to May 11, 1966, and which continue to be so
located maintained and used. However, when such trailer coach is once removed
from its location, it may not be restored to said plot of ground, nor may it be
replaced by another trailer coach, except with specific permission of the
Village Board. (1966 Code, §19.613)
3-6-7: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit the storage of any
trailer coach for any length of time when said trailer coach is not used for
living or sleeping purposes. (1966 Code, §19.614)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-7-1: Municipal Retailer's Occupation Tax
3-7-2: Municipal Service Occupation Tax
3-7-3: Municipal Use Tax
3-7-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILER'S OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the Village in the business of
selling tangible personal property at retail at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business in
accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code.
Every such person engaged in such business in the Village shall file, on or
before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department
of Revenue required by section 3 of "An Act in Relation to a Tax Upon Persons
Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for
Use or Consumption", approved June 28, 1933, as amended 1 .
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible property during the preceding month. (Ord. 144, 9-2-69)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
3-7-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the Village in the business of
making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost price of
all tangible personal property transferred by said serviceman either in the
form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident
to the sale of service in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-
5 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for Municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of the Village shall file, on or before the last
day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue
required by section 9 of the Service Occupation Tax Act 1 .
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (Ord. 145, 9-2-69)
 
Notes
1 2. S.H.A. 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
3-7-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code upon the privilege of
using in the Village any item of tangible personal property which is purchased
outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered
with an agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at the rate of one
percent (1%) of the selling price of such tangible property with "selling
price" to have the meaning as defined in the "Use Tax act", approved July 14,
1955 1 .
Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois Department of Revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. (Ord. 169, 11-
5-74)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 35 ILCS 105/2.
CHAPTER 8
RAFFLES; GAMBLING
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: License Requirement; Persons Ineligible
3-8-3: License Fees and Issuance
3-8-4: Conduct Of Raffles; Limitations
3-8-5: Records To Be Kept
3-8-6: Gambling Prohibited
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases in this section shall have the meanings given,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
            An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite
CHARITABLE: number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must
            also confer some benefit on the public.
            An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic
EDUCATION:  instruction in the useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and
            institutions of learning which compare favorable in their scope and intensity
            with a course of study presented in tax supported schools.
            An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of
FRATERNAL:  which is to promote the welfare of its members and provide assistance to the
            general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for
            those who otherwise would be cared for by the government.
            An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of
LABOR:      the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher
            degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET         The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sum expended for
PROCEEDS:   the prizes, local license fees, and other reasonable operating expenses incurred
            as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT:  An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit basis
            with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation.
            A form of lottery, as defined in paragraph 28-2(b) of the “criminal code of 1961"
            conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter, in which:
            A.   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
            represented and differentiated by a number or a combination of numbers or by some
RAFFLE:     other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
            chance.
            B.   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other
            method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of
            persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance
            shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS:  Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the purpose of
            religious worship.
            An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all
            are individuals who are veterans or are spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans,
VETERANS:   the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to
            provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer public
            benefit. (Ord. 735, 10-11-2022)
 
3-8-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENT; PERSONS INELIGIBLE:
   A.   Licenses issued under this chapter are subject to the following
restrictions:
      1.   No person shall conduct raffles or chances without first having
obtained a license therefor pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   The license and application for license must specify the area or
areas within the Village in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the
time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of
determination of the winning chances and the location or locations at which
winning chances will be determined.
      3.   The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to
the not-for-profit character of the prospective licensing organization signed
by the presiding officer or the secretary of that organization.
      4.   A license issued under this chapter shall be only to conduct raffles
as defined in this chapter. Each license is valid for one raffle only.
   B.   The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
      1.   A person who has been convicted of a felony.
      2.   A person who is or who has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter.
      3.   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection B1
or B2 of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in
which such person is active or employed.
      4.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or
B3 of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or
not.
      5.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or
B3 of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle
as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 735, 10-11-2022)
3-8-3: LICENSE FEES AND ISSUANCE:
   A.   The license fee for each raffle conducted pursuant to this chapter
shall be none. The Village Board shall act on a license application within
thirty (30) days within the date of that application.
   B.    The license issued under this chapter shall authorize the sale of
raffle chances only within the borders of the Village limits.
   C.    Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable,
labor, fraternal, educational or veterans’ organizations that operate without
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a
period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license
and which has had during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide
membership in carrying out their objectives. (Ord. 735, 10-11-2022)
3-8-4: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES; LIMITATIONS:
   A.   The Village Board hereby establishes the following limitations in the
conduct of operating the raffles licensed under this chapter:
      1.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall be two hundred and fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00).
      2.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall be two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00).
      3.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      4.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or
sold shall be one (1) year.
   B.   The conducting of raffles is subject to the following further
restrictions:
      1.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must exclusively be devoted to
the lawful purpose of the organization permitted to conduct the raffle.
      2.   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization
may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
      3.   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating
in the management or operation of the raffle.
      4.   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed
under this chapter.
      5.   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified
on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
      6.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in
the conducting of the raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen
(18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined
only when accompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 735, 10-11-2022)
3-8-5: RECORDS TO BE KEPT:
   A.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep records of its
gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion
at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for
each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with receipts or other
records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased items, or
service, or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution
of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of
payment.
   B.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same not for profit
organization pursuant to their license issued by the department of revenue of
the state of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization
shall have separate records of each of its raffles. The person who accounts for
gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall
not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   C.   Each organization licensed to conduct a raffle shall within thirty (30)
days after the conclusion of each raffle report to its membership, and to the
Village Board, by filing a written report with the Village Clerk, its gross
receipts, its expenses and net proceeds from the raffle, and the distribution
of net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
   D.   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 735, 10-11-2022)
3-8-6: GAMBLING PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful to gamble, attend or participate in any gambling
activity, or to make any bet, or to buy or sell any chances or tickets in any
gambling game, arrangement or device, other than as may be provided for herein
and excepting the purchase of lottery tickets as authorized by the state.
   B.   It is unlawful to possess any gambling device or paraphernalia with the
intent to use the same for an unlawful purpose, and any such device or
paraphernalia kept with any such intent may be confiscated by the Chief of
Police.
   C.   It is unlawful to maintain or patronize any establishment maintained
for gambling purposes.
   D.   Notwithstanding the above, the prohibitions provided for in this
chapter shall not apply to any device, equipment, paraphernalia or activity
authorized and operated in full compliance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act,
including but not limited to, video gaming terminals and the equipment
ancillary thereto. (Ord. 735, 10-11-2022)
CHAPTER 9
VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: Imposition Of Annual Fee
3-9-3: Application For Permit
3-9-4: Limitations Upon Placement
3-9-5: Play By Minors Prohibited; Penalties
3-9-6: Penalty For Violation
3-9-7: Inspection Of Records
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   The phrases "video gaming terminal", "licensed establishment",
"licensed fraternal establishment", "licensed veterans' establishment", and
"licensed truck stop establishment" shall have the meanings set forth in the
act 1 .
   B.   "Licensee" shall mean and include all of the establishments defined in
subsection A of this section. (Ord. 572, 6-12-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
3-9-2: IMPOSITION OF ANNUAL FEE:
Commencing upon adoption of this chapter, an annual fee of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) is hereby imposed upon each video gaming terminal operated by
a licensed establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, licensed veterans'
establishment or licensed truck stop establishment within the Village of
Stockton in accordance with the provisions of the act. The fee paid for each
video gaming terminal shall be for the fiscal year May 1 through April 30, and
any fee paid during a fiscal year shall apply until the end of the fiscal year
in which paid. Any continuing operation of a video gaming terminal shall
require the payment of a new annual fee on or before May 1 of each year for the
ensuing fiscal year. (Ord. 572, 6-12-2012; amd. Ord. 722, 1-11-2022)
3-9-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Every licensee shall make application to the village clerk for a permit. Each
licensee and/or videogaming terminal operator shall pay the annual fee for each
video gaming terminal operated. The application shall designate the name of the
licensee, the location of the licensed establishment operating the video gaming
terminal, the number of video gaming terminals operated at that location, and
shall include a copy of the licensee issued by the state of Illinois for the
operation of the video gaming terminal. No permit shall be issued to any person
whose video gaming terminal is not licensed by the state for Illinois for the
location for which the permit is sought. (Ord. 572, 6-12-2012; amd. Ord. 718,
10-12-2021)
3-9-4: LIMITATIONS UPON PLACEMENT:
No video gaming terminal permit shall be issued to, and no video gaming
terminal shall be placed or operated from within, a location in the Village
that does not also have issued to it a license for the sale of alcoholic
beverages at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises.
Notwithstanding any greater limit which may from time to time be established by
the Illinois legislature, no more than six (6) video gaming terminals shall be
allowed, nor permits be issued therefor, under this Ordinance for each licensee
at any one location.
However, a licensed large truck stop establishment, as defined by Statute, may
operate up to ten (10) video gaming terminals on its premises at any time.
(Ord. 572, 6-12-2012; amd. Ord. 678, 12-10-2019; Ord. 708, 6-8-2021)
3-9-5: PLAY BY MINORS PROHIBITED; PENALTIES:
No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be permitted to use or
play a video gaming terminal, and any licensee who shall allow a person under
the age of twenty one (21) years to use or play a video gaming terminal shall
be subject to fine or have his or her license(s) issued hereunder suspended or
revoked, after hearing before the village president acting pursuant to the
procedures applicable to hearings held pursuant to the provisions of section
3-3-20 of this title. (Ord. 572, 6-12-2012)
3-9-6: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter by
operation of a video gaming terminal without having obtained the permit and
paid the annual fee therefor, or by operating a video gaming terminal in
violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be fined an amount not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense, and the license(s)
shall be subject to suspension or revocation as herein provided. Each day that
a video gaming terminal is operated in violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 572, 6-12-2012)
3-9-7: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
Each licensee shall permit the inspection of the books and records of the
licensee pertaining to and reflecting operation of each video gaming terminal
of the licensee at the request of any local official or law enforcement officer
or the state of Illinois at all reasonable times. (Ord. 572, 6-12-2012)
TITLE 4
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Department Created
4-1-2: Chief Of Police
4-1-3: Duties Of Members
4-1-4: Conduct Of Members
4-1-5: Writs (Rep. by correspondence dated 12-15-1997)
4-1-6: Witness Fees
4-1-7: Rules And Regulations
4-1-8: Auxiliary Police
4-1-8-1: Auxiliary Police Corps Established
4-1-8-2: Appointments; Term
4-1-8-3: Not Members Of Police Department; Uniform
4-1-8-4: Powers And Duties
4-1-8-5: Use Of Firearms; Identification Card And Badge
4-1-8-6: Training And Familiarization With Rules And Regulations
4-1-8-7: Termination Of Appointment For Violations
4-1-9: Part Time Police
4-1-10: Collection Of Payment Of Checks For Local Businesses
4-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a police department, an executive department of the
village. The police department shall consist of the chief of police, assistant
chief of police and such other members as may be provided from time to time by
the village president and board of trustees. (1966 Code §5.001)
4-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of chief of police,
who shall be appointed by the village president by and with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees, and he shall be ex officio village marshal
and superintendent of police. (1966 Code §5.002)
   B.   Duties: The chief of police shall be the keeper of the village jail and
shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein. He shall keep such
records and make such reports concerning the activities of his department as
may be required by statute or by the president and board of trustees. The chief
shall be responsible for the performance of the police department in all its
functions, and all persons who are members of the department shall serve
subject to the orders of the chief of police. (1966 Code §5.003)
   C.   Stolen Property, Custody Of: The chief of police shall be the custodian
of all lost and abandoned or stolen property in the village. (1966 Code §5.010)
4-1-3: DUTIES OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the police department to see to the enforcement of all
the ordinances of the village and all statutes applicable herein; and to
preserve order and prevent infractions of the law, and arrest violators
thereof. (1966 Code §5.004)
4-1-4: CONDUCT OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct
himself in a proper and law abiding manner at all times, and to avoid the use
of unnecessary force. Each member of the department shall obey the orders and
directions of his superior. (1966 Code §5.006)
4-1-5: WRITS:
(Rep. by correspondence dated 12-15-1997)
4-1-6: WITNESS FEES:
Any member of the police department shall appear as a witness whenever
necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance of the village or of
any state or federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for
service as witness in any action or suit to which the village is a party; and
fees paid for such services shall be turned over to the chief of police, who
shall deposit the same with the village treasurer. (1966 Code §5.007)
4-1-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the
hours of duty, vacations, uniforms and conduct of the members of the police
department as he shall deem advisable, and such rules when approved by the
village president and board of trustees shall be binding on such members. (1966
Code §5.008)
4-1-8: AUXILIARY POLICE:
4-1-8-1: AUXILIARY POLICE CORPS ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established in the village an auxiliary police corps consisting
of such number of auxiliary policemen, who shall serve the village as
employees, without pay, as the corporate authorities shall from time to time
deem necessary. (1982 Code)
4-1-8-2: APPOINTMENTS; TERM:
Auxiliary policemen shall be appointed by the village president subject to the
advice and consent of the board of trustees, and shall hold such appointments
for a term of one year, or until the same shall be terminated at the discretion
of the village president with the consent of the board of trustees. (1982 Code)
4-1-8-3: NOT MEMBERS OF POLICE DEPARTMENT; UNIFORM:
Auxiliary policemen shall not be members of the regular police department of
the village but shall wear a uniform and identification symbol prescribed by
the chief of police, which uniform and symbol shall be different and distinct
from that worn by the members of the regular police department. (1982 Code)
4-1-8-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Auxiliary policemen shall, at all times, during the performance of their duties
be subject to the direction and control of the chief of police and shall have
the following powers and duties to be exercisable only when properly assigned
to them and when on duty and in uniform:
   A.   To aid in directing traffic in the village.
   B.   To aid in the control of natural or manmade disasters.
   C.   To aid in case of civil disorder.
   D.   To perform normal and regular police duties when assigned by the chief
of police on occasions when it is impracticable for members of the regular
police department to perform normal and regular police duties.
   E.   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons
who break the peace or are found violating any village ordinance or any
criminal law of the state.
   F.   To exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace that the
village president and board of trustees may prescribe. (1982 Code)
4-1-8-5: USE OF FIREARMS; IDENTIFICATION CARD AND BADGE:
Auxiliary policemen shall not carry firearms nor use their police
identification card or badge to cause an arrest to be effected, except when in
uniform and in the performance of their duties. (1982 Code)
4-1-8-6: TRAINING AND FAMILIARIZATION WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Auxiliary policemen, prior to entering upon any of their duties, shall receive
a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures by the
chief of police of the village or his designee, and shall familiarize
themselves with and be subject to and obey all ordinances and other rules,
regulations, policies and procedures governing the conduct and operation of the
regular police department of the village. (1982 Code)
4-1-8-7: TERMINATION OF APPOINTMENT FOR VIOLATIONS:
Violation of any of the rules, regulations, policies and procedures of the
regular police department of the village or of any of the provisions of this
section shall subject an auxiliary policeman to termination of his appointment.
(1982 Code)
4-1-9: PART TIME POLICE:
   A.   Employment: The village of Stockton may employ part time police
officers from time to time as they deem necessary.
   B.   Duties: A part time police officer shall have the responsibilities of a
full time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the general
order of the Stockton police department, but the number of hours a part time
police officer may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part time police
officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full time police
officers. Part time police officers shall be trained in accordance with the
Illinois police training act 1  and the rules and requirements of the ILETSB
(Illinois law enforcement and training and standards bureau).
   C.   Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time police officer
must meet the following standards:
      1.   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      2.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   Pass a medical examination.
      4.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      5.   Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
      6.   Possess no prior felony convictions.
      7.   Any individual who served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged.
   D.   Discipline: Part time police officers shall be under the disciplinary
jurisdiction of the chief of police. Part time police officers serve at the
discretion of the village of Stockton authorities, shall not have any property
rights in said employment and may be removed by the village of Stockton
authorities at any time. Part time police officers shall comply with all
applicable rules and general orders issued by the police department. (Ord. 565,
6-12-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
4-1-10: COLLECTION OF PAYMENT OF CHECKS FOR LOCAL BUSINESSES:
As public service to local businesses, the police department, when contacted,
will pursue its best efforts to collect payment from any person who provides a
local business with a check or other order that is not paid by that person's
depository bank. Any person who fails to have sufficient funds or credit with
their depository bank when a check or other order is issued, or issues a check
or other order that is subsequently presented for payment and dishonored, shall
pay the police department a collection fee which shall be determined by the
board. (Ord. 516, 9-8-2009)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Criminal Code Adopted
4-2-2: Vandalism; Destruction Of Property; Parental Responsibility
4-2-3: Offensive Noises
4-2-4: Loitering
4-2-5: Disturbing The Peace While Intoxicated
4-2-6: Possession Or Use Of Drug Paraphernalia And Controlled Substances
4-2-7: Vagrancy
4-2-1: CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted that certain code known as the "Criminal Code of 1961"
in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., as amended, which code has
been and now is filed in the office of the Village Clerk, and the same is
hereby adopted and represented as fully as if set out at length herein, and the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the Village. (1982
Code)
4-2-2: VANDALISM; DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Illegal Acts; Penalty: Any person who:
      1.   Knowingly damages any property of another without the consent; or
      2.   Recklessly by means of fire or explosive, damages property of
another without his consent; or
      3.   Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another without his consent;
or
      4.   Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without his consent;
or
      5.   Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another without
his consent, and discharges firecrackers, stink bombs or any other offensive
smelling compound and thereby intends to interfere with the use of another of
the land or building, commits an offense punishable by a fine of not less than
three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
When an offender is adjudicated to have been in violation of any offense
prohibited by this Section, the court may, in addition to fining said offender,
require said offender, as part of his sentence, to make restitution or
reparation in an amount not to exceed actual out-of-pocket expenses or loss
proximately caused by the conduct of the offender. The court shall determine
the amount and conditions of payment. Cash bond, in excess of actual court
cost, may be made available as security for the amount of restitution at the
discretion of the court. Where the conditions of payment have not been
satisfied, the court, at any time prior to the time in which restitution is to
be made, may impose an additional period during which the offender shall make
the required restitution. The court shall retain all of the incidents of the
original sentence, including the authority to modify or enlarge the fine to an
amount not in excess of that authorized by this Section, if the conditions of
payment of restitution are violated.
   B.   Parental Responsibility:
      1.   Definitions: As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the terms specified have the meanings ascribed to them:
    LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor by
a circuit court of the State, but does not include a person appointed guardian,
or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act 1 .
   MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years, but not yet
nineteen (19) years of age.
      2.   Responsibility: The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated
minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the
absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental
responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts
described below with the knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in
violation of this Section, upon the occurrence of the events described in
subsection B2a, b and c of this Section:
         a.   An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal
guardian is adjudicated, under either 740 or 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes, to
have been in violation of: 1) any ordinance of the Village prohibiting wilful
or malicious acts causing injury to a person or property; or 2) any statute of
the State of Illinois prohibiting wilful or malicious acts causing injury to a
person or property, where such violation occurred within the Village; and
         b.   Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written
notice thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, or by personal service, with a certificate of personal service
returned, from the Police Department of the Village following said
adjudication; and
         c.   If at any time within one year following receipt of the notice as
set forth in subsection B2b of this Section, said minor is adjudicated to be in
violation of any Village ordinance or statute as described in subsection B2a of
this Section, where such violation has occurred subsequent to the receipt of
notice as described in subsection B2b of this Section and has occurred within
the Village.
      3.   Fine: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of
this Section shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
      4.   Liability:
         a.   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who
resides with such parent or legal guardian is liable for actual damages or loss
proximately caused by the wilful and malicious acts of such minor which cause
injury to person or property.
         b.   The Village or any subdivision or department of the Village, or
any person, partnership, corporation, association or any incorporated or
unincorporated religious, educational or charitable organization is entitled to
enforce the liability imposed in subsection B4a of this Section.
         c.   No recovery under subsection B4a of this Section may exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) in actual damages for each person or legal entity as
provided in subsection B4b of this Section, for such occurrence of such wilful
or malicious actions by the minor causing injury, in addition to taxable court
costs. In determining the damages to be allowed under this provision for
personal injury, only medical, dental and hospital expense may be considered.
         d.   The provisions for recovery under subsection B4a of this Section
shall not affect the recovery of damages in any other cause of action where the
liability of the parent or legal guardian is predicated on a common law basis.
(Ord. 189, 8-1-1978; 1982 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.
4-2-3: OFFENSIVE NOISES:
   A.   Certain Noises Prohibited:
      1.   Animal And Bird Noises: The keeping of any animal or bird which, by
causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose
of any person.
      2.   Construction Noises: The erection (including excavating therefor),
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, and the excavation of
streets and highways, on Sundays, and other days, except between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., unless a permit be
first obtained from the Village Clerk.
      3.   Devices To Attract Attention: Use of any drum, loudspeaker,
amplifier, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting
attention for any purpose.
      4.   Engine Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of
any engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle except
through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or explosive
noises therefrom.
      5.   Handling Merchandise: The creation of any loud and excessive noise
in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and
destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
      6.   Hawking: The hawking of goods, merchandise, or publications in a
loud and boisterous manner.
      7.   Horns And Signal Devices: The sounding of any horn or signal device
on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle while not in motion,
except as danger signal if another vehicle is approaching, apparently out of
control, or to give warning of intent to get under motion, or if in motion,
only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration
of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such device of any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
      8.   Radio And Musical Instruments: The playing of any radio, television
set, phonograph, or any musical or electronic instrument in such a manner or
with such volume, particularly during the hours between eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., or at any time or place, so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or in any
dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
      9.   Shouting And Whistling: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling,
singing, or the making of any other loud noise on the public street, between
the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., or the
making of any such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort, or repose of persons in any school, place of worship, or office, or in
any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the
vicinity.
      10.   Whistle Or Siren: The blowing of any whistle or siren, except to
give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or
danger.
   B.   Exceptions: None of the terms or prohibitions of noises shall apply to
or be enforced against:
      1.   Emergency Vehicles: Any police or fire vehicle or any ambulance or
emergency vehicle while engaged upon emergency business.
      2.   Highway Maintenance And Construction: Excavations or repairs of
bridges, streets, or highways by or on behalf of the Village or the State of
Illinois during the night, when the public safety, welfare, and convenience
renders it impossible to perform such work during the day.
      3.   Public Addresses: The reasonable use of stationary amplifiers or
loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in
character. (Ord. 223, 7-6-1982)
4-2-4: LOITERING:
   A.   Definitions:
    LOITERING: Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the
concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall
also include the colloquial expression "hanging around".
   PARENT OR GUARDIAN: Any adult person having care or custody of a minor,
whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of any court or otherwise.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public has access and shall include any
street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall also include the front or
the neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, or other place of
business, and public grounds, areas, parks, as well as parking lots or other
vacant private property not owned by or under the control of the person charged
with violating this Chapter or in the case of a minor, not owned or under the
control of this parent or guardian.
   B.   Certain Types Of Loitering Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
      1.   Clearly cause an immediate, actual, physical violent reaction from
any person of ordinary sensibilities, which reaction will cause or create a
threat to the peace and good order of the public; or
      2.   So disturb a person of ordinary sensibilities as to cause such
person to react immediately in such a way as to threaten by physical violence
the peace and good order of the public; or
      3.   Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or
      4.   Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a "public
place" as defined in subsection A of this Section. This subsection B4 shall
include the making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or
insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb a person of
ordinary sensibilities so as to cause such person to react immediately in such
a way as to threaten by physical violence the peace and good order of the
public.
No person shall be convicted of loitering in a public place in violation of
this Chapter unless a police officer at the time determined that such person
was causing any of the conditions enumerated hereinabove and such police
officer, at that time, ordered the person to cease the enumerated conduct,
which police order the person refused to obey.
   C.   Loitering By Minors: No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of
eighteen (18) years shall knowingly permit the minor to loiter in violation of
this Chapter.
   D.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever any minor under the age of eighteen (18)
years is adjudicated to be in violation of this Chapter, his parent or guardian
shall be notified of this fact by the Chief of Police or any other person
designated by him to give such notice.
   E.   Presumption: If at any time within thirty (30) days following the
giving of notice as provided in subsection D of this Section, the minor to whom
such notice relates again violates this Chapter, it shall be presumed in the
absence of evidence to the contrary that the minor did so with the knowledge
and permission of his parent or guardian. (Ord. 347, 4-9-1996)
4-2-5: DISTURBING THE PEACE WHILE INTOXICATED:
   A.   Offense. It shall be unlawful for any person in an intoxicated
condition to engage in any behavior which causes a disturbance of the peace
including, but not limited to, making or creating loud noises so as to cause a
disturbance of the peace, acting in an unruly or generally threatening manner
in the presence of any person including a police officer, firefighter, first
responder or EMT; refusing to follow the instructions of a police officer,
firefighter, first responder or EMT; or otherwise disturbing the peace in any
public place or location in the Village.
   B.   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon
a finding of guilt, be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 709, 6-8-2021)
4-2-6: POSSESSION OR USE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES:
   A.   Offense. It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to
use, or to possess with the intent to use, drug paraphernalia [as defined in
the Drug Paraphernalia Control Act, 720 ILCS 600/1 et.seq., specifically 720
ILCS 600/2(d)], or to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq., and 720
ILCS 570-100 et seq.
   B.   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon
a finding of guilt, be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 712, 6-8-2021)
4-2-7: VAGRANCY:
   A.   Adoption by reference. The provisions of Illinois Municipal Code 65
ILCS 5/11-5-4 is herein adopted by reference in order to promote the health and
safety of the residents of the Village of Stockton. It permits municipalities
to pass and enforce regulations to prevent vagrancy;
   B.   Specific activities prohibited. It shall be an act of vagrancy to
urinate and defecate in public; to sleep in a public right of way, sidewalk,
park, other public property or on private property without the owner's consent;
or construct a temporary shelter, tent or structure used for storage in a
public right of way, sidewalk, park or other public property; and
   C.   Relocation. The Village shall offer to provide transportation to locate
any individual in violation of this section to another suitable location. (Ord.
773, 10-8-2024)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Curfew
4-3-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any person of less than seventeen
(17) years to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place,
street or highway in the Village at the following times unless accompanied by a
parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18)
years of age unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this
State authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform:
Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. on Saturday;
Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. on Sunday; and
Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day. (1966 Code, §23.101; 1982 Code)
   B.   Permitting Violation: It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian
or other person to knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to
violate the provisions of subsection A of this Section. (1966 Code, §23.102)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMALS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Cruelty To Animals
4-4-2: Dangerous Animals
4-4-3: Disturbing Peace Or Quiet
4-4-4: Strays
4-4-5: Killing Dangerous Animals
4-4-6: Diseased Animals
4-4-7: Housing
4-4-8: Dog, Cat Or Other Animal Waste
4-4-1: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the village in any way. Any person
who inhumanely beats, overloads, underfeeds or abandons any animal shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this section. (1966 Code §22.101)
4-4-2: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind to
run at large in the village. Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae
naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit
from the village president and board of trustees. (1966 Code §22.102)
4-4-3: DISTURBING PEACE OR QUIET:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess, or harbor
any animal that, by habitual and continuous barking, howling, yelping, bawling
or other loud noise, annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
health, peace, repose and/or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensibilities within the village.
      1.   Any initial violation of this subsection A shall be punishable by
imposition and payment of a fine as provided for in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   Any dog that subsequently disturbs the peace or quiet after the dog has
been found in violation of subsection A of this section is declared hereby to
be a public nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded at any time by a
police officer or animal control officer.
   C.   Upon finding a violation of subsection B of this section, the court
may, in addition to the payment of the penalties provided under section
1-4-1 of this code, order the person to take sufficient action to immediately
abate the nuisance. (Ord. 552, 9-13-2011)
4-4-4: STRAYS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats or
poultry to run at large in the village. Any such animal running at large in any
public place in the village shall be impounded in the manner provided in
chapter 5 of this title. It shall be further unlawful to picket or tie any such
animal in the streets of the village for the purpose of grazing or feeding.
(1966 Code §22.104)
4-4-5: KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
The members of the police department or any other person in the village are
authorized to kill any dangerous animal when it is necessary for the protection
of any person or property. (1966 Code §22.105)
4-4-6: DISEASED ANIMALS:
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an infectious disease
shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any public place whereby
the health of man or beast may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal be
shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof except under the
supervision of the health officer.
It is hereby made the duty of the health officer to secure such disposition of
any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the
communication or spread of contagion or infection, except in cases where the
state veterinarian is empowered to act. (1966 Code §22.106)
4-4-7: HOUSING:
No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is or may
be kept to become unclean or unwholesome, and it shall be unlawful to keep any
live swine, poultry or cattle anywhere in the village. (1966 Code §22.107)
4-4-8: DOG, CAT OR OTHER ANIMAL WASTE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to promptly remove and
dispose of, in a sanitary manner, feces left by a dog, cat or other animal on
property, public or private, other than that of the owner or handler of such
animal.
   B.   It shall be a specific defense to a charge of violating subsection A of
this section that the animal is a certified working dog trained to assist
disabled individuals and that the person charged has a disability which
prevents the individual from promptly removing the excrement and disposing of
it in a sanitary manner.
   C.   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction, be fined no less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) for
a first offense and no more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a
second or a subsequent offense. (Ord. 447, 2-14-2006)
CHAPTER 5
DOGS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Running At Large
4-5-2: Control
4-5-3: Impoundment; Redemption Fees
4-5-4: Care Of Impounded Animals
4-5-5: Dog Bite
4-5-6: Dog Waste
4-5-7: "Dangerous" Or "Vicious" Dogs Defined; Responsibilities Of Owners Or
Keepers
4-5-1: RUNNING AT LARGE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or any person in control of any dog
to permit, or cause to be permitted, his or her dog to run at large in the
village at any time, or to fail to use reasonable care in restraining any dog
that he or she keeps, harbors or otherwise maintains, or that is under his or
her control, from running at large.
   B.   Any dog found running at large is declared hereby to be a public
nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded by any police officer or animal
control officer. In addition, the owner or any person in control of any dog
found running at large shall be liable for the penalties as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   C.   A dog found to be in violation of subsection A of this section must be
microchipped at the owner's expense, if not already microchipped, within twenty
one (21) days after being reclaimed.
   D.   A dog found to be in violation of subsection A of this section a second
time must be spayed/neutered at the owner's expense, if not already spayed/
neutered, within twenty one (21) days after being reclaimed. (Ord. 551, 9-13-
2011)
4-5-2: CONTROL:
It shall be unlawful to permit any dog to go upon any public street, alley or
sidewalk or other public place unless such dog is under control pursuant to
section
4-5-1 of this chapter. (1966 Code §22.202)
4-5-3: IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION FEES:
Any dog found in the village in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be impounded by any police officer or such person as may be
designated by the village board and placed in the village pound or other
suitable place, including placement within the custody of the Jo Daviess County
health department, pursuant to the rules and regulations of said health
department. The village clerk shall, not later than seven (7) days following
the impounding of such dog, notify the owner of the dog in writing, if known,
and if the owner of the dog is not known, by publishing once in a newspaper
published in the village a notice describing the dog and the place and time of
taking said dog. Unless the dog is redeemed and all charges paid as herein
provided, said dog may be sold or destroyed in the most humane manner possible
after the expiration of fourteen (14) days from the time the dog is impounded;
provided, however, that any dog which appears to be suffering from rabies or
other dangerous disease shall not be released but may be destroyed as soon as
compatible with the health laws of the village 1 . Only a person responsible
for the impounding of dogs shall release any impounded dog and then only upon
receipt of evidence that the following charges have been paid to the village
clerk:
Five dollars ($5.00) for the impounding fee, three dollars ($3.00) per day for
each day, or any part thereof, said dog was impounded, and the cost of the
newspaper publication, if any; provided, however, that any dog placed within
the custody of the Jo Daviess County health department shall be released only
after the payment of any additional fees charged by said health department.
It shall be lawful for the chief of police to kill any vicious dog at large
within the limits of the village, which cannot be taken up and impounded. (Ord.
256, 12-4-1984)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 6, chapter 1 of this code.
4-5-4: CARE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
Animals which are kept in the village pound shall be humanely treated and fed.
Such pound shall be under the charge of the chief of police or a person he
appoints, who shall be responsible for the care and custody of the same.
Unredeemed animals shall be disposed of as provided by the Village President
and Board of Trustees. (1966 Code §22.205)
4-5-5: DOG BITE:
Whenever any dog bites a person, the owner of said dog shall immediately notify
the Chief of Police who shall order the dog to be held on the owner's premises
or shall have such dog impounded for a period of ten (10) days. The dog shall
be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again at the end of the
ten (10) day period. (1966 Code §22.206)
4-5-6: DOG WASTE:
   A.   Activity Regulated: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to
promptly remove and dispose of, in a sanitary manner, feces left by a dog being
handled by that person on property, public or private, other than the premises
of the owner or handler of such dog.
   B.   Exception: It is a specific defense to a charge of violating the above
subsection that the dog involved is a certified working dog trained to assist
disabled individuals and that the person charged has a disability which
prevents the individual from removing the excrement and properly disposing of
it in a sanitary manner.
   C.   Penalties: Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for a first violation of this section and not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second and
each subsequent violation of this section. (Ord. 413, 11-13-2001)
4-5-7: "DANGEROUS" OR "VICIOUS" DOGS DEFINED; RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR
KEEPERS:
   A.   Definitions: A "dangerous" or "vicious" dog shall include any or all of
the following, except police dogs or guard dogs acting under the supervision of
a police officer or certified trained dog handler:
      1.   Any dog which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks
a human being or a domestic animal without provocation or justification; or
      2.   Any dog which, without provocation or justification, approaches in a
threatening or terrorizing manner, any person or domestic animal upon the
streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places within the Village; or
      3.   Any dog which is trained to attack or cause injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals, or any dog which has a
history of attacking or propensity to attack people or domestic animals without
provocation or justification.
      4.   For purposes of this subsection a domestic animal means an animal of
a tamed species commonly kept as household pets. (Ord. 671, 7-9-2019)
   B.   Responsibilities Of Owners Of Dangerous Dogs:
      1.   Any person owning a vicious or dangerous dog must register the dog
with the Stockton Police Department and pay a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for such registration.
      2.   Upon registering a vicious or dangerous dog, the owner shall
display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his or her premises warning that
there is a vicious dog on the premises. The sign shall be visible and legible
from the sidewalk and/or street.
      3.   If the animal is kept outdoors in a nonfenced yard, the owner shall
properly confine the dog in a pen or structure with secure sides and a secure
top. If the bottom is not secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded in
the ground no less than two feet (2'), such that the dog cannot dig its way
out. The pen shall be no less than six feet (6') high and contain no less than
fifty (50) square feet of ground space. All pens shall comply with applicable
provisions of the Village's Zoning Ordinance, as well as being located at least
twenty five feet (25') from any neighboring residence or one-half (1/2) the
distance from the outdoor facility and the residence, whichever is greater, so
as not to be offensive to neighboring residents.
      4.   No person owning or harboring a dangerous or vicious dog shall
permit such dog to go beyond the confined area of such person's premises unless
the dog is securely leashed and muzzled. The leash shall not be longer than six
feet (6'). Retractable or flexi leads are not allowed. The leash shall be
controlled by an adult or by a person physically capable of controlling the
dog.
      5.   The owner must provide proof at the time of registration that:
         a.   The homeowner's insurance policy for the residence in which the
dangerous dog is housed contains a rider or a liability clause for dangerous
dogs;
         b.   The dog's rabies vaccination status is current;
         c.   The dog is licensed by the County for the current year; and
         d.   The dog is microchipped with a permanent ID.
      6.   Once a dog is deemed to be dangerous, it shall be neutered or spayed
so as not to propagate vicious characteristics that may be inherent in the
progeny of the dangerous dog.
   C.   Appeal Procedure: Within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice
of the Police Department’s decision that a dog is dangerous, the owner of the
dog may appeal the decision to the Village Board. The owner of the dog shall
send notice of his/her intent to appeal by certified mail to the Chief of
Police with a copy to the Village Clerk. If such an appeal is filed, it shall
be heard within three (3) weeks of its filing. After such hearing, the Village
Board, within seven (7) days of the close of the appeal hearing, may affirm or
reverse the order of the Chief of Police by written decision filed with the
City Clerk and provided to the dog owner.
   The determination of the Village Board shall be final and binding. The dog
shall be kept either in a secure enclosure or shall be impounded at an animal
shelter during the appeal process. Any and all costs for the appeals process
and the impounding of the dog shall be borne by the owner.
   D.   Violations And Penalties; Enforcement:
      1.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Further, each day for which a violation occurs and each
violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
      2.   The Stockton Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this
section.
      3.   Two (2) violations of subsection A1 of this section shall result in
mandatory euthanasia of the dangerous dog. However, the Police Department may
determine that the dog shall be euthanized after only one attack, depending on
its severity. (Ord. 553, 9-13-2011; amd. Ord. 762, 1-9-2024)
CHAPTER 6
FAIR HOUSING POLICY
SECTION:
4-6-1: Declaration Of Policy
4-6-2: Definitions
4-6-3: Prohibited Acts
4-6-4: Penalty
4-6-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
   A.   In furthering the policy of the State of Illinois as expressed in its
constitution and other laws; in order that the safety and general welfare,
peace and health of all inhabitants of the Village may be ensured, it is hereby
declared the policy of the Village to assure equal opportunity to all
residents, regardless of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed, or physical disability to live in decent, sanitary, healthful,
standard living quarters.
   B.   It is the policy of the Village that no owner, lessee, sublessee,
assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm or corporation having the right
to sell, rent, lease (or otherwise control) any housing accommodation and/or
real property within the Village, or any agent of these shall refuse to sell,
rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of
persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such
person or persons or discriminate against any person or persons because of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability in
the conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing
accommodation and/or real property or in the furnishing of facilities and/or
services in connection therewith.
   C.   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum
choice within the community's total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and
economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive
patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities. (Ord. 385, 6-8-
1999)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following
terms shall have the meanings as described in this Section and as used in this
Chapter:
DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS: Housing which is in
sound, clean, and weathertight condition in conformance with applicable local,
State and national codes.
DISCRIMINATE OR DISCRIMINATION: Any difference expressed in any way toward a
person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental or
financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such
sale, exchange, rental, lease or finance because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such person.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any person, institution or business entity of any kind
which loans money to persons and receives as security for said loans a secured
interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Includes any building, structure, or portion thereof
which is used or occupied, maintained, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings, or
any real estate so used, designed or intended for such use.
OWNER: Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or own any
beneficial interest in any real property or who hold legal or equitable title
to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
REAL ESTATE BROKER: Any person, partnership, association, corporation and/or
agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange
or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rental for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of
another.
REAL PROPERTY: Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the Village of Stockton,
Illinois. (Ord. 385, 6-8-1999)
4-6-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sublessee, real
estate broker or salesman, financial institution or employee of the financial
institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the foregoing, to
discriminate against any person or persons because of their race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability with regard to
the sale, exchange or rental, or any dealing concerning any housing
accommodation and/or real property.
In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real estate
broker or employee thereof, owner or other person, or financial institution
dealing with housing or real property in the Village:
   A.   To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the price,
terms, conditions, or privileges of any kind relating to the sale, rental,
lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in the
Village or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection therewith.
   B.   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any
notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any form
of application, for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real property,
or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase,
rental or lease of such real estate, which expresses directly or indirectly any
discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex,
creed, or disability of any person.
   C.   To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing loans,
accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the
purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of
any housing accommodation and/or real property.
   D.   To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease, of any
housing accommodation and/or real property on the grounds of loss of value
because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed, or disability.
   E.   To distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or
statements designed to induce any owner of any housing accommodation and/or
real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or
prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed, or disability of persons in the neighborhood.
   F.   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or the
anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation and/or
real property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale or
listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or
disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in
the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located.
   G.   For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent or
otherwise deal with such owner's housing accommodations and/or real property
with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national origin
or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability.
   H.   For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal with any
housing accommodation and/or real property because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the proposed buyer or
tenant. (Ord. 385, 6-8-1999)
4-6-4: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall
be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. This Section shall in no way
abrogate or impair the right of the Village to specifically enforce, by any
legal means, any of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 385, 6-8-1999)
TITLE 5
TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE
SECTION:
5-1-1: Traffic Code Adopted
5-1-2: Excessive Acceleration
5-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations for
pedestrians and the operation of vehicles, that certain code known as 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended, which Code
has been and now is filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the same is
hereby adopted and represented as fully as if set out at length herein, and the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City. (1982
Code)
5-1-2: EXCESSIVE ACCELERATION:
It shall be an offense to accelerate or decelerate any vehicle in such fashion
as to cause tires of such vehicle to squeal, smoke, or cause the formation of
skid marks on the pavement, or to accelerate in such a manner as to make the
vehicle swerve or fishtail from side to side. (Ord. 242, 10-4-83)
CHAPTER 2
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
SECTION:
5-2-1: No-Parking Places
5-2-2: Snow Removal
5-2-3: Street Cleaning
5-2-4: Time Limit Parking
5-2-5: Towing Cars Away
5-2-6: Parking At Curb
5-2-7: Unauthorized Use Of Parking Places Reserved For Handicapped Persons
5-2-1: NO-PARKING PLACES:
At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the
following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic-control device.
   A.   In any intersection;
   B.   In a crosswalk;
   C.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30')
of a point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone;
   D.   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the
approaching side;
   E.   Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection or crosswalk;
   F.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18');
   G.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
   H.   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway;
   I.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any Fire
Department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any
such station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance when properly
signposted;
   J.   On any sidewalk or parkway;
   K.   At any other place where official signs prohibit parking; and
   L.   At any of the following places:
      On the west side of Willis Street between Benton Street and Summit
Street;
      On the west side of Stockton Street from Queen Street to Summit Street;
      On the west side of Pearl Street from Benton Street to High Street;
      On the east side of Park Street from Front Street to High Street;
      On the south side of Maple Street from Main Street to Pearl Street;
      On the south side of High Street from Simmons Street to Rush Street;
      On the south side of Carpenter Street from Main Street easterly to the
end of the concrete pavement;
      On the south side of Queen Street from Main Street to Simmons Street;
      On the south side of Summit Street between Main Street and Hudson Street;
      On the north side of Prairie Street from Pearl Street easterly to the end
of Prairie Street;
      On both sides of South Main Street from Railroad Avenue southerly to
Carpenter Avenue;
      On both sides of Hudson Street from Route 20 north; and
      Provided, however, the east side of Park Street from Benton Street to
High Street may be used for funeral parking; and provided further, that during
snow removal, the chief of police may from time to time designate the opposite
side of the foregoing streets for no parking.
   M.   Automobiles, trucks and other vehicles shall be prohibited from parking
along either side of North Avenue (marked U.S. Route 20) within the corporate
limits of the Village. Parking will not be permitted within the limits of
intersections as determined by the State from intersection studies.
      Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined
twenty dollars ($20.00) for a first offense; thirty dollars ($30.00) for a
second offense; and fifty dollars ($50.00) for a third or each subsequent
offense. (Ord. 334, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 374, 9-8-1998; Ord. 681, 2-11-2020)
5-2-2: SNOW REMOVAL:
   A.   Streets: It shall be unlawful to park or allow a vehicle to remain
parked or to stand on any public street in the village after a snowfall has
occurred so as to interfere with snow plowing and removal.
   B.   Sidewalks:
      1.   The owner, agent or occupant of any premises shall keep the sidewalk
in front of, along and abutting said premises free from snow and other
obstructions. Such snow or obstructions shall be removed within twenty four
(24) hours after the cessation of the storm.
      2.   In the event the sidewalk shall be covered by ice or sleet, the
owner or occupant of the abutting property shall cover or cause the sidewalk to
be covered by sand, salt or such other material which will make such sidewalk
safe for pedestrians.
      3.   If any owner or occupant of such premises fails or refuses to comply
with the provision of this subsection, then the village's public works
department may proceed to have such sidewalk cleaned and/or made safe and in
such case assess a fee against the abutting property, its owner or occupant in
an amount as determined by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 498, 2-12-2008)
5-2-3: STREET CLEANING:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or portion
thereof in the village at any time when such street is being cleaned. Signs
indicating that a street or portion thereof is being cleaned shall be posted
immediately before the cleaning of the street, and shall be removed after the
cleaning of the street is finished; provided, however, that permanent signs
have been erected on portions of Main Street and Front Street in the village
and it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle from Queen Street to Benton Street
and on Front Street from Hudson to Pearl Streets between the hours of twelve
thirty o'clock (12:30) A.M. and six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. of each
Wednesday morning for the purpose of clearing the streets for street cleaning.
(Ord. 151, 11-3-1970)
5-2-4: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
   A.   Except on Sundays and holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle (including, but not limited to, all motor vehicles, trucks, trailers,
recreational vehicles, campers and/or camping trailers, boats and/or boat
trailers, snowmobiles or motorcycles and/or snowmobile or motorcycle trailers)
for more than the time designated in any consecutive period of time between the
hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Mondays,
Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays or between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on Fridays and Saturdays, or in any other
area so designated by ordinance as a limited parking area during the hours
designated.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to park any such vehicle on any street in the
village for any consecutive period of more than twenty four (24) hours.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to permit any such vehicle to stand on Main Street
from Queen Street to Benton Street and on Front Street from Hudson Street to
Pearl Street between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:
00) A.M. of any day.
   D.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
fined twenty dollars ($20.00) for a first offense; thirty dollars ($30.00) for
a second offense; and fifty dollars ($50.00) for a third or each subsequent
offense. (Ord. 494, 8-14-2007; amd. Ord. 635, 1-11-2017; Ord. 682, 2-11-2020)
5-2-5: TOWING CARS AWAY:
   A.   The police department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty
are hereby authorized to remove and tow away or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle illegally parked in any
place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks
the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any
emergency vehicle; or any vehicle which has been parked in any public street or
other public place for a period of twenty four (24) consecutive hours.
   B.   Cars so towed away shall be stored on any village property or in a
public garage or parking lot and shall be restored to the owner or operator
thereof after payment of the expense incurred by the village in removing and
storing such vehicles. (1966 Code, §13.505)
5-2-6: PARKING AT CURB:
   A.   No vehicle shall be parked except with the right side of such vehicle
next to the curb, except as provided for in subsection B of this section, and
it shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street other than
parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within
twelve inches (12") of the regularly established curb line, except that upon
those streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked
at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks.
   B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles parked in
the following areas:
      On the north side of Summit Street west of Main Street in the parking
area for the Lutheran Church.
      On the north side of Prospect Street.
      On Rush Street.
      On the west side of Pearl Street adjacent to the park. (1966 Code,
§13.506)
5-2-7: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING PLACES RESERVED FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS:
   A.   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing
registration plates or decals issued to a handicapped person or to a disabled
veteran as defined in the Illinois vehicle code, as evidence that the vehicle
is operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled veteran, in any parking
place, including any private or public off street parking facility,
specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign, as designated under
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-301 of the Illinois vehicle code, for motor
vehicles bearing such registration plates.
   B.   Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or private
off street parking facility may, after notifying the police department, remove
or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety any
vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use by the handicapped
which does not display handicapped registration plates or a special decal or
device as required under this section.
   C.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in addition to any costs or charges connected
with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle authorized under this section.
   D.   The fines as established in subsection C of this section shall be
imposed for vehicles parked in spaces for the handicapped that do not display
the registration plates or a special decal or device pursuant to applicable
provisions of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 314, 7-2-1991; amd. Ord. 683, 3-
10-2020)
CHAPTER 3
STREETS AND INTERSECTIONS
SECTION:
5-3-1: One-Way Streets Or Alleys
5-3-2: Yield Right Of Way Streets
5-3-3: Limited Load Streets
5-3-4: Posting Signs
5-3-5: Naming Certain Streets
5-3-1: ONE-WAY STREETS OR ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the opposite direction from that
designated on any street or alley so designated by signage as being one-way.
(Ord. 606, 4-14-2015)
5-3-2: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY STREETS:
The following streets are hereby designated as yield right of way streets and
traffic on the intersecting streets shall yield the right of way to traffic on
the following streets or parts of streets:
Traffic On  Shall Yield To Traffic On
Traffic On                                         Shall Yield To Traffic On
All streets intersecting Simmons Street with the  Simmons Street
exception of Front Avenue
Benton Avenue                                     Park Street
W. Carpenter Avenue                               S. Ward Street
West side of Columbia Avenue                      Rush Street
W. Hess Avenue                                    S. Ward Street
High Avenue                                       Rush Street
Hillside Lane                                     Blackhawk Drive
Hillside Lane                                     N. Rush Street
Hubert Street                                     Grandview Avenue
W. King Avenue                                    S. Ward Street
W. Mapes Avenue                                   N. Rush and N. Pearl Streets
Mathilda Drive                                    Grandview Avenue
Park Street                                       Columbia Avenue
Park Street                                       Front Street
Park Street                                       High Avenue
W. Prairie Avenue                                 N. Rush and N. Pearl Streets
Prospect                                          N. Park and N. Pearl Streets
S. Stockton Street                                E. Queen Avenue
S. Ward Street                                    W. Front Avenue
S. Ward Street                                    Grandview Avenue
W. Washington Avenue                              S. Ward Street
N. Willis Street                                  E. Benton Avenue
N. Willis Street                                  E. High Avenue
N. Willis Street                                  E. Summit Avenue
 
Any street designated by ordinance as a yield right of way street and so posted
is hereby declared to be a yield right of way street.
The driver of a vehicle, in obedience to a yield right of way sign, shall
reduce the speed of his vehicle to not more than twenty (20) miles per hour and
shall yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersecting street either from the right or left or which are approaching so
closely on such intersection as to constitute a hazard; but said driver having
so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with
the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield right of way sign,
such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to
yield the right of way. (Ord. 448, 2-14-2006)
5-3-3: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street in the Village when
the gross weight on the surface of the road through any axle of such vehicle
exceeds sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds.
The following are hereby established as limited load streets and it shall be
unlawful to operate any vehicle with a gross weight which exceeds twenty
thousand (20,000) pounds on said streets without first securing a special
permit from the Village President and Board of Trustees:
   Hudson Street from U.S. Highway Route 20 south to Front Street.
   N. Simmons Street from U.S. Highway Route 20 south to E. Carpenter Avenue.
   N. Simmons Street from U.S. Highway Route 20 north to the Village limits.
   Phelps Avenue from North Simmons Street east two hundred fifty feet (250')
to Stockton Travel Center parking lot (Parcel 17-002-001-07).
The following are hereby established as limited load streets and it shall be
unlawful to operate any vehicle with a gross weight which exceeds twenty five
thousand (25,000) pounds on said streets without first securing a special
permit from the Village President and Board of Trustees.
   Pearl Street from U.S. Highway Route 20 north to Prairie Avenue.
   Pearl Street from U.S. Highway Route 20 south to Front Avenue.
   Prairie Avenue from Pearl Street east to the termination of Prairie Avenue.
   Rush Street from U.S. Highway Route 20 south to Columbia Avenue.
Where lower limits are imposed by ordinance and signs indicating such
limitations are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of
such weight on such street, except for agricultural purposes or for commercial
deliveries in cases where no other access is available and in such instances
such vehicle may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum
distance necessary for such limited purpose. (Ord. 244, 11-1-1983; amd. Ord.
672, 10-8-2019)
5-3-4: POSTING SIGNS:
The chief of the police department shall post or cause to be posted suitable
signs for all through streets, one-way streets or alleys, stop intersections,
yield right of way streets, and all other reasonable signs or control devices
necessary for the reasonable exercise of those police powers enumerated in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208. (Ord. 257, 12-4-1984)
5-3-5: NAMING CERTAIN STREETS:
   A.   All streets in the village running in an east and west direction shall
be designated, known as and called "avenues", with such avenues lying east of
Main Street called "east" and such avenues lying west of Main Street called
"west" as Main Street is the dividing line of said avenues so extending east
and west.
   B.   All streets in the village running in a north and south direction shall
be designated, known as and called "streets", with such streets lying north of
Front Avenue called "north" and such streets lying south of Front Avenue called
"south", as Front Avenue is the dividing line of said streets so extending
north and south.
   C.   There shall be the following exceptions to the above designations
thereby retaining their present names:
   Blackhawk Drive
   Hillside Lane
   Hilltop Terrace
   Mathilda Drive
   Stockton Drive (Ord. 281, 6-2-1987)
CHAPTER 4
MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC AND VEHICLE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Engine Brakes And Compression Brakes Prohibited
5-4-1: ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to use,
operate or cause to use or operate within the village of Stockton, Jo Daviess
County, Illinois, any engine brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any motor vehicle,
except in the case of a true emergency to avoid damage to property or injury to
any person.
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined no less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense and no more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for a second or subsequent offense. (Ord. 441, 10-11-2005)
CHAPTER 5
GOLF CARTS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Authorization
5-5-2: Definitions
5-5-3: Requirements
5-5-4: Permits
5-5-5: Violations
5-5-6: Severability
5-5-1: AUTHORIZATION:
Golf carts, as defined and qualified herein, shall be allowed on village
streets under the conditions as stated herein. (Ord. 513, 7-14-2009)
5-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
GOLF CART: A vehicle designed and intended for the purposes of transporting one
or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment while engaged in
the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf or maintaining the condition
of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
VILLAGE STREETS: Any of the streets maintained by and within the boundaries of
the village of Stockton, Jo Daviess County, Illinois. (Ord. 513, 7-14-2009)
5-5-3: REQUIREMENTS:
All persons age eighteen (18) and older wishing to operate a golf cart on
village streets must comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Provide proof of current liability insurance;
   B.   Register with the village and have the vehicle certified by inspection
by the police chief or his designated representative;
   C.   Follow the "rules concerning alternate transportation for the village
of Stockton", if any, as periodically updated;
   D.   Display village issued decal or sticker on the rear of the vehicle;
   E.   Possess a current, valid driver's license;
   F.   Have a golf cart equipped with the following:
      1.   Horn;
      2.   Brakes and brake lights;
      3.   Turn signals;
      4.   A steering wheel apparatus;
      5.   Tires;
      6.   Rearview mirror;
      7.   Approved "slow moving vehicle" emblem on the rear of the vehicle;
      8.   Red reflector warning devices in both the front and rear;
      9.   Headlights that emit a white light visible from a distance of five
hundred feet (500') to the front which must illuminate when in operation;
      10.   Taillamps that emit a red light visible from at least one hundred
feet (100') from the rear which must be illuminated when in operation;
      11.   Seat belts for operator and all passengers; and
      12.   Any additional requirements made necessary by amendments to the
Illinois vehicle code;
   G.   Obey all traffic laws of the state of Illinois and the village of
Stockton;
   H.   When the golf cart is in operation the operator and any passenger(s)
shall wear a seat belt;
   I.   Operate the vehicle only on village streets, except where prohibited,
and not upon a sidewalk;
   J.   Obey the posted speed limit or twenty five (25) miles per hour,
whichever is less; and
   K.   A person operating or in actual physical control of a golf cart as
described herein on a street while under the influence of drugs or alcohol is
subject to sections 11-500 through 11-502 of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord.
532, 10-12-2010; amd. Ord. 785, 6-10-2025)
5-5-4: PERMITS:
   A.   No person shall operate a qualified golf cart without first obtaining a
permit from the village as provided herein. The cost of the annual permit shall
be fifty dollars ($50.00) or whatever amount may be determined from time to
time by the board of trustees. Evidence of coverage under a recreational
vehicle insurance policy is to be provided to the police department when
obtaining and/or renewing a permit. (Ord. 526, 4-26-2010)
   B.   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the
village and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name and address of applicant;
      2.   Name of insurer carrier and policy number and/or a photocopy of
applicable liability insurance coverage card issued specifically for the
vehicle to be operated pursuant to the permit;
      3.   The serial number, make, model and description of golf cart;
      4.   Such other information as the village may require, including a
release and waiver of liability signed by applicant releasing the village of
Stockton and its employees, and agreeing to indemnify and hold the village
harmless from any and all future claims resulting from the operation of
applicant's golf cart on village streets.
   C.   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must pass an inspection by the village police chief (or
his designee) to ensure that the vehicle is equipped to operate on village
streets and is in compliance with this chapter and the Illinois vehicle code.
      2.   A physically handicapped applicant must submit a certificate signed
by a physician, certifying that the applicant is able to safely operate a
qualified golf cart.
   D.   The village may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a
finding that the holder thereof has violated any provision of this chapter or
there is evidence that the permittee cannot safely operate a qualified golf
cart on village streets. (Ord. 513, 7-14-2009)
5-5-5: VIOLATIONS:
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by payment of
a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) and the village's enforcement costs incurred,
including its attorney fees, for each offense. Any second or subsequent offense
shall result in the revocation of the village permit for a period of not less
than one nor more than three (3) years. To the extent that any violation of
this chapter may also constitute a violation of a criminal statute of the state
of Illinois, the violator shall also be subject to criminal prosecution. (Ord.
513, 7-14-2009)
5-5-6: SEVERABILITY:
   A.   In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any
particular provision of this chapter to be invalid or unenforceable, the
remaining provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be valid and
enforceable.
   B.   Any ordinance, or portion thereof, of the village of Stockton that may
be contrary to this chapter shall be deemed to be repealed. (Ord. 559, 11-8-
2011)
CHAPTER 6
UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Authorization
5-6-2: Definitions
5-6-3: Operation Of Utility Terrain Vehicles
5-6-4: Equipment
5-6-5: Miscellaneous Regulations
5-6-6: Permits
5-6-7: Inspections
5-6-8: Violations; Penalty
5-6-1: AUTHORIZATION:
The operation of utility terrain vehicles for personal transportation upon the
roads and streets subject to the jurisdiction of the Village of Stockton is
allowed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 684, 2-11-
2020)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
                               A commercially designed and manufactured
                               motorized vehicle with four (4) wheels, a
UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLE (UTV): steering wheel, and non-straddle seating that
                               conforms to applicable federal regulations (see
                               49 C.F.R. part 571.500).
                               Village streets means any public right-of-way,
                               roadway, or street located within the corporate
VILLAGE STREETS:               limits of the Village of Stockton, and subject
                               to the jurisdiction of the Village of Stockton,
                               Jo Daviess County, Illinois. (Ord. 684, 2-11-
                               2020)
 
5-6-3: OPERATION OF UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLES:
No person shall operate a UTV upon the streets and roads subject to the
jurisdiction of the Village of Stockton unless such person meets the following
requirements:
   A.   The operator must be twenty one (21) years of age or older.
   B.   The operator must possess a current valid driver's license and be
insured in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois providing for
liability insurance.
   C.   At the time of application the UTV is inspected by the Stockton Police
Deptartment or its designee, and the vehicle certified that it meets all
applicable safety standards and equipment requirements for safe operation.
(Ord. 684, 2-11-2020)
5-6-4: EQUIPMENT:
All UTVs operated on Village roads and streets must be equipped with the
following:
   A.   Brakes and brake lights;
   B.   White front headlight(s) that are illuminated when the vehicle is in
operation and visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500');
   C.   Red rear tail light(s)/lamp(s) that are illuminated when the vehicle is
in operation and visible from a distance of not less than one hundred feet
(100');
   D.   Seat belts for all occupants which must be engaged and in use when the
UTV is in motion;
   E.   Turn signals and horn;
   F.   Orange/red flag mounted on the driver's side of the UTV mounted seven
feet (7') from ground level; and
   G.   Additional requirements upon amendment of the Illinois Motor Vehicle
Code or by Stockton Village ordinance. (Ord. 684, 2-11-2020)
5-6-5: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS:
   A.   Operators of UTVs comply with and obey all traffic laws of the State of
Illinois and the ordinances of the Village of Stockton.
   B.   UTVs shall be operated only on Village streets and not on highways
subject to county, state or federal jurisdiction (i.e. IL Route 78 S (Main
Street) and U.S. Route 20 (North Avenue)) except to cross at intersections with
Village streets.
   C.   UTVs must obey posted speed limits.
   D.   No person shall operate or be in physical control of a UTV on a Village
roadway while impaired or under the influence of alcohol or drugs in violation
of provisions of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
   E.   UTVs may not be operated on Village sidewalks, in parks or parking
areas unless being operated for purposes of snow removal.
   F.   During use, UTV operators must have a copy of his/her approved
application/permit available if requested by law enforcement or Village
personnel. (Ord. 684, 2-11-2020)
5-6-6: PERMITS:
   A.   No person shall operate a UTV upon the Village streets without first
obtaining a permit from the Village Clerk. Permits shall be issued for a period
of one (1) year and renewed annually on a calendar year basis without proration
at a cost of fifty dollars ($50.00). A decal or sticker shall be issued for
each UTV certified to be operated upon the Village's streets upon the payment
of the annual fee(s). The non-transferable decal or sticker must be displayed
on the UTV.
   B.   Applications for permits shall be obtained from the Village Clerk and
once completed be returned with proof of liability insurance on the UTV for
which the permit is requested.
   C.   The application shall include the following information:
      1.   Name, address and age of the applicant;
      2.   Valid driver's license number;
      3.   Name of liability insurance carrier and a copy of the declaration of
coverage issued by the carrier insuring the UTV;
      4.   Make, model, serial number and description of UTV for which the
permit is sought;
      5.   An executed waiver of liability signed by the applicant releasing
the Village of Stockton from any liability for any claim and agreeing to hold
the Village harmless and indemnify it for any claim resulting from the
applicant's operation of the UTV on the Village streets; and
      6.   Such other information as may be requested by the Village. (Ord.
684, 2-11-2020)
5-6-7: INSPECTIONS:
No permit shall be issued by the Village Clerk until the UTV sought to be
permitted is inspected by the Stockton Police Department or its designee. All
UTVs shall be in compliance with this chapter and the Illinois Motor Vehicle
Code as applicable. (Ord. 684, 2-11-2020)
5-6-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense; two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for a second offense; and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third
or each subsequent offense and the suspension or revocation of the violator's
permit to operate a UTV upon the roads and streets of Stockton at the
discretion of the Village of Stockton Police Department. (Ord. 684, 2-11-2020)
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
5-7-1: Adjudication Of Municipal Code Violations; Scope
5-7-2: Administrative Adjudication Procedures Not Exclusive
5-7-3: Composition Of Code Hearing Division; Hearing Officer; Powers And Duties
5-7-4: Administrative Hearing Process
5-7-5: Prima Facie Case; Rules Of Evidence; Standard Of Proof
5-7-6: Subpoenas And Defaults
5-7-7: Continuances
5-7-8: Findings, Decision, Order, And Penalty
5-7-9: Late Fees
5-7-10: Judicial Review
5-7-11: Nonresidential Procedures
5-7-12: Enforcement Of Administrative Orders
5-7-13: Other Methods Of Code And Ordinance Enforcement
5-7-14: Collections Of Fines And Costs
5-7-15: Table Of Offenses Subject To Code Hearing Enforcement
5-7-1: ADJUDICATION OF MUNICIPAL CODE VIOLATIONS; SCOPE:
   A.    The Village of Stockton, pursuant to its authority under 65 ILCS 5/1-
2.2 et seq., hereby establishes the procedure for a system of administrative
adjudication of Village municipal code violations to the extent permitted by
the Illinois Constitution.
   B.   As used in this chapter, a “system of administrative adjudication”
means the adjudication of any violation of the Village of Stockton Municipal
Code through the establishment of a code hearing department except for (i)
building code violations and (ii) any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code
or similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of
vehicles or a reportable offense under §6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625
ILCS 5/6-204) (hereinafter “local adjudication”).
   C.   This chapter is intended to comply with 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2 et seq. and
where there is any conflict or missing information, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2 et seq.
shall supersede this chapter.
   D.   To accomplish the purposes set forth herein, the Illinois Vehicle Code
(625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 et seq.) is adopted in its current form and as it may be
amended from time to time for adjudication of vehicular regulation violations
to the extent permitted by the state constitution.
   E.   The process for administrative adjudication may be consolidated and
organized in conjunction with the process for Seizure and Impoundment of
Vehicles administrative adjudication provided in 10-6-1 et seq. of the Village
of Stockton Municipal Code.
   F.   The process for local adjudication may be consolidated and organized in
conjunction with the process for building code and nuisance administrative
adjudication provided in
9-6-1 et seq. of the Village of Stockton Municipal Code. (Ord. 714, 8-10-2021)
5-7-2: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The adoption by the Village of a system of administrative adjudication
procedures does not preclude the Village from using other methods to enforce
municipal ordinances, including, but not limited to, the prosecution of
violations in the Circuit Court for the 15th Judicial Circuit, Jo Daviess
County, IL. (Ord. 714, 8-10-2021)
5-7-3: COMPOSITION OF CODE HEARING DIVISION; HEARING OFFICER; POWERS AND
DUTIES:
   A.   A code hearing division is hereby established with the authority to
oversee the administrative adjudication process in the Village as herein
provided and shall consist of a hearing officer, administrator, and may include
a computer operator/systems coordinator and hearing room personnel.
   B.   Hearing Officer. Adjudicatory hearings shall be presided over by a
hearing officer. The powers and duties of the hearing officer shall include the
authority to:
      1.   Preside over adjudicatory hearings and hear testimony and accept
evidence that is relevant to the existence of the code violations;
      2.   Administer oaths;
      3.   Upon written request of the parties or their representatives, issue
subpoenas and direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearings;
      4.   Rule upon objections and the admissibility of evidence;
      5.   Preserve and authenticate the record, including the exhibits and
evidence introduced at hearings;
      6.   Weigh the evidence presented at hearings based on relevancy and
competence, determine the credibility of witnesses, and resolve conflicts in
testimony;
      7.   Make ultimate findings and determinations based on the relevant and
competent evidence presented at a hearing of whether a code violation exists
and determine the validity of any notice of impending driver’s license
suspensions; and
      8.   The determination of the hearing officer shall be in writing and
shall include a written finding of fact, decision, and order, including any
fine, costs, penalty or other action with which the defendant must comply
should the defendant be found liable.
   C.   Administrator. The administrator is authorized and directed to:
      1.   Operate and manage this system of adjudicatory hearings;
      2.   Adopt, distribute, and process code violation notices and other
notices as may be required to carry out the purpose of this chapter;
      3.   Collect and process monies paid after a final determination of a
code violation;
      4.   Promulgate internal rules and regulations reasonably required to
operate and maintain this administrative hearing system;
      5.   Certify copies of final determinations of standing and/or parking
regulation violation liability, vehicle compliance violation or any other
ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual
reports verifying the final determination of any violation liability which was
issued in accordance with this chapter or the laws of the state, including 625
ILCS 5/11-208.3, as from time to time amended;
      6.   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and those of 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5; and
      7.   Collect unpaid fines and/or penalties and otherwise pursue all post
judgment remedies available under law, including compromising and settling
violation notices prior to a hearing date which shall be approved by the
hearing officer.
      8.   The administrator shall also be the traffic compliance administrator
as provided in 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3.
   D.   System Coordinator/Computer Operator. The system coordinator/computer
operator shall operate and maintain computer programs for the local
adjudication created hereunder, on a day-to-day basis, including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Input of violation notice information;
      2.   Input of hearing and notice dates;
      3.   Input of fine, costs, and penalty assessments and payments;
      4.   Issuance of receipts for payment;
      5.   Issuance of succeeding notices of hearing dates or court dates,
issuing notice of a final determination of liability, issuing notice of
impending driver’s license suspension, as directed by the administrator or by
the hearing officer in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth;
and
      6.   Maintaining accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
   E.   Hearing Room Personnel. Hearing room personnel shall be qualified off-
duty, full-time, part-time, or auxiliary police officers who are authorized and
directed to:
      1.   Maintain hearing room decorum;
      2.   Exercise authority consistent with those powers granted to courtroom
deputies of the circuit court; and
      3.   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and
as directed by the hearing officer or administrator.
   F.   Selection and Appointment of Personnel. The persons who shall hold the
positions of hearing officer, administrator, computer operator/systems
coordinator, and hearing room personnel under this chapter shall be selected
and appointed according to the following procedures:
      1.   Hearing Officer Appointment. The hearing officer shall be appointed
by the City of East Dubuque Mayor with the consent of the Board and shall serve
pursuant to the terms set forth in an approved agreement. The hearing officer
shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at
least three years and must successfully complete a formal training program,
which instructions on rules of procedure of the administrative hearings that
will be conducted, orientation to each subject area of the code violations that
will be adjudicated, observation of similar administrative hearings, and
participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing
final orders
      2.   Administrator, System Coordinator, and Hearing Room Personnel. The
East Dubuque City Manager shall assign the duties of administrator, system
coordinator, and hearing room personnel to City employees. (Ord. 714, 8-10-
2021)
5-7-4: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCESS:
   A.   Authority. All full-time, part-time, and auxiliary police officers as
well as other specifically appointed individuals shall have the authority to
issue violation notices.
   B.   Content of Violation Notice. When a Village official with authority to
enforce Village ordinances and code provisions makes a determination that a
violation has occurred, he or she shall note the violation on a multiple copy
violation notice and report form that indicates (i) the name and address of the
defendant, (ii) the type and nature of the violation, including the section or
regulation violated, (iii) the date and time the violation was observed, (iv)
the names of witnesses to the violation, (v) the signature and identification
number, if applicable, of the person issuing the violation notice and in the
case of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulations certification
shall be valid if the authorized person issuing the notice signs the notice at
the time of service, (vi) a hearing date along with the time and location of
the hearing, (vii) if applicable, the amount of the fine and notice that the
failure to pay the fine within the allotted time will result in adjudication of
the violation notice through administrative hearing and the penalties for
failing to appear at the administrative hearing, (viii) penalty for any late
fee, and (ix) if applicable, the vehicle make and state registration number.
   C.   Content of Violation Notice for Ordinance Violations Related to Vehicle
Standing, Parking, and Other Compliance Regulations. In addition to the above,
there shall be a section entitled “request for hearing” setting forth that the
registered owner or lessee may appear at the initial administrative hearing to
contest the validity of the violation notice on the date and at the time and
place as specified in the violation notice by:
      1.   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly
identified “request for hearing”;
      2.   If a non-resident of the Village of Stockton or Jo Daviess County,
IL, checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly identified as
“non-resident request for hearing - nonappearance”;
      3.   Placing his name and current address in the place provided;
      4.   Signing his name in the appropriate indicated place;
      5.   Filing the violation notice, with the request for hearing portion
fully completed, with the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator postmarked by the
25th of the month, if the violation notice was issued between the first through
the 15th day of the month, or postmarked by the tenth of the month, if the
violation notice was issued between the 16th and the end of the prior month.
The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator; and
      6.   A clearly marked statement that execution of the non-resident
request for hearing is a waiver of the non-resident’s right to a personal
appearance and that the adjudication will be made based upon the notarized
statement of facts submitted by the non resident and the facts contained in the
violation notice.
   D.   The violation report derived from the violation notice form shall be
forwarded to the code hearing division where a docket number shall be stamped
on all copies of the report and a hearing date shall be noted or filled in. The
hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days
after the notice is served. One copy of the violation notice and report form
shall be maintained in the files of the code hearing division and shall be part
of the record of the hearing; one copy of the report form shall be returned to
the individual representing the Village in the case so that he or she may
prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the
date indicated; and one copy of the report form shall be served either in
person or by first class mail to the defendant along with a summons commanding
the defendant to appear at the hearing. Hand delivery of the violation notice
containing the required content shall be sufficient for in person service.
Service of a violation notice may be made by affixing the original or a
facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully standing or parked vehicle.
   E.   Parties may request in writing to the hearing officer before the
hearing date that the hearing officer issue subpoenas to direct attendance and
testimony of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant documents.
   F.   At the hearing, parties shall be provided with an opportunity to give
testimony, present witnesses, submit evidence, and cross-examine opposing
witnesses. Parties may be represented by legal counsel. (Ord. 714, 8-10-2021)
5-7-5: PRIMA FACIE CASE; RULES OF EVIDENCE; STANDARD OF PROOF:
   A.   A prima facie case may be established if the violation notice served in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter is certified by the issuer. A
violation notice shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal
proceeding.
   B.   The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the
adjudicatory hearing process. Any evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted,
but only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons
in the conduct of their affairs.
   C.   The burden of proof required to sustain a finding of a violation of
Village ordinances shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. (Ord. 714, 8-
10-2021)
5-7-6: SUBPOENAS AND DEFAULTS:
At any time prior to the hearing date, but not less than two (2) working days
prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may,
at the request of either party, direct witness to appear and give testimony at
the hearing. If, on the date set for hearing, the defendant, or his or her
attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in default
and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the
existence of a code violation in the defendant’s absence. (Ord. 714, 8-10-2021)
5-7-7: CONTINUANCES:
No continuance shall be authorized by the hearing officer except in cases in
which a continuance is necessary to protect the rights of the parties. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. (Ord. 714, 8-10-2021)
5-7-8: FINDINGS, DECISION, ORDER, AND PENALTY:
   A.   At the conclusion of a hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination, on the basis of the relevant and competent evidence presented at
the hearing, whether or not a code or ordinance violation exists. The
determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as findings, decision
and order. The findings, decision and order shall include the hearing officer’s
findings of fact, a decision whether or not a code or ordinance violation
exists based upon the findings of fact, and an order.
   B.   If a violation is found, the order shall impose a fine and costs and
may direct the defendant to correct the violation and/or impose such other
sanction as may be appropriate as allowed by law consistent with Village
ordinance; set a date by which the violation must be brought into compliance,
if applicable. The order shall contain a statement of the penalties for late
payment and that any unpaid fines, costs, and penalty assessed is a debt due
and owing the Village after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust
judicial procedures for review. In the case in which a defendant fails to
comply with a judgment ordering the correction of a code violation or imposing
any fine or other sanction as a result of the code violation, the order shall
provide that any expenses incurred by the Village to enforce the judgment,
including, but not limited to, attorney fees, costs, and costs related to
property demolition or foreclosure, shall be a debt due and owing the Village
and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. If a violation is not
found, the order shall include a statement to that effect and dismiss the case.
A copy of the findings, decision and order shall be served on the owner within
five days after issuance by first class mail.
   C.   A notice of judgment entered by default shall be forwarded to any
person who fails to appear and shall contain the same information as a
determination of liability but shall also state that the judgment may be set
aside by the hearing officer if, within twenty-one (21) days of issuance of the
judgment, a petition is received stating what the hearing officer determines is
good cause for failure to appear. The default judgment shall state that it
constitutes a final determination of liability if such petition is not
received, if the petition is denied, or after setting a new hearing date, the
person fails to appear.
   D.   The hearing officer shall not have the authority to impose a penalty of
incarceration or impose a fine in excess of Seven Hundred Fifty and No/100's
Dollars, ($750.00), for each violation except for those offenses under 625 ILCS
5/11-208.3 which shall carry a maximum fine of Five Hundred and No/100's
Dollars, ($500.00). When applicable, however, each day a code provision is
found to have been violated by the defendant shall constitute a separate
offense, and each separate offense subjects the defendant to the fine and
penalty provided by the governing fine or penalty provision. Any fine assessed
is exclusive of any costs imposed. In all cases where there is a determination
of liability by the hearing officer, the hearing officer shall impose
administrative costs (i.e., court costs) in the amount of Twenty-Five and No/
100's Dollars, ($25.00), or greater.
   E.   In addition, and notwithstanding any fines and administrative costs,
the hearing officer may order:
      1.   Costs incurred by the Village for effecting compliance with code
provision(s) for which a defendant has been found to be liable;
      2.   Compliance with the code provision(s) found to have been violated;
and
      3.   Performance of a term of community service in lieu of fines.
   F.   For all vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation
violations, there shall be a second notice sent following a failure to appear
at the hearing. In addition, a notice of final determination shall be sent
following an appearance by the violator and a determination of liability or the
failure to appear by the violator by the final hearing date upon conclusion of
any judicial review. The notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the
following information:
      1.   The date and location of violation cited in the vehicular standing,
parking or compliance regulation violation notice;
      2.   The particular standing, parking or compliance regulation violated;
      3.   The vehicle make and state registration;
      4.   The fine, court costs, and any penalty that may be assessed for late
payment;
      5.   A notice to the registered owner or lessee of their current status,
other than paid in full;
      6.   The date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
alleged violation may be contested on its merits if the individual failed to
appear at his or her first hearing date;
      7.   A statement that failure to either pay the fine and any applicable
penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at
the time and place specified will result in a final determination of vehicle
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation liability for the cited
vehicle violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated as well as
court costs;
      8.   If a final determination occurs, a statement that a final
determination of vehicular standing, parking or compliance violation liability
for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust judicial
procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due
and owing the Village;
      9.   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing
the Village within the time specified may result in the Village’s filing a
complaint in the Circuit Court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a
judgment as provided herein; and
      10.   A warning that failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within
forty-five (45) days of the date of the notice may result in the Village
notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of
suspension proceedings under 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 if they have failed to pay any
fine or penalty due and owing as a result of ten (10) or more vehicular
standing, parking or compliance regulation violations.
   G.   A notice of impending suspension of a person’s driver’s license shall
be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any fine or
penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more vehicular standing,
parking or compliance regulation violations. The notice shall state that the
failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty-five (45) days of the
date of the notice will result in the Village notifying the Secretary of State
that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625
ILCS 5/6-306.5. The notice of impending driver’s license suspension shall be
sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
Secretary of State.
   H.   Notices shall be sent to the registered owner of the cited vehicle at
the address as is recorded with the Secretary of State or sent to the lessee of
the cited vehicle at the address last known to the lessor of the cited vehicle
at the time of the lease by first class mail, postage prepaid.
   I.   Notices not related to vehicular standing, parking or compliance
regulations shall be sent to the last known address of the individual by first
class mail, postage prepaid. (Ord. 714, 8-10-2021)
5-7-9: LATE FEES:
Failing to pay the total fines and costs within twenty-one (21) days of the
issuance of the determination of liability and the exhaustion of or the failure
to exhaust any administrative review procedures as set forth in this chapter
shall result in the imposition of a late payment penalty fee as follows:
   A.   A late payment penalty fee of Fifty and No/100's Dollars, ($50.00),
shall be imposed if the total fines and costs are paid more than twenty-one
(21) days following the issuance of the determination of liability but within
forty-two (42) days following the issuance of the determination of liability.
   B.   A late payment penalty fee of Seventy Five and No/100's Dollars,
($75.00), shall be imposed if the total fines and costs are paid more than
forty-two (42) days following the issuance of the determination of liability
but within sixty-three (63) days following the issuance of the determination of
liability.
   C.   A late payment penalty fee of One Hundred and No/100's Dollars,
($100.00), shall be imposed if the total fines and costs are paid more than
sixty-three (63) days following the issuance of the determination of liability.
(Ord. 714, 8-10-2021)
5-7-10: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by a hearing officer that a code violation does or does not
exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review
and shall be subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law, as
amended. (Ord. 714, 8-10-2021)
5-7-11: NONRESIDENT PROCEDURES:
Non-residents of this Village who have been issued a vehicular standing,
parking or compliance regulation violation notice may contest the alleged
violation on its merits without personally appearing at an administrative
hearing by:
   A.   Completing, in full, the “non-resident request for hearing” section of
the violation notice;
   B.   Signing the non-resident “request for hearing” in the space specified
in the violation notice and acknowledging that his personal appearance is
waived and submitting to an adjudication based upon the notarized statement
filed by him and the facts contained in the violation notice;
   C.   Filing the violation notice with the “request for hearing” section
fully completed with the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator postmarked by the
25th of the month, if the violation notice was issued between the first through
the 15th day of the month, or postmarked by the tenth of the month, if the
violation notice was issued between the 16th and the end of the prior month.
The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator;
   D.   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the administrator
postmarked by the 25th of the month, if the violation notice was issued between
the first through the 15th day of the month, or postmarked by the tenth of the
month, if the violation notice was issued between the 16th and the end of the
prior month. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the
administrator. The acceptance of a “non-resident request for hearing” after the
due date or with cause is at the discretion of the administrator.
      1.   The hearing officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts
set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident as is
contained in the violation notice.
      2.   Notice of the determination of the hearing officer shall be served
upon the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted.
      3.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is
placed in the United States mail.
      4.   All other provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to
nonresidents. (Ord. 714, 8-10-2021)
5-7-12: ENFORCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS:
   A.   Any fine, costs or other sanction imposed that remains unpaid after the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law, shall be considered a debt due and owing to
the Village and enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   B.   Issues such as whether a violation occurred and the penalties that are
imposed may not be raised in any subsequent proceeding after the period for
judicial review has passed.
   C.   Any expenses incurred by the Village to enforce the judgment,
including, but not limited to, attorney’s fees, court costs, and costs related
to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of
competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer, shall be a debt due and owing the
Village and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. However, prior
to any expenses being fixed by a hearing officer, the Village shall provide
notice to the defendant that states that the defendant shall appear at a
hearing before the administrative hearing officer to determine whether the
defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date
for such a hearing, which shall not be less than seven days from the date that
notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven-day period shall begin
to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
   D.   Any person, having received notice and an opportunity for a hearing as
provided in this chapter, who knowingly fails to comply with an order issued by
the hearing officer under this chapter, including the issuance of a subpoena,
shall, if the order is not stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction prior to
its effective date, be guilty of contempt. Contempt shall be enforceable only
through a court proceeding in the Circuit Court of the 15th Judicial Circuit,
Jo Daviess County, IL, and shall be punishable by applicable law. Each day that
a violation continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. It
shall not be a defense that a person came into compliance with an order, sought
judicial review of it, or made efforts to comply with an order, subsequent to
its effective date. (Ord. 714, 8-10-2021)
5-7-13: OTHER METHODS OF CODE AND ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT:
This chapter shall not affect the validity of any other system of adjudication
authorized by state law and Village of Stockton Ordinances. (Ord. 714, 8-10-
2021)
5-7-14: COLLECTIONS OF FINES AND COSTS:
All fines and other monies to be paid to the Village in accordance with this
chapter shall be remitted to the Village and deposited in the appropriate
Village account as designated by the Treasurer, or his or her designee. (Ord.
714, 8-10-2021)
5-7-15: TABLE OF OFFENSES SUBJECT TO CODE HEARING ENFORCEMENT:
The table below provides a non-exhaustive list of violations subject to
adjudication under this chapter:
Animal Violations
Description Municipal Initial Step 2 Step 3 Fee Step 4 Fee Min Fine Max Fine
            Code      Fine    Fee
Description Municipal Initial Step 2 Step 3 Fee Step 4 Fee Min Fine Max Fine
            Code      Fine    Fee
Cruelty to  4-4-1     $100.00 $50.00 $150.00    $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Animals
Dangerous   4-4-2     $100.00 $50.00 $150.00    $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Animals
Noisy       4-4-3     $100.00 $50.00 $150.00    $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Animals
Strays      4-4-4     $100.00 $50.00 $150.00    $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Killing of
Dangerous   4-4-5     $100.00 $50.00 $150.00    $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Animals
Deceased    4-4-6     $100.00 $50.00 $150.00    $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Animals
Housing     4-4-5     $100.00 $50.00 $150.00    $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Dog, Cat or
Other       4-4-8     $100.00 $50.00 $150.00    $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Animal
Waste
Running at  4-5-1     $100.00 $50.00 $150.00    $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Large
Control     4-5-2     $100.00 $50.00 $150.00    $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Dog Bite    4-5-5     $100.00 $50.00 $150.00    $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Dog Waste   4-5-6     $100.00 $50.00 $150.00    $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Dangerous
or Vicious  4-5-7     $100.00 $50.00 $150.00    $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Dogs
 
Parking Violations
Description Municipal Initial Step 2 Step 3 Fee Step 4 Fee Min Fine Max Fine
            Code      Fine    Fee
Description  Municipal Initial Step 2 Step 3 Fee Step 4 Fee Min Fine Max Fine
             Code      Fine    Fee
No Parking   5-2-1 A-K $25.00  $10.00 $85.00     $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
Parking      5-2-1 L   $25.00  $10.00 $85.00     $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
Prohibited
Snow Removal 5-2-2 B   $25.00  $10.00 $85.00     $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
- Sidewalks
Street       5-2-3     $25.00  $10.00 $85.00     $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
Cleaning
Time Limit   5-2-4 A-D $25.00  $10.00 $85.00     $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
Parking
Parking at   5-2-6 A-B $25.00  $10.00 $85.00     $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
Curb
Unauthorized
Parking in   5-2-7     $250.00 $10.00 $85.00     $130.00    $250.00  $500.00
Handicapped
Space
 
Miscellaneous and Compliance Violations
Description Municipal Initial Step 2 Step 3 Fee Step 4 Fee Min Fine Max Fine
            Code      Fine    Fee
Description     Municipal Initial Step 2  Step 3  Step 4 Fee Min Fine Max Fine
                Code      Fine    Fee     Fee
Hours of        3-3-10    $250.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
Operation
Premises
Requirements    3-3-13 A- $250.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
and             D
Restrictions
Minors          3-3-15 A- $250.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
                F
Violations      3-3-16    $250.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
Persons of Non-
Age;            3-3-17    $250.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
Identification
Cards
Possession of
Liquor in motor 3-3-18    $250.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
vehicle - open
container
Peddling
Alcoholic       3-3-19    $250.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
Beverages
Peddlers,
Solicitors and
Transient       3-4-2     $250.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
Merchants
License
Required
Application for 3-4-3 A-G $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
Issuance
Non-
Transferability 3-4-4     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
of License
Carrying and
Display of      3-4-5     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
License
Prohibited      3-4-6     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
Practices
Outdoor
Advertising -   3-5-7     $25.00  $10.00  $85.00  $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
Prohibited Acts
Criminal Code   4-2-1     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Adopted
Vandalism -
Damage to or    4-2-2 A   $250.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
Destruction of
Property
Parental
Responsibility  4-2-2 B   $250.00 $100.00 $200.00 $500.00    $250.00  $750.00
for Vandalism
Offensive       4-2-      $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Noises          3 A.1-10
Loitering       4-2-4     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Disturbing the
Peace While     4-2-5     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Intoxicated
Possession or
Use of Drug     4-2-6     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Paraphernalia
Minors - Curfew 4-3-1     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Traffic Code    5-2-1     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Adopted
Engine Brakes
and Comp.       5-4-1     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Brakes
Prohibited
Golf Carts      5-5-1 et  $100.00 $50.00  $150.00 $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
                seq.
Contagious      6-1-1     $25.00  $10.00  $85.00  $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
Diseases
Food and Food   6-2-1 A-C $25.00  $10.00  $85.00  $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
Sales Premises
Watercourses    6-2-2 A   $25.00  $10.00  $85.00  $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
Refuse Deposits 6-2-3     $25.00  $10.00  $85.00  $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
Dangerous       6-2-5 A   $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Premises
Dangerous Acts  6-2-5 B   $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Spitting        6-2-7     $25.00  $10.00  $85.00  $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
Dense Smoke     6-2-8     $25.00  $10.00  $85.00  $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
Garbage
Deposits on     6-3-2     $25.00  $10.00  $85.00  $130.00    $25.00   $500.00
Street
Weeds -
Declared        6-4-1     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Nuisance
Plants & Weeds
- Height        6-4-2     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Restriction
UTVs            6-5-1 to  $100.00 $50.00  $150.00 $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
                6-5-8
Inoperable
Motor Vehicles  6-6-2     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Prohibition
Purchase of
Tobacco by
Minors -
Misrepresent
Identity or Age 6-8-2     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
or Use False,
Misleading or
Altered
Identification
Use of Tobacco  6-8-3     $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
by Minors
Fire Prevention
and Life Safety 7-2-1     $100.00 $50.00  $150.00 $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Protection
Deposits on     8-1-14    $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Streets
Open Burning    8-1-16 A- $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
                B
Excavations     8-3-1 to  $100.00 $50.00  $150.00 $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
                8-3-11
Tree Ordinance  8-5-1 to  $100.00 $50.00  $150.00 $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
                8-5-10
Water Service   8-6-1 to  $100.00 $50.00  $150.00 $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Regulations     8-6-11
Sewer Service   8-7-1 to  $100.00 $50.00  $150.00 $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Regulations     8-7-9
Standards;
Conformity      9-1-1     $100.00 $50.00  $150.00 $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Required
Building Permit 9-1-2     $100.00 $50.00  $150.00 $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Adoption of     9-1-3     $100.00 $50.00  $150.00 $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Technical Codes
Dangerous       9-1-3 to  $150.00 $100.00 $200.00 $600.00    $150.00  $750.00
Buildings       9-3-4
Open Burning
and             9-6-1 to  $100.00 $50.00  $150.00 $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Recreational    9-6-5
Fires
Development in  9-7-1 to
Flood Plain     9-7-14    $100.00 $50.00  $150.00 $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
Areas
Zoning          11-1-1 to $100.00 $50.00  $150.00 $200.00    $100.00  $500.00
                11-19-1
 
(Ord. 714, 8-10-2021)
TITLE 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Contagious Diseases
6-1-1: CONTAGIOUS DISEASES:
   A.   Report Required: Every physician called in to care for or treat a
person afflicted with a contagious disease or any epidemic disease shall make a
report of the same within twenty four (24) hours after being called in, to the
Health Officer. In case no physician is in attendance, it shall be the duty of
the person in charge or having the care of such person to make a report within
twenty four (24) hours from the time the disease is recognized. (1966 Code,
§21.101)
   B.   Quarantine: The Health Officer shall have charge of the enforcing of
quarantine rules. He shall have the power and the authority to place any
premises within which a contagious disease or an epidemic disease occurs, under
quarantine, and he shall determine the time when quarantine ends. (1966 Code,
§21.102)
   C.   Spreading Contagion: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or
carelessly spread any contagious disease or to so cause the spread of the same.
(1966 Code, §21.102)
   D.   Deliveries to Quarantined Premises: No person engaged in the delivery
of food or drink intended for human consumption shall enter any premises which
are quarantined because of the existence of a contagious or epidemic disease.
No containers or bottles shall be removed from any such premises until the
termination of the quarantine, and no such container which has been so removed
shall be again placed in use for the carrying of food or drink until the same
has been thoroughly sterilized. (1966 Code, §21.104)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Food and Food Sale Premises
6-2-2: Watercourses, Pools
6-2-3: Refuse Deposits
6-2-4: Cemeteries
6-2-5: Dangerous Premises, Acts, Wrecked, Junked or Discarded Vehicles
6-2-6: Drinking Cups
6-2-7: Spitting
6-2-8: Dense Smoke
6-2-9: Nuisances, Abatement
6-2-1: FOOD AND FOOD SALE PREMISES:
   A.   Unwholesome Food: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any
unwholesome or polluted food or drink of any kind in the Village. (1966 Code,
§21.301)
   B.   Sanitary Regulations: All premises used for the sale or storage of food
or drink intended for human consumption shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition. It shall be unlawful to permit any person who is afflicted with a
contagious disease to handle any food or drink intended for human sale.
Premises shall be kept free from flies and vermin of all kinds. (1966 Code,
§21.302)
   C.   Serving Food: Utensils for personal use in all places serving food or
drink to the public shall be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized after each such
usage. (1966 Code, §21.310)
6-2-2: WATERCOURSES, POOLS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or
pollute any watercourse or source of water supply in the Village. (1966 Code,
§21.303)
   B.   Any stagnant pool of water in the Village is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any such nuisance to
remain or exist on any property under his control. (1966 Code, §21.304)
6-2-3: REFUSE DEPOSITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit anywhere in the Village any
uncovered piles of refuse, garbage, offal or carcasses of dead animals. Such
refuse must be buried at least two feet (2') below the surface of the ground or
burned in properly constructed incinerators or otherwise properly disposed of.
Any uncovered pile of refuse is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit the accumulation on
any yard, street, alley, vacant lot or other space in the Village of any
lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones, scrap metal, motor vehicle bodies or
parts, or any similar material, rubbish, or refuse unless said material is 1)
of a type of material considered in the normal and usual course of business or
trade as inventory for resale or manufacturing purposes and 2) stored upon the
premises in question in a manner as neatly as possible under the circumstance
as to avoid unnecessary weed or noxious plant growth or unsightly views to the
general public. (Ord. 224, 7-6-82)
6-2-4: CEMETERIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish a cemetery or to bury any
person within the Village limits, or within one mile thereof, except in an
established cemetery. (1966 Code, §21.306)
6-2-5: DANGEROUS PREMISES, ACTS, WRECKED, JUNKED OR DISCARDED VEHICLES:
   A.   Premises: It shall be unlawful to permit any building, structure or
place to remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health in
any way. Any such structure, building or place is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
   B.   Acts: It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the
public health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public. (Ord. 258,
12-4-84)
   C.   Wrecked, Junked or Discarded Vehicles:
      1.   Definitions:
    JUNKED VEHICLE Any vehicle defined herein, not licensed for the current
year as required by law or having one or more of the following characteristics:
            (1)   Broken or cracked windshield, window, headlight, taillight or
any other cracked or broken glass;
            (2)   Deflated tires; or
            (3)   Inoperable because of its state of disrepair or defective
condition.
   VEHICLE Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public or private road or highway, except
devices moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or
snowmobiles as defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act.
      2.   Wrecked, junked or discarded vehicles are hereby declared to be
nuisances and no person in charge or control of any property within the
Village, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow
any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to
remain on such property longer than seven (7) days, except that this paragraph
shall not apply with regard to such vehicle when it is in an enclosed building
or when it is on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful
place and manner and when necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise.
      3.   The Chief of Police or any member of his Department designated by
him is hereby authorized to abate such nuisance and may enter upon private
property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting such vehicle,
posting notice thereon, and removing and impounding such vehicle. The owner of
the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing and storage costs and shall pay
same before such vehicle is released to his custody or possession.
      4.   Anyone convicted of violating the above provisions shall be fined
not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day such violation continues. (Ord. 295, 1-3-89)
6-2-6: DRINKING CUPS:
It shall be unlawful to maintain any common drinking cup, dipper or other
similar utensil, for the use of more than one person, in any public hall,
theater, store or other place frequented by the public. (1966 Code, §21.309)
6-2-7: SPITTING:
It shall be unlawful to spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk or other
public place, or on the floor or walls of any store, theater, hall, public
vehicle, or other place frequented by the public, or to which the public is
invited. (1966 Code, §21.312)
6-2-8: DENSE SMOKE:
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any
fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or any other agency in the Village so as to
cause annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof. (1966 Code, §21.313)
6-2-9: NUISANCES, ABATEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any
nuisance on any property under his control. The Chief of Police and the Health
Officer are each hereby authorized to abate any such nuisance existing in the
Village, whether such nuisance is specifically recognized by ordinance or not.
(1966 Code, §21.311)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Garbage Receptacles
6-3-3: Replacement Of Garbage Receptacles
6-3-4: Deposits in Streets
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are herewith defined
as follows:
 
            A person, corporation or partnership performing residential uncontaminated
CONTRACTOR: recycling collections, landscape waste collections, bulky household waste
            collections and garbage collection and disposal under contract with the
            Village.
            All animal and vegetable matter from the handling, preparation, cooking,
GARBAGE:    consumption, storage, decay or decomposition of food (meats, fish, fowl,
            fruits, grains) and/or any other animal or vegetable matter whatsoever, subject
            to decay which may putrefy or generate noxious or offensive odors.
OWNER:      Any person, agent, firm or corporation having legal or equitable interest in
            the property.
RECEPTACLE: A toter as provided by the contracted contractor.
REFUSE:     Solid waste material, except body waste.
            Any single-family or multifamily dwelling of six or fewer units within the
RESIDENTIAL corporate limits of the Villageto which Village water and/or Village sewer
DWELLING    services are currently provided. The term “residential dwelling unit” shall
UNIT:       also include mobile home dwellings which become part of the Village’s
            residential household waste program.
RESIDENTIAL Household waste generated by a producer at a residential dwelling unit. (Ord.
HOUSEHOLD   763, 1-9-2024)
WASTE:
 
6-3-2: GARBAGE RECEPTACLES:
Residential household waste receptacles will be provided by the waste
contractor and may be stored at the rear of the dwelling unit or they can be
placed in a suitable place out of public view when not placed for collection.
Toters will be provided by the contractor and will remain with the property
regardless of whether the ownership or occupancy of the residence changes.
Damaged toter receptacles will be replaced by the contractor. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, receptacles damaged due to improper use by the residential
dwelling unit owner and/or occupants will be the responsibility of the
residential dwelling unit owner and/or occupants to replace. (Ord. 763, 1-9-
2024)
6-3-3: PLACEMENT OF GARBAGE RECEPTACLES:
Receptacles shall be placed at or near the curb (or as close to the roadway as
practicable without interfering with or endangering the movement of vehicles or
pedestrians) in front of each dwelling unit where they can be seen from the
street or road on scheduled pick-up days. Receptacles must be returned to their
dwelling or out of public view by 6:00 p.m. on the day of collection. (Ord.
763, 1-9-2024)
6-3-4: DEPOSITS IN STREETS:
No garbage or refuse of any kind shall be deposited in any street, alley or
public way, excepting as is provided in this Chapter; and no such refuse shall
be so placed that it can be blown about or scattered by the wind. (1966 Code,
§21.204; amd. Ord. 763, 1-9-2024)
CHAPTER 4
PLANTS AND WEEDS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Weeds, Declared A Nuisance
6-4-2: Height Restrictions And Setbacks
6-4-3: Barberry Bushes
6-4-4: Removal; Notice
6-4-5: Abatement
6-4-6: Lien
6-4-7: Foreclosure Of Lien
6-4-8: Native Planting Lot(s)
6-4-9:   Penalty
6-4-1: WEEDS, DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds
of a like kind, as defined in the Illinois Noxious Weed Law (505 ILCS 100/2(5)
found growing in or on any lot, tract or parcel of land in the village are
hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such
weeds to grow or remain in any such place. (Ord. 627, 9-13-2016; amd. Ord. 746,
7-11-2023)
6-4-2: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS AND SETBACKS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit plants, weeds, grass or other
vegetation other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants to grow
to a height exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in the village, except native
plantings on native planting lots as defined or in a natural or buffer area as
provided under 525 ILCS 30/1 et seq. Any such plants or weeds exceeding such
height are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for anyone to plant anything other than grass
within a five foot (5') setback of all property lines with the exception of
terrace trees preapproved by the Village. (Ord. 627, 9-13-2016; amd. Ord. 742,
5-9-2023; Ord. 746, 7-11-2023)
6-4-3: BARBERRY BUSHES:
It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to plant or permit the growth of the
species of tall, common or European barberry, further known as Barberis
vulgeris or its horticultural varieties, anywhere within the village. (Ord.
627, 9-13-2016)
6-4-4: REMOVAL; NOTICE:
The village shall serve or cause to be served a notice upon the owner, agent or
occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants are growing hi violation of
the provisions of this chapter and to demand abatement of the nuisance within
seven (7) days from the date of said notice. If a violation reoccurs within the
same calendar year, demand for abatement of the subsequent nuisance shall be
five (5) days. A notice placed in the U.S. mail, proper first-class postage
prepaid, shall be deemed served. The owner’s claim that notice was not received
shall not affect the right of the village to proceed as provided in the
following section. (Ord. 627, 9-13-2016; amd. Ord. 746, 7-11-2023)
6-4-5: ABATEMENT:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within seven (7) days from
the date of the notice specified above, or if a violation reoccurs within the
same calendar year, if the person so served does not abate the nuisance within
five (5) days, the village may serve said person with a citation for a
violation of this chapter as well as proceeding to enter upon the premises to
abate such nuisance, by cutting or removing the overgrown weeds, grass, plants
or other vegetation or native plantings, keeping an account of the expense of
doing so. Such expense shall be charged to and paid by such owner, agent or
occupant of the subject premises. (Ord. 627, 9-13-2016; amd. Ord. 746, 7-11-
2023)
6-4-6: LIEN:
Charges for such abatement (weed cutting and removal) shall be a lien upon the
subject premises. Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for thirty
(30) days after it has been rendered, the village clerk may file a statement of
claim of lien with the county recorder's office. This statement shall provide a
legal description of the subject premises, the expenses and costs incurred, the
date the weeds were cut, and indication that the village claims a lien for the
specified amount. In addition to such expenses and costs incurred, the village
shall be entitled to impose and collect from the owner, agent or occupant an
administrative fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
The village shall make reasonable efforts to provide the owner of the subject
premises with notice of such statement of claim of lien as recorded, provided
that the owner's name and address are readily available upon diligent inquiry.
The failure to mail the owner such a notice of the lien claim as recorded, or
should the owner claim it was not received, shall not affect the right of the
village to foreclose the lien for such charges as provided in the following
section. (Ord. 627, 9-13-2016)
6-4-7: FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting charges, including fees and
costs as specified, shall be sold for nonpayment of the same and the proceeds
of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges, fees and costs as is the case
in the foreclosure of statutory liens. The village attorney is hereby
authorized and directed to initiate such proceedings in the name of village in
the circuit court of the 15th judicial circuit, Jo Daviess County, Illinois,
against any property for which such bill has remained unpaid for thirty (30)
days after being rendered. (Ord. 627, 9-13-2016)
6-4-8: NATIVE PLANTING LOT(S):
“Native planting” as defined herein shall be allowed on a privately-owned lot
which is landscaped, or is proposed to be landscaped, so as to exhibit the
deliberate and conscious decision to plant, cultivate, and maintain “native
plantings” defined as those native or naturally occurring plant species
identified as wildflower and prairie grasses in commonly accepted publications
including “Native Illinois Herbs and Forbs”, by the Illinois Department of
Conservation. A copy of the aforesaid publication shall be on file and
available for review in the Village Hall.
Restrictions: Native plantings shall, not be planted, cultivated or grown
within five feet of a property line whether front yard, side yard, or back yard
and no native plantings shall obstruct a public sidewalk/path or driveway
entrance.
Annual Cutting: Native plantings shall be frilly mowed or cut to a height of
eighteen inches (18") or less at least once prior to May 1 of each calendar
year. (Ord. 746, 7-11-2023)
6-4-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating this chapter shall pay a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
for the second offense and up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the
third and any subsequent offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed to be a separate offense. In the case of a platted subdivision, each
unimproved platted lot may be subject to a separate fine. A violation under
this chapter may be established by the preponderance of the evidence. (Ord.
627, 9-13-2016; amd. Ord. 746, 7-11-2023)
CHAPTER 5
RECYCLING PROGRAM
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definitions
6-5-2: Program Established
6-5-3: Separating Recyclables and Placement for Collection
6-5-4: Theft of Recyclables
6-5-5: Violation and Penalty
6-5-6: Additional Methods of Disposal
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
CURBSIDE RECYCLING An organized program sponsored by the Village resulting in
residents and/or businesses within the Village limits separating recyclable
materials from other waste items and placing them curbside to be collected by
the Village's designated contract hauler.
RECYCLING CONTAINERS The Village will initially provide the recycling container
(s) to home and/or business owners for the purpose of storing recyclable
materials on-site and for placing those materials "curbside" for collection.
Each household or place of business will be responsible for the normal and
reasonable care of the container(s). Replacement or additional containers will
be purchased from the Village at the resident's expense. Abuse, theft, neglect
or misuse of the container(s) are prohibited and shall be deemed a violation of
this Ordinance subject to the penalties provide in Section
6-5-5.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS Materials having an economic value in the secondary
materials market including, but not limited to newsprint, aluminum cans and
articles, glass containers, corrugated paper (cardboard and paper boxes),
magazines, plastic containers and may, from time to time, include other
household or business waste items designated by the Village as recyclable
materials based upon market conditions and available recycling technology.
6-5-2: PROGRAM ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a recycling program for the mandatory separating of
recyclable materials from household and business garbage and refuse in the
Village of Stockton.
6-5-3: SEPARATING RECYCLABLES AND PLACEMENT FOR COLLECTION:
Recyclable materials shall be prepared and separated from other garbage and
refuse, stored in recycling containers, placed at the curbside and collected
monthly by the Village's designated contract hauler along with the regular
garbage collection.
Residents will be notified by the Village of the recyclable materials to be
separated from the garbage and refuse for collection. The Village may, from
time to time, alter the recyclable materials to be separated from garbage and
refuse and include those materials in the recycling program. Should more
frequent collections becomes necessary, residents will be notified by the
Village.
6-5-4: THEFT OF RECYCLABLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, obtain, pick up or possess any
recyclable material(s) placed for collection by a residence or business as part
of this recycling program unless said person is the Village's designated
contract hauler.
6-5-5: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
Chapter or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00),
except that the maximum fine for failure to comply with this Chapter shall not
exceed twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense. In addition to the
fine imposed upon conviction, any person found guilty of violating this Chapter
may also be required to pay the Village's costs incurred in enforcing the terms
of this Chapter, including reasonable attorney fees. No enforcement of this
Chapter shall be made until two (2) months from effective date hereof.
6-5-6: ADDITIONAL METHODS OF DISPOSAL:
Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials(s) to any other person
whether operating for profit or not-for-profit. (Ord. 302, 4-3-90)
CHAPTER 6
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Definitions
6-6-2: Prohibition
6-6-3: Abatement
6-6-4: Penalties
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter:
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: A. "Inoperable motor vehicle" means:
      1.   Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7)
days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the
engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power; or
      2.   Any engine(s), wheels or other motor vehicle parts which are
detached and separated from a motor vehicle and which have remained on public
or private property for a period of at least seven (7) days.
   B.   The term "inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include:
      1.   A motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of
being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or
repair operations, provided that the repairs are completed within thirty (30)
days of the date the motor vehicle was rendered incapable of being driven under
its own motor power;
      2.   Any motor vehicle that is wholly kept within a building and
concealed from public view when not in use;
      3.   An operable historic vehicle over twenty five (25) years of age;
      4.   A motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in
the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles; or
      5.   A motor vehicle located on the sale lot of a licensed and registered
motor vehicle dealer. (Ord. 327, 9-1-92)
6-6-2: PROHIBITION:
The Village declares that it is a violation of this Chapter and a public
nuisance to maintain, keep, store or permit an inoperable motor vehicle on any
private or public property within the Village for a period of seven (7) days or
more. (Ord. 327, 9-1-92)
6-6-3: ABATEMENT:
   A.   A person is required to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicle(s)
under his or her control within seven (7) days after written notice is received
from the corporate authorities of the Village or from the Chief of Police or
any member of his department designated by him, commanding disposition of the
inoperable motor vehicle(s).
      1.   The notice referred to above shall provide the following
information:
         a.   Advising the owner that the vehicle is inoperable as defined by
this Chapter;
         b.   That the owner has seven (7) days within which to remove the
inoperable motor vehicle;
         c.   That the failure of the owner to remove the inoperable motor
vehicle will subject the inoperable motor vehicle to being towed, removed and
stored at the owner's expense and will subject the owner of the inoperable
motor vehicle to the penalties prescribed in this Chapter.
   B.   1. The Police Department is hereby authorized to cause the towing,
removal and storage of any motor vehicle which is in violation of this Chapter
and whose owner has not timely removed or caused the removal of said motor
vehicle after the service of the notice as provided herein.
      2.   The owner of the vehicle towed shall be financially responsible for
the costs of said towing, removal and storage.
      3.   When an inoperable motor vehicle is towed away, the Police
Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the
color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series
name, body style, vehicle identification number and license plate year and
number displayed on the vehicle, if any. The record shall also include the date
and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and
the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
   C.   Moving the inoperable motor vehicle from one location to another
location within the Village shall not start a new seven (7) day period. (Ord.
327, 9-1-92)
6-6-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   A person who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. Any person found to be in
violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the
first violation and not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second and each subsequent violation of
any of the provisions of this Chapter. Each day the violation continues shall
be a separate violation.
   B.   The failure of the owner of the inoperable motor vehicle to remove the
vehicle duly served as required by this Chapter and upon the expiration of the
seven (7) day period shall subject the vehicle to removal and possible disposal
in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-201 et seq. (Ord. 327, 9-
1-92)
CHAPTER 7
SKATEBOARDING, ROLLERSKATING, ROLLERBLADING AND BICYCLING
SECTION:
6-7-1: Activity Regulated
6-7-2: Operation
6-7-3: Areas Where Use Is Prohibited
6-7-4: Bicycle Parking
6-7-5: Penalties
6-7-1: ACTIVITY REGULATED:
No person shall skateboard, rollerskate, rollerblade or bicycle anywhere in the
Village without complying with the terms of this Chapter. (Ord. 366, 10-14-
1997)
6-7-2: OPERATION:
No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades, a bicycle or
similar devices in a reckless manner. All persons using such devices in areas
where they are not prohibited shall exercise due care at all times and shall
yield the right of way to any pedestrians using such sidewalk or street. (Ord.
366, 10-14-1997)
6-7-3: AREAS WHERE USE IS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a skateboard, roller
skates, rollerblades, a bicycle or similar devices on the sidewalks in the
downtown area. The "downtown area" is defined for the purpose of this Section
as including Main Street bounded by Queen Avenue on the south and Benton Avenue
on the north and also including Front Avenue bounded by Hudson Street to the
east and Pearl Street to the west. Sidewalks and public rights of way on both
sides of the included and boundary streets are affected by this prohibition.
(Ord. 366, 10-14-1997)
6-7-4: BICYCLE PARKING:
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or
against a building or a curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 366, 10-14-1997)
6-7-5: PENALTIES:
A person who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall
constitute a violation of this Chapter. Any person found to be in violation of
any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
violation and not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second and each subsequent violation of any
of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 366, 10-14-1997)
CHAPTER 8
USE AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO BY MINORS
SECTION:
6-8-1: Definitions
6-8-2: Purchase By Minors Prohibited
6-8-3: Use And Possession By Minors Prohibited
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
POSSESSION OF TOBACCO: To have tobacco upon one's person or in close physical
proximity.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any public sidewalks, public thoroughfares, public streets and
alleys, public highways, public parks, any property of a public school or any
other public areas within the village limits of the village of Stockton.
TOBACCO: Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose of smoking,
chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including cigars, chewing tobacco,
dipping tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form. (Ord. 397, 3-
14-2000)
6-8-2: PURCHASE BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
purchase tobacco, or to misrepresent their identity or age or use any false or
altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco.
The penalty for the violation of this section shall be a fine not to exceed
fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first offense and a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second or any subsequent offense. In addition
to or in lieu of a fine or any other penalty assessed upon an admission or
finding of guilt under this section, a final disposition may include community
service, education alternatives or any similar programs. (Ord. 397, 3-14-2000)
6-8-3: USE AND POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
possess, use or consume tobacco in a public place in the village of Stockton.
It shall not be a violation of this section for a minor to possess, use or
consume tobacco in a public place in the village of Stockton while in the
presence of his or her parent or legal guardian.
A violation of this section may result in the confiscation of the tobacco from
the possession of the offender and be punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty
dollars ($50.00) for a first offense and a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for a second or any subsequent offense.
In addition to or in lieu of a fine or any other penalty assessed upon an
admission or finding of guilt under this section, a final disposition may
include community service, education alternatives or any similar programs.
Fines hereunder may be waived if the offender provides proof of enrollment in
and satisfactory completion of a recognized tobacco treatment program. (Ord.
397, 3-14-2000)
CHAPTER 9
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
6-9-1: Open Burning Prohibited
6-9-2: Definitions
6-9-3: Exceptions
6-9-4: Miscellaneous Regulations
6-9-5: Violations; Penalty
6-9-1: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any
person to cause, suffer or allow open burning of any kind within the Village,
including, without limitation, the burning of landscape waste. (Ord. 674, 10-8-
2019)
6-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
                   Any and all accumulations of grass clippings; shrub, bush
                   and vine cuttings; leaves; tree limbs up to two inches (2")
LANDSCAPE WASTE:   in diameter; brush; and other similar materials produced on
                   a property and accumulated as a result of the care of lawns,
                   yards, gardens, bushes, shrubs, trees and other natural
                   landscaping.
OPEN BURNING:      The combustion of any material where smoke, fumes and ash
                   are carried directly into the air.
                   Small outdoor fires burning dry, non-hazardous materials
                   intended only for recreational use and enjoyment and
RECREATIONAL FIRE: includes campfires, bonfires, outdoor fireplaces or a fire
                   pit, ring or cage which are suitably constructed to contain
                   a fire and prevent burning materials from falling.
                   A person eighteen (18) years of age or older who is not
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: under the influence of any substance or suffering from a
                   disability that would impair his or her ability to properly
                   and safely supervise a fire. (Ord. 674, 10-8-2019)
 
6-9-3: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Open burning shall be permitted during specific ten (10) day periods in
the Spring and Fall annually as determined by the Board of Trustees. Notice of
such periods shall be published two (2) weeks in advance on the Village's
website, on utility billing and in local papers. All such burning shall comply
with the following:
      1.   Only dry landscape waste produced on the property shall be burned.
      2.   Open burning shall be allowed during daylight hours only.
      3.   Burning must be supervised by a responsible adult at all times.
      4.   Burning shall not be allowed on windy days or when burning may
otherwise be prohibited.
      5.   If possible, a garden hose shall be made available at the burn site.
      6.   No burning is allowed on Village streets or alleys.
      7.   No burning shall create a visibility hazard on streets or in alleys.
      8.   Care shall be taken to locate fires a sufficient distance from
buildings, vehicles or other exposures to prevent fire spread and property
damage.
   B.   Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits, rings and cages and/or other devices
designed for holding and burning wood for recreational purposes only shall be
permissible in the Village subject to the following:
      1.   Fire pits shall not have an inside diameter of more than forty two
inches (42").
      2.   Fireplaces or fire pits, rings or cages shall not be used within
fifteen feet (15') of a building or lot line.
      3.   Portable fire pits, rings or cages shall be used only on a level,
stable, non-combustible surface.
      4.   Only clean/dry wood is permitted to be burned in fireplaces or fire
pits, rings or cages.
      5.   No trash, yard waste or other material shall be burned.
      6.   If a fireplace or fire pit, ring or cage is a propane unit, only
propane shall be used.
      7.   The smoke from a fireplace or fire pit, ring and/or cage shall not
become a nuisance.
      8.   A garden hose, fire extinguisher, or other method of fire control
shall be readily available.
      9.   The fireplace or fire pit, ring or cage shall be supervised at all
times by a responsible adult.
      10.   The fire must be completely extinguished before being left
unattended.
      11.   Manufactured fireplaces and fire pits, rings and cages shall be
used in accordance with manufacturer's recommended guidelines for safe use.
      12.   The use of any type of grill that produces an open flame is
prohibited from being used on the balcony, deck, patio or rooftop of any multi-
family dwelling.
      13.   No propane tanks shall be stored within any multi-family dwellings
or on balconies, decks, porches or rooftops of such buildings.
      14.   Barbecue grills may be used for grilling on ground level at a
multi-family dwelling as long as the grill is fifteen feet (15') or more from
the nearest overhang or any other part of the structure. (Ord. 674, 10-8-2019)
6-9-4: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS:
   A.   Recreational fires are prohibited between the hours of midnight to noon
daily.
   B.   Open burning and recreational fires are prohibited in the Central
Business (B-C) District as shown on the Village's Zoning Map. (Ord. 674, 10-8-
2019)
6-9-5: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Anyone found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first
offense, not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a second offense
and up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third or subsequent offense.
(Ord. 674, 10-8-2019)
CHAPTER 10
SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-10-1: Definitions
6-10-2: Purpose And Intent
6-10-3: Roster
6-10-4: Eligibility
6-10-5: Application
6-10-6: Review of Applications
6-10-7: Non-assignment
6-10-8: Tow Trucks; Minimum Equipment Standards
6-10-9: Minimum Business And Storage Lot Requirements
6-10-10: Dispatching Requirements
6-10-11: Violations Authorizing Seizure And Administrative Penalty
6-10-12: Notice Of Seizure And Impoundment
6-10-13: Preliminary And Full Hearing
6-10-14: Administrative Penalty
6-10-15: Vehicle Possession
6-10-16: General Regulations
6-10-17: Tow Truck Owner And Driver Duties And Obligations
6-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
 
                              Any person having a lawfully recorded lien on a
LIENHOLDER OF RECORD:         vehicle as registered with the Illinois Secretary
                              of State.
OWNER OF RECORD OF A VEHICLE: The record title holder as registered with the
                              Illinois Secretary of State.
                              A motor vehicle which has been altered or
                              designed and equipped for and exclusively used in
TOW TRUCK:                    the business of towing vehicles by means of a
                              crane, tow bar, tow line or dolly, or is
                              otherwise exclusively used to render assistance
                              to other vehicles.
                              A company or provider whose primary business is
TOWING SERVICE:               the provision of tow truck services in response
                              to a dispatch or request from the police
                              department or any other municipal department.
                              Any truck weighing over ten thousand (10,000)
TRUCK:                        pounds. (Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-
                              2021)
 
6-10-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter to prescribe the basic regulations for the
operation of tow trucks in the removal of motor vehicles and trailers which as
a result of an arrest are left on a public right-of-way, private parking lots,
roadways, driveways (or similar locations) or which are illegally parked,
abandoned, constitute an obstruction to traffic or snow removal operations, or
constitute a public nuisance. It is the purpose and intent of the Village Board
of Trustees in enacting this chapter to provide a fair and impartial means of
distributing Village requests for towing services among qualified services, and
to ensure that such services are prompt and are provided in the best interest
of the public, as well as the interest of efficient removal of such vehicles.
In enacting this chapter, it is not the purpose of the Board to regulate towing
services other than those dispatched or requested by Village personnel. (Ord.
711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-2021)
6-10-3: ROSTER:
All towing services selected and designated to provide towing services under
this chapter shall be listed on a roster to be kept by the police department.
The roster of towing services shall, at all reasonable times, be open to public
inspection. [The maximum number of towing services on said roster shall not
exceed six firms at any one time.] The roster of towing services shall be
effective for a period of two years commencing on the date of adoption of this
Ordinance and be renewed bi-annually thereafter on the anniversary date hereof
such that it continues unless amended by the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord.
711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-2021)
6-10-4: ELIGIBILITY:
A towing service shall become eligible to be listed on the roster and
participate in the assignment of service calls by the police department if it
meets the requirements set forth in this chapter. No person or towing service
shall be placed on the roster or operate a tow truck on tow roster calls if
that person or towing service has been convicted under the laws of Illinois or
any other state of an offense which under the laws of Illinois would be a
felony theft of a vehicle or a felony offense under Article 1, Chapter 4 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, or has been fined by the Illinois Commerce Commission.
(Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-2021)
6-10-5: APPLICATION:
Any towing service meeting the minimum eligibility requirements may submit a
verified application to the Village to participate in police towing operations.
The application shall be in a form provided by the Village Clerk or the police
department, and shall elicit the following information:
   A.   Business Operation.
      1.   Name of Towing Service. Indicate whether a corporation or
partnership, list all parties having a financial interest in the towing
service, including names and addresses, and number of years the business has
been established.
      2.   Experience. List number of years and locations of participation in
similar police towing services, together with any commendations or written
complaints received from governmental agencies in conduct of the business
within the last five years.
      3.   Stability. State business activities of the towing service aside
from participation in police towing activities.
      4.   Attendants and Drivers. List names and addresses of all attendants
and drivers who will conduct the towing service, as well as number of years
employed, training received by attendants and drivers, and experience of the
personnel in the conduct of the business. Said list shall be updated within ten
(10) days on any new attendants and/or drivers being employed.
      5.   Equipment. Describe available equipment to be used in towing
services, particularly in terms of comparative qualities or capacities as
related to minimum eligibility requirements.
      6.   Communications. Describe the method of operation of the
communications system between the place of business and operating tow trucks,
as well as the means utilized for ensuring prompt dispatch of trucks upon
receipt of call from the police department.
      7.   Other Facilities and Personnel Available. List all provisions for
record-keeping, back-up personnel and auxiliary services which might be
required to effectively carry out a high level of service to the public in the
business of tow truck operations.
   B.   Business Location and Storage Lot.
      1.   Primary Business Location. List location of primary business
operation, including dimensions and types of facilities available.
      2.   Storage Lot. List location of storage lots, zoning classification,
dimensions thereof, relationship to primary business operation, and the type of
protection provided at the lot(s). (Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-
2021)
6-10-6: REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the police chief or his designated agent to review and
investigate as reasonably necessary all applications and renewals submitted
under this chapter and place all eligible firms on the roster. The police chief
shall disapprove of any application or renewal if, after due review and
investigation, s/he finds that the applicant does not meet the minimum
requirements set forth in this chapter. The police chief shall notify an
applicant in writing if an application or renewal is disapproved and indicate
the reasons for such disapproval. (Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-
2021)
6-10-7: NON-ASSIGNMENT:
Any towing service listed on the roster shall not assign its place to other
towing services nor assign any calls without written consent of the police
chief. (Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-2021)
6-10-8: TOW TRUCKS; MINIMUM EQUIPMENT STANDARDS:
Minimum equipment standards for tow trucks shall be as follows:
   A.   Truck Chassis. At least one rig of one-ton capacity with rear dual
wheels. The police officer on the scene shall determine if greater capacity is
needed and shall call upon any service capable of providing that capacity
regardless of whether or not the company is on the roster of the Village or
whether it is their period of time to receive police requests.
   B.   Company Information. Company name, address or phone number on both
sides of tow truck.
   C.   Lights. Trucks must, at all times, be equipped with such headlights,
taillights, red reflectors, stoplights, warning lights, etc., as required by
state law, plus one white utility light (adjustable or portable), and may be
equipped with such other lights as the owner may desire which are not forbidden
by law.
   D.   Winch. To be power-driven by power takeoff from transmission equipped
with safety dogs or equivalent braking devices.
   E.   Additional Equipment. Trucks must be equipped with oil dry, red flares,
lanterns or reflectors, hand tools, crowbar, rope, broom, shovel, dustpan, fire
extinguisher (dry chemical type), portable red taillight and stoplight for
towed vehicles, equipment for opening locked vehicles and safety snubber chain.
Each towing service shall have at least one set of dollies readily available at
all times. (Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-2021)
6-10-9: MINIMUM BUSINESS AND STORAGE LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.    Business and Storage. The storage lot of a towing service must be in
close proximity to its place of business, and have adequate storage space to
accommodate a reasonable number of vehicles, either under cover or well-fenced.
The towing service must exercise ordinary care to keep stored vehicles and
contents safe from theft, vandalism and other such perils.
   B.   Hours. There shall be an attendant on call, capable of responding to
police requests for towing twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven days a week. An
attendant shall be on call to be present or available for the recovery of 1)
towed vehicles and 2) personal items from towed vehicles by an authorized party
Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., except for New Year’s Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
   C.   Records. Each business shall keep a record of the vehicle and license
number; date and time it was towed; location from which it was towed; name of
officer ordering the towing; and whether the vehicle was impounded or towed at
the owner’s request. (Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-2021)
6-10-10: DISPATCHING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All requests for towing service pursuant to this chapter shall be made
through the police department.
   B.   When it becomes evident that there will be a delay in responding to a
request for towing service, the towing service concerned shall advise the
police department of this delay.
   C.   Tow trucks shall be dispatched from the place of business, or a
reasonable distance from the place of business, as determined by the police
department. The police department may, from time to time, establish a policy
with regard to distribution of requests for towing service among the successful
applicants, provided that the policy is fair and equitable to all firms listed
on the roster. (Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-2021)
6-10-11: VIOLATIONS AUTHORIZING SEIZURE AND ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY:
   A.   Violations Authorizing Seizure. Except as provided herein or elsewhere
in the Municipal Code of the Village of Stockton, a motor vehicle, operated
with the permission, express or implied, of the owner of record, that is used
in connection with the violations set forth in subsections (1) - (36) below,
shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the Village, and the owner of
record of said vehicle shall be liable to the Village for an administrative
penalty in the amount of Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars, ($250.00), which shall
be in addition to any towing and storage fees charged by the towing service as
provided herein. The administrative penalty shall be assessed to cover costs
associated with the investigation, arrest and detention of an offender, or the
removal, impoundment, storage, and release of the vehicle. It shall not be
necessary for criminal charges to be filed, prosecuted, and/or proven in order
to demonstrate that one or more of the following violations has/have been
committed:
      1.   Driving with suspended or revoked license, 625 ILCS 5/6-303, except
that a vehicle shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the
suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to
comply with emission testing;
      2.   Driving under the influence of alcohol, drugs, any intoxicating
compound or a combination of alcohol, drugs, or any intoxicating compound, 625
ILCS 5/11-501(a);
      3.   When a motor vehicle is operated by a person against whom a warrant
has been issued by a Circuit Court in Illinois, failing to answer charges that
the driver violated subsection (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of the above or for a
violation of 625 ILCS 5/6-101;
      4.   Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer, third or subsequent
offense, 625 ILCS 5/11-204(c);
      5.   Aggravated fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer, 625 ILCS
5/11-204.1;
      6.   Leaving the scene, after involvement in a motor vehicle accident
involving death or personal injury, 625 ILCS 5/11-401;
      7.   Reckless driving or reckless driving causing bodily harm to a child
or school crossing guard, 625 ILCS 5/11-503(a), (b), (b-1), (c) and (d);
      8.   Aggravated reckless driving, 625 ILCS 5/11-503(c);
      9.   Reckless driving causing great bodily harm or permanent disability
or disfigurement to a child or a school crossing guard, 625 ILCS 5/11-503(d);
      10.   Street racing, second or subsequent offense, pursuant to 625 ILCS
5/11-506;
      11.   Aggravated street racing, 625 ILCS 5/11-506(d)(3);
      12.   Illegal transportation of alcohol/driver, 625 ILCS 5/11-502(a);
      13.   The following firearms offenses:
         a.   Unlawful use of weapons, 720 ILCS 5/24-1;
         b.   Unlawful use or possession of weapons by felons or persons in the
custody of the Department of Corrections facilities, 720 ILCS 5/24-1.1;
         c.   Aggravated discharge of a firearm, 720 ILCS 5/24-1.2;
         d.   Aggravated discharge of a machine gun or a firearm equipped with
a device designed or used for silencing the report of a firearm, 720 ILCS 5/24-
1.2-5;
         e.   Reckless discharge of a firearm, 720 ILCS 5/24-1.5;
         f.   Aggravated unlawful use of a weapon, 720 ILCS 5/24-1.6;
         g.   Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition, 720 ILCS
5/24-3.1;
         h.   Unlawful sale or delivery of a firearm on the premises of any
school, 720 ILCS 5/24-3.3;
      14.   Indecent solicitation of a child, 720 ILCS 5/11-6;
      15    Aggravated assault, 720 ILCS 5/12-2;
      16.   Aggravated battery, 720 ILCS 5/12-3.05;
      17.   Theft, 720 ILCS 5/16-1;
      18.   Theft of lost or mislaid property, 720 ILCS 5/16-2;
      19.   Theft from coin operated machine, 720 ILCS 5/16-5;
      20.   Tampering with or theft of communication services, 720 ILCS 5/16-
18;
      21.   Retail theft, 720 ILCS 5/16-25;
      22.   Robbery, 720 ILCS 5/18-1;
      23.   Armed robbery, 720 ILCS 5/18-2;
      24.   Burglary, 720 ILCS 5/19-1;
      25.   Residential burglary, 720 ILCS 5/19-3;
      26.   Arson, 720 ILCS 5/20-1;
      27.   Aggravated arson, 720 ILCS 5/20-1;
      28.   Possession of explosives or explosive or incendiary devices, 720
ILCS 5/20-2;
      29.   Criminal damage to property, 720 ILCS 5/21-1;
      30.   Mob action, 720 ILCS 5/25-1;
      31.   The operation or use of a motor vehicle:
         a.   In the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a violation of
the Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.;
         b.   In the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a violation of
the Illinois Controlled Substance Act, 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.; or
         c.   While soliciting, possessing, or attempting to solicit or possess
cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined by the Cannabis Control Act 720
ILCS 550/1 et seq., or the Illinois Controlled Substance Act, 720 ILCS 570/100
et seq.;
      32.   The following sexual offenses:
         a.   Prostitution, 720 ILCS 5/11-14.
         b.   Solicitation of a sexual act, 720 ILCS 5/11-14.1.
         c.   Promoting prostitution, 720 ILCS 5/11-14.3.
         d.   Promoting juvenile prostitution, 720 ILCS 5/11-14.4.
         e.   Patronizing a prostitute, 720 ILCS 5/11-18.
         f.   Patronizing a juvenile prostitute, 720 ILCS 5/11-18.1.
      33.   The motor vehicle is otherwise subject to seizure and impoundment
pursuant to 720 ILCS 5/36-1;
      34.   A violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-503 (reckless driving) while the
vehicle is part of a funeral procession, or in a manner that interferes with a
funeral procession; or
      35.   A violation of 625 ILCS 5/6-101 (drivers must have licenses or
permits), except where the violation is for a license which has been expired
for twelve (12) months or less, or for a license which is invalid because of
curfew (as in the case of a graduated license).
      36.   Ten Or More Violations: Any vehicle which is in violation of this
title due to having no less than ten (10) outstanding (UNPAID) parking tickets
which are not pending in city administrative court.
      37.   A violation of 720 ILCS 5/31-1 Resisting or obstructing a peace
officer.
   B.   Imposition of Administrative Penalty. The following shall apply to the
administrative penalty imposed for costs for seizure pursuant to subsection (A)
above:
      1.   All administrative penalties and towing and storage charges shall be
imposed on the registered owner of the motor vehicle or the agent of that
owner.
      2.   The fees shall be in addition to:
         a.   Any other penalties that may be assessed by a court of law for
the underlying violation; and
         b.   Any towing or storage fees or both, charged by the towing
company.
      3.   The officers on the scene shall advise the owner of record of the
vehicle, or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time
of the alleged violation, as to whether such tow requires charging the penalty
specified in subsection (A) hereof. If an administrative penalty is to be
imposed, the penalty shall be paid directly to the Village, and payment shall
be made at the Village police department.
      4.   The towing or storage fees, or both, shall be collected by and paid
to the towing service that tows and stores the impounded vehicles.
      5.   The towing service shall keep detailed records regarding vehicles
towed hereunder, rates charged, and fees paid. Said records shall be available
for inspection by the police department upon reasonable request by the police
department.
      6.   In lieu of the Village imposing a fee upon a towing service
providing services hereunder, the towing service shall (by applying to be
placed on the roster and accepting placement thereon) perform the following
services to Village police vehicles (located within Village boundaries) at the
request of the Village:
         a.   Provide tows of Village police vehicles that have broken down;
and
         b.   Provide the changing of flat tires for Village police vehicles
(or tow said vehicles). (Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-2021; Ord.
745, 6-13-2023)
6-10-12: NOTICE OF SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this Ordinance, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by
the Village. The police officer shall notify the registered owner or lessee of
the vehicle and any lienholder of record, of the fact of the seizure and of the
vehicle and of owner’s right to request an administrative hearing, as provided
for in this Ordinance. Said vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion
of the administrative hearing, an administrative tow fee of Two Hundred Fifty
and No/100's Dollars, ($250.00), and the towing and storage charges are paid.
(Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-2021)
6-10-13: PRELIMINARY AND FULL HEARING:
   A.   Hearing Officer. The police chief shall designate from time to time a
person within the County as a preliminary hearing officer who shall be an
attorney licensed to practice law in the state for at least a minimum of three
(3) prior years as the hearing officer.
   B.   Preliminary Hearing. Within twenty-four (24) hours of any vehicle being
seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, if requested by any owner of
record, lessee, or any lienholder of record, the preliminary hearing officer
shall allow for preliminary hearing at which time said owner of record, lessee,
or any lienholder of record may present any evidence said person desires which
would demonstrate a defense to said seizure and impoundment. The preliminary
hearing may be conducted in person, over the phone or by other communication
method or combination of communication methods. If the preliminary hearing
officer determines that said evidence supports such a defense, the police
department may release said vehicle without further process. If the preliminary
hearing officer determines that said evidence does not support such a defense,
then the preliminary hearing officer shall direct that the matter proceed to a
full hearing as outlined in the subsection (C) below.
   C.   Full Administrative Hearing. If the vehicle remains impounded, and
absent a determination to release vehicle, a full administrative hearing shall
be scheduled within sixty (60) days from the date of the seizure and
impoundment.
      1.   Notice of Administrative Hearing. Notice shall be given in writing
within thirty (30) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded by personal
delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered
owner or lessee of the vehicle and any lienholder of record, stating the
stating the date, time, location of the administrative hearing and requesting a
plea of guilty or not guilty.
      2.   Guilty Plea. If the owner returns a guilty plea, the matter may be
disposed of without administrative hearing on the basis of the guilty plea.
      3.   Hearing. If the owner pleads not guilty or fails to respond, the
administrative hearing will proceed as scheduled, unless continued by order of
the hearing officer, no later than sixty (60) days after the initial or
preliminary administrative hearing. All interested persons shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. At any time prior to the
hearing date, the hearing officer may, at the request of either party, direct
witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of
evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible, but only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably
prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
      4.   Administrative Determination. After the hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the vehicle
impoundment. If the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of evidence
that the vehicle was used in connection with a violation set forth in this
section, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record
of the vehicle civilly liable to the Village for an administrative penalty in
an amount not to exceed Seven Hundred Fifty and No/100's Dollars, ($750.00),
and requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded until the owner pays the
administrative penalty to the Village (or to the towing firm as directed by the
Village) plus fees to the towing firm for the towing and storage of the
vehicle. If the hearing officer finds that no such violation occurred, the
hearing officer shall order the immediate return of the owner’s vehicle or cash
bond without fees.
      5.   Default. If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the
hearing officer shall enter a default order in favor of the Village.
      6.   Appeal. An owner may appeal the determination made by the hearing
officer pursuant to the administrative review law. (Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd.
Ord. 715, 8-10-2021)
6-10-14: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY:
If an administrative penalty is imposed pursuant to this section, such penalty
shall constitute a debt due and owing to the Village. If a cash bond has been
posted pursuant to this section, the bond shall be applied to the penalty.
Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty, or
administrative fee imposed under this chapter which remains unpaid in whole or
in part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under
the administrative review law may be enforced by obtaining a judgment in the
local circuit court and pursuing enforcement of the judgment. Except as
provided otherwise in this section, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded
until the penalty is paid to the Village and any applicable towing and storage
fees are paid, in which case possession of the vehicle shall be given to the
person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle or the vehicle is sold or
otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment to enforce a lien as provided by
law. If the vehicle is not retrieved within sixty (60) days after an
administrative hearing officer issues a written decision, the vehicle shall be
deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the
disposition of abandoned vehicles, as set forth in Article II, Chapter 4 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-2021)
6-10-15: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
   A.   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, or as set forth in
this section, no owner, lien holder, or other person shall be legally entitled
to take possession of a vehicle impounded under this chapter until the
administrative penalty and any fees or costs that are applicable have been
paid.
   B.   A person with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle may obtain
possession of the vehicle if formal foreclosure proceedings have been
initiated, provided that the lienholder agrees in writing to pay from the net
proceeds of any foreclosure sale, the administrative penalty, plus the
applicable fees and costs imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd.
Ord. 715, 8-10-2021)
6-10-16: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state
or federal laws or Village ordinances pertaining to vehicle seizure and
impoundment, and these penalties shall be in addition to any penalties that may
be assessed by a court for any criminal charges.
   B.   This section shall not apply if the vehicle used in the violation of
law was stolen at that time, and the theft was reported to the appropriate
police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was
discovered.
   C.   Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this chapter shall be
those approved by the police chief for all towers authorized to tow for the
police department. (Ord. 711, 6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-2021)
6-10-17: TOW TRUCK OWNER AND DRIVER DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS:
The following duties and obligations shall apply in regard to the tow trucks,
tow truck owners and to trick drivers:
   A.   Removal of Hazards. Police to Determine Necessity of Removing Vehicles.
After being dispatched by the police department to the scene, the tow truck
operator shall cooperate with the police officers in removing hazards and
illegally parked vehicles as requested. It is the duty of the police officers
to determine when such a vehicle should be impounded or moved, and the tow
truck operator shall abide by their decisions. Officers shall refer to police
department policies (as amended from time to time) for said determinations.
   B.   Identification of Tow Trucks. Only tow trucks bearing the name of the
towing service called shall be dispatched to the scene of need.
   C.   Conduct. All owners of towing services shall conduct their business in
an orderly and businesslike manner and use every means to avoid any conflicts
between any interested parties. The primary measure to be used by the Village
in determining whether a towing service has violated this section will be the
number and type of complaints received by the Village from the public. The
police department is charged with the investigation of all complaints related
to towing services.
   D.   Protection of Vehicles. Vehicles impounded by the police for special
investigations, i.e., fingerprints, etc., shall be held in maximum security
until cleared by the investigating officers. Contents of vehicles with a police
hold shall not be removed until cleared by the investigating officers.
   E.   Responsibility for Employees’ Acts. The owners of a tow truck
participating in towing assignments by the police department shall be
responsible for the acts of their employees while on duty. Towing services
shall be responsible for damage to vehicles while in their possession (with the
exception of occurrences that are out of the reasonable control of the towing
service).
   F.   Periodic Inspection of Records, Equipment, Facilities. Towing services
on the roster shall be subject to periodic checks of all towing service’s
records, equipment and storage facilities by police officers. A towing service
that fails to produce tow records or allow for inspections of its equipment and
facilities at the request of the police shall be immediately suspended from the
roster until further investigation.
   G.   Damage Appraisals. All vehicles stored or impounded as a result of a
tow ordered by the police department shall be made available for inspection to
the owner of the vehicle or his representative, any insurance agent, insurance
adjuster, or any body shop or car dealer, for the purpose of estimating or
appraising damages, except vehicles with a police hold.
   H.   Access to Vehicles. Vehicles impounded or to be impounded by a towing
service shall be accessible to police department personnel, and employees of
the towing service shall be required to assist police department personnel in
respect to the impounded vehicles upon request.
   I.   Itemized Statements, When Required.
      1.   A person conducting towing services shall furnish an itemized
statement of services performed, labor and special equipment used in completing
the tow of a vehicle and the charges made therefor to and upon the request of:
         a.   The person requesting the towing service;
         b.   The registered owner of the vehicle towed;
         c.   The insurance carrier of either subsection (a) or (b) above;
         d.   The duly authorized agent of subsection (a), (b) or (c) above.
      2.   A person conducting towing services shall furnish a copy of the
statement to any person authorized by this section to receive the statement
without demanding payment as a condition precedent. The chief of police or his
designee shall have authority over determining who may have access to towed
vehicles ordered by the Village during any dispute that may arise from this
section.
   J.   Vehicle Repair or Alteration, When Permitted. A person conducting
towing services shall refrain from making any repairs or alterations to a towed
vehicle without first being authorized by the Village. Parts or accessories
shall not be removed from a towed vehicle without authorization except as
necessary for security purposes. Under such circumstances, the parts or
accessories removed shall be listed on the itemized statement and stored in the
business office. This section shall not be construed to prohibit persons
conducting towing services from making emergency alterations necessary to
permit the removal vehicles by the tow service.
   K.   Facilities to Conform to Building Code. Towing services’ storage lots,
buildings, fencing, driveways, etc., must conform to the building code
requirements of the municipality in which the property is located.
   L.   Zoning Requirements. Business and storage lots of towing services must
conform to the zoning regulations of the municipality in which the property is
located.
   M.   Storage Lot Capacity. At no time shall the storage lot of a towing
service be filled to more than fifty percent capacity. Should the lot be filled
greater than that limit, the Village may suspend towing until such time as the
number of the vehicles in the lot is reduced to within the above-stated
capacity.
   N.   Deviation from Roster. Any and all tow truck operators not selected and
designated pursuant to this chapter are prohibited from removing from the
public streets and towing away any vehicles involved in the situations as set
forth in this chapter.
   O.   Insurance.
      1.   Each towing service listed on the roster shall have, in full force
and effect, during the period the service remains on the roster, public
liability, property damage and fire and theft insurance coverage as follows.
The Village shall be listed as an additional insured on each policy. Proof of
such coverage shall be a minimum eligibility requirement.
         a.   Comprehensive general liability must include the following
industry standard forms of insurance:
            (1)   Premises/operation coverage;
            (2)    Products and completed operations coverage;
            (3)   Blanket contractual liability;
            (5)   Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single
limit, or five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) bodily injury and two
hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) property damage.
         b.   Comprehensive auto liability must include the following
endorsements:
            (1)   All owned autos, hired-car coverage, and employers non-owned
auto coverage;
            (2)   The policy shall not contain a radius restriction of less
than fifty (50) miles;
            (3)   Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) on hook liability.
         c.   Garage keeper’s legal liability or motor truck cargo: The towing
service shall provide coverage for the vehicles in their custody. Either a
motor truck cargo policy, listing all storage lots as terminal locations or
garage keepers’ legal liability shall be required. The minimum amount of
coverage shall be no less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
         d.   Workers’ compensation and employers’ liability: Statutory limits
for workmen’s compensation and a one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
employers’ liability limit.
      2.   Each towing service shall supply the Village with a certificate of
insurance, which indicates coverage for the above-mentioned minimum insurance
requirements and at least sixty (60) days notice of cancellation or material
change. The certificate of insurance shall name the Village as additional
insured.
   P.   Village Indemnification. If any service listed on the roster performs
towing services in a manner not in accordance with the provisions contained in
this chapter, the police department is held harmless from any and all liability
or damage arising therefrom and by participating in the roster, the towing
service hereby indemnifies and holds harmless the Village and the police
department and its employees, officers, agents and assigns (indemnitees), for
any and all liability, obligation, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs,
charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees
and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be
imposed upon, incurred by or be asserted against the indemnitees by reason of
any act or omission of the towing service, its personnel, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors, resulting in personal injury, bodily injury,
sickness, disease or death to any person or damage to, loss of or destruction
of tangible or intangible property, or any other claims which may arise out of
or be in any way connected with the towing services operations performed under
this chapter.
   Q.   Removal or Suspension from Roster.
      1.   Any deviation from the requirements established in this chapter, or
failure at any time to provide reasonable, quick and efficient service may
result in the temporary suspension for no more than sixty (60) days or removal
of the name of such towing service from the roster upon the determination of
the police chief.
      2.   The police chief shall provide the tow operator with written notice
at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the effective date of the suspension/
removal by delivering said notice to the tow operator’s place of business. Said
written notice shall include:
         a.   The effective date of the suspension/removal;
         b.   Whether the suspension/removal is temporary or permanent;
         c.   The allegations which form the basis of the suspension/removal;
         d.   The actions, if any, the tow operator may take to prevent the
suspension/removal from occurring;
         e.   The procedure which the tow operator must follow to request a
hearing to appeal the suspension/removal;
         f.   That the towing service may request a hearing by submitting
formal request for hearing in writing within seven days from the date of the
delivery of notice; and
         g.   If no hearing is requested, the suspension/removal shall stand.
      3.   If a hearing is requested, the Village Attorney may act as hearing
officer. The Village shall set a time for the hearing within thirty (30)
business days of receipt the request (if the request is timely made). If the
towing service is unavailable at the time provided by the Village, the Village
may (in its discretion) reschedule the hearing, but the suspension/removal will
continue until the hearing unless the Village is unable to provide an
alternative hearing date within the next seven (7) days after the initial
hearing date.
      4.   The hearing shall be informal and provide both sides with the
opportunity to present all evidence relevant to the suspension/removal. The
hearing officer shall issue a written decision based upon a preponderance of
the presented evidence within ten (10) days of the hearing. The opinion will be
sent to the towing service’s business address with a copy retained in the
towing services application file. The Village or the towing service may contest
the decision of the hearing officer in any manner provided by law. (Ord. 711,
6-8-2021; amd. Ord. 715, 8-10-2021)
TITLE 7
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
CHAPTER 1
FIRE LIMITS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Boundaries Established
7-1-1: BOUNDARIES ESTABLISHED:
The fire limits of the Village are hereby established and shall include all
that portion of the Village lying within the following described boundaries:
Commencing at the intersection of Hudson Street and Queen Street; thence
northerly to Benton Avenue; thence westerly to Pearl Street; thence southerly
to Front Street; thence easterly to Ward Avenue; thence southerly to the
northern boundary of the Chicago Great Western Railway right of way; thence to
a southeasterly direction along the northern boundary of the Chicago Great
Western Railway right of way to and following Queen Street to the point of
beginning. (1966 Code, §12.201)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE PREVENTION AND LIFE SAFETY PROTECTION
SECTION:
7-2-1: Adoption of Fire Prevention and Life Safety Codes; Availability of
Copies
7-2-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION AND LIFE SAFETY CODES; AVAILABILITY OF
COPIES:
There is hereby adopted by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village,
for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to
life and property from fire and explosion, that certain code known as the
National Fire Protection Association Codes and Standards, and the whole
thereof, in its current edition, and as amended from time to time, of which
code not less than three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the office
of the Clerk of the Village, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provision thereof shall be
controlling within the corporate limits of the Village. These codes and
standards, as well as their amendments and other provisions relating thereto,
shall be known collectively as the Stockton Fire Prevention and Life Safety
Code.
In the event that a conflict exists between the Codes adopted by this Section
or any ordinance of the Village, the more stringent provision shall apply.
Any person desiring to examine the Fire Prevention and Life Safety Code
hereinabove adopted, may do so at the office of the Village Clerk during
business hours on any business day. (1982 Code)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Bench Mark
8-1-2: Supervision
8-1-3: Construction Requirements
8-1-4: Injury To Pavements, Defects
8-1-5: Repairs
8-1-6: Obstructions
8-1-7: Barricades
8-1-8: Private Use
8-1-9: Encroachments
8-1-10: Poles And Wires
8-1-11: Gas Pumps
8-1-12: Openings
8-1-13: Barbed Wire, Electric Fences
8-1-14: Deposits On Streets, Sidewalks
8-1-15: Building Operations
8-1-16: [Reserved]
8-1-17: Games
8-1-18: Sidewalk Cafe Permits
8-1-1: BENCH MARK:
For the purpose of defining and establishing the grades of streets, avenues and
alleys in the village, the top of the cast iron water table of the brick
building on lot ten (10) of block three (3), original town of Stockton, is
hereby fixed and established as a bench mark at an elevation of one hundred
feet (100') and to zero, the base or datum plane one hundred feet (100') below
such bench mark, shall be referred to all grades and levels in the village, and
the same shall be recognized in all surveys and plans for grades of all
streets, avenues and alleys and in establishing and describing the same. (1966
Code §7.502)
8-1-2: SUPERVISION:
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways shall be under the
supervision of the superintendent of streets. He shall have supervision over
all work thereon, and the cleaning thereof, and shall be charged with the
enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to such public places (except
traffic regulations) and is hereby authorized to enforce such ordinances. (1966
Code §8.101)
8-1-3: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement
on any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or to repair the
same without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such
permits shall be made to the village clerk, and shall state the location of the
intended pavement or repair, the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is
to do the actual construction work. No such permit shall be issued except on
order of the village president and board of trustees. (1966 Code §8.102)
   B.   Bond: Each applicant shall file a bond or policy in the amount of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) with sureties to be approved by the village
president and board of trustees, conditioned to indemnify the village from any
loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken or the manner of doing the
same. (1966 Code §8.103)
   C.   Specifications: All street and sidewalk pavement shall be made in
conformity with the specifications approved from time to time by the village
president and board of trustees. (1966 Code §8.104)
8-1-4: INJURY TO PAVEMENTS, DEFECTS:
It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or
injure any newly laid street or alley pavement while the same is guarded by a
warning sign or barricade; or to knowingly injure any street, sidewalk or alley
pavement. (1966 Code §8.105)
It shall be the duty of every village officer or employee becoming cognizant of
any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk, or any obstruction thereof, to
report the same to the village president and board of trustees as soon as
possible. (1966 Code §8.107)
8-1-5: REPAIRS:
All public streets, alleys and sidewalk pavement shall be in good repair. Such
repair work, whether done by the village or the abutting owner, shall be under
the supervision of the superintendent of streets. (1966 Code §8.106)
8-1-6: OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or
maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way,
except as may be specifically authorized by ordinance. (1966 Code §8.108)
   B.   Exits Or Stairways: It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the
obstruction of any stairway, aisle, corridor or exit in any office building,
factory, hotel, school, church, theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public
hall, or any building used by two (2) or more tenants or families in such a
manner that it interferes with the free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor
or exit. (1966 Code §24.025)
   C.   Drains: It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street
or alley. (1966 Code §8.113)
8-1-7: BARRICADES:
   A.   Required: Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street,
sidewalk or other public place or making an excavation in the same shall
maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury of any person or vehicle by
reason of the work; such barricades shall be protected by suitable lights at
nighttime.
Any defect in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent injury. Any
person properly maintaining any opening or excavation in any such place shall
guard such opening or excavation while the same remains open, by proper
barricades and lights. (1966 Code §8.109)
   B.   Disturbing Barricades: It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere
with any new pavement, excavation or opening in any public street, alley or
sidewalk. (1966 Code §8.110)
8-1-8: PRIVATE USE:
Except for special events and occasions, including, but not necessarily limited
to, activities such as sidewalk sales, homecoming, holiday celebrations and
various chamber sponsored activities, it shall be unlawful for any person to
use any street, sidewalk or other public place as space for the display of
goods, products or merchandise for sale; or to write or mark any signs or
advertisements on any such pavements. (Ord. 570, 6-12-2012)
8-1-9: ENCROACHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches upon any public street or property. (1966 Code §8.112)
8-1-10: POLES AND WIRES:
It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or to maintain any poles or
wires over any public street, alley or other public place without first having
secured permission from the village president and board of trustees. (1966 Code
§8.114)
8-1-11: GAS PUMPS:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any gasoline pump or tank in any
public street, alley or sidewalk. (1966 Code §8.115)
8-1-12: OPENINGS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any
public street, alley or sidewalk or other public place without a permit from
the village president and board of trustees. All such lawfully maintained
openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing which meets the
approval of the superintendent of streets. (1966 Code §8.116)
8-1-13: BARBED WIRE, ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or in
part of barbed wire, or with any similar materials, designed to cause injury to
persons, or any wire charged with electric current, anywhere within the
village, except to protect industrial property, in which case barbed wire must
be at least ten feet (10') above the sidewalk and extend inward of property.
(1966 Code §8.117; amd. Ord., 10-14-2008)
8-1-14: DEPOSITS ON STREETS, SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Deposits, Deliveries On Streets, Sidewalks:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or to permit to be
deposited, upon any public way in the village, including any public street or
sidewalk, any rubbish, trash, or debris; any mud, dirt, cement, concrete,
gravel, stones, plant matter, including grass clippings; any snow from snow
removal operations; or, any material which may cause damage to said sidewalk or
street, which may be a hazard to persons, animals, property or vehicular
traffic, or which may impede the flow of stormwater.
      2.   Exception to subsection A1 of this section shall be made for leaves
raked into the curb from the terrace area (only). Also, snow from the sidewalks
in the four (4) downtown blocks that comprise the downtown business district
may be pushed onto the street for removal by the village snowplows.
      3.   Any person who shall clear or remove any snow, ice, or other
precipitation from any sidewalk, private drive, driveway or parking lot, on or
adjacent to his or her property, shall clear or remove same to a location on
his or her property only, and shall not clear or remove same onto or upon any
public property.
      4.   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited for not more than
one-half (1/2) hour on a sidewalk, if preparatory to delivery; provided, the
usable width of the sidewalk shall not thereby be reduced to less than four
feet (4').
      5.   a. Construction materials may be deposited on streets preparatory to
delivery for use; provided, that such deposit does not reduce the usable width
of the street or roadway at that point to less than eighteen feet (18'), and
provided that such materials shall not be permitted to remain on such street
for more than six (6) hours.
         b.   Any such construction materials shall be guarded by lights if the
same remains upon any street or sidewalk during nighttime.
      6.   In no event shall any person at any time cover or block access to
any fire hydrant in the village.
      7.   In the event any person depositing any material on a public way in
violation of this section fails or refuses to immediately remove it, the street
superintendent may cause the material to be removed. The cost incurred by the
village for such removal and all expenses incurred in connection therewith
shall be assessed against the property and/or the person who deposited the
material. Assessment of such costs against the person who violated the
provisions of this section shall not be construed as a waiver of the right of
the village to file a complaint against such person and/or to request that a
fine be imposed upon conviction.
   B.   Violation: Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00), and not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a like fine or
penalty for each day said violation continues. (Ord. 509, 11-12-2008)
8-1-15: BUILDING OPERATIONS:
   A.   Use Of Streets: The use of streets for the storage of materials in the
process of construction or alteration of a building may be granted where the
same will not unduly interfere with traffic and will not reduce the usable
width of the roadway to less than eighteen feet (18'); provided, that no
portion of the street other than that directly abutting on the premises on
which work is being done shall be used, except with the consent of the owner or
occupant of the premises abutting on such portion. Any person seeking to make
such use of the street shall file with the village clerk a bond with corporate
sureties to be approved by the village board to indemnify the clerk for any
loss or damage which may be incurred by it by reason of such use and
occupation. (1966 Code §12.401)
   B.   Night Operations: No construction or alteration shall be carried on at
nighttime if the same is accompanied by loud noises. (1966 Code §12.402)
   C.   Sidewalks: No sidewalks shall be constructed in the course of building
construction or alteration without a special permit from the village clerk
being first obtained. (1966 Code §12.403)
   D.   Safeguards: It shall be the duty of the person doing any construction,
alteration or wrecking work in the village to do the same with proper care for
the safety of persons and property. Warnings, barricades and lights shall be
maintained wherever necessary for the protection of pedestrians or traffic; and
temporary roofs over sidewalks shall be constructed wherever there is danger to
pedestrians from falling articles or materials. (1966 Code §12.404)
8-1-16: [RESERVED]:
8-1-17: GAMES:
It shall be unlawful to play any game upon any street, alley or sidewalk where
such games cause unnecessary noise or interfere with traffic or pedestrians.
(1966 Code §8.121)
8-1-18: SIDEWALK CAFE PERMITS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to permit daytime and early
evening outdoor dining on sidewalks adjacent to local food establishments and
restaurants for the enjoyment of patrons without unreasonable disturbance to
the immediate neighborhood or pedestrian traffic. It is intended to permit the
tasteful, aesthetic use of tables and chairs on adjacent sidewalks of local
food establishments and restaurants under the direction and approval of village
authorities. It is the intention of the board of trustees of the village of
Stockton to monitor and review the use of these facilities after the adoption
of this section to determine its full impact upon the village and the enjoyment
of its citizens.
   B.   Definition: "Sidewalk cafe" means any area on the public sidewalk
adjacent to a licensed food service business where food and/or beverages may be
consumed at tables and chairs whether the food and/or beverages are purchased
at the table or inside the adjacent licensed food service business.
   C.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, organization or association to use the public sidewalk for the
operation of a sidewalk cafe whether offering direct service to the table or
not, without first obtaining a sidewalk cafe permit. Permits will be issued
only to businesses owning or leasing property immediately adjacent to an
improved sidewalk within a public right of way. Permits may be obtained at any
time during a calendar year for the seasonal period beginning no sooner than
April 1 and ending no later than November 1 of said calendar year. No permit
shall be issued to any business which is not in compliance with all provisions
of this code.
   D.   Application: All applicants for sidewalk cafe permits shall complete an
application on a form provided by the village. An inspection of the property to
document existing conditions of public improvements shall be performed by the
village prior to issuance of a permit. Applications should be filed at least
three (3) weeks prior to anticipated use to allow sufficient time for such
inspection. All applications shall include:
      1.   A dimensioned drawing or site plan showing the sidewalk adjacent to
the business, any streetlights, signs, planters, the curb, on street parking or
any other public appurtenances, and the proposed location of any tables or
chairs.
      2.   Certificates of insurance, subject to the reasonable approval of the
village president, naming the village of Stockton as an additional insured for
the term of the permit and including liability insurance coverage in a
commercially reasonable amount per occurrence.
      3.   A signed indemnification statement on a form provided by the
village.
   E.   Regulations: All permit holders shall be subject to the following
regulations:
      1.   The sidewalk shall be kept clean and free from food, refuse or
clutter at all times regardless of the source of such food, refuse and clutter.
No cooking or food preparation shall be permitted on the sidewalk.
      2.   Tables and chairs which do not in any way interfere with pedestrian
or vehicular safety, or with necessary access for public safety purposes or
personnel, and as approved for use as part of the permitting process, shall be
removed from the public sidewalk at the end of each business day.
      3.   Umbrellas are not permitted on the tables.
      4.   Operation of the sidewalk cafe shall not create an unreasonable
disturbance in the immediate neighborhood.
   F.   Fees: The fee for a sidewalk cafe permit shall be an amount as may be
determined from time to time by the village board and paid by the applicant at
the time an application is submitted to the village clerk.
   G.   Enforcement And Revocation:
      1.   Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall
result in a fine of up to one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per day and/or
revocation of the permit.
      2.   The chief of police or other local public safety official, upon
determining that the method or manner of use of the sidewalk cafe or the
conduct of persons serving or using such facilities pose a threat to the public
health, safety or welfare, shall have the authority to cause the tables and
chairs to be removed immediately and to recommend that the village board revoke
the sidewalk cafe permit. (Ord. 569, 6-12-2012)
CHAPTER 2
DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Permit Required
8-2-2: Bond Required
8-2-3: Grade Surfaces
8-2-4: Specifications
8-2-5: Repair
8-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles or animals across any
sidewalk in the Village without first having obtained a permit therefor.
Application for such permit shall be made to the Village Clerk.
No permit for construction of a driveway for commercial use or for the habitual
use of other than the owner or occupant of the premises served shall be issued
except upon the order of the Village President and Board of Trustees. All
permits shall be subject to approval of the President and Board of Trustees.
(1966 Code, §8.201)
8-2-2: BOND REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any such driveway for the
habitual or continual use of vehicles belonging to any person other than the
owner or occupant of the premises abutting on such driveway or to which it
leads, or for any commercial use, unless a bond or indemnity policy in the
penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) is first filed by the person so
constructing or maintaining the driveway. Such bond shall be conditioned to
indemnify the Village for any loss, damage or liability suffered or incurred by
reason of the existence, construction or use of such driveway, and shall have
as surety a corporation licensed and authorized to do business in the State of
Illinois as a surety company. (1966 Code, §8.207)
8-2-3: GRADE SURFACES:
No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a steep, sharp
depression or other obstruction on the sidewalk. The grade shall be as nearly
as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. It shall be unlawful to
have the surface finish of any driveway where the same crosses the sidewalk
constructed of such materials as to render it slippery or hazardous to
pedestrians, or to have the grade of such portion vary from the grade of the
sidewalk, or be other than level. (1966 Code, §8.203)
8-2-4: SPECIFICATIONS:
Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed in compliance with
specifications adopted from time to time by the Village President and Board of
Trustees. (1966 Code, §8.204)
8-2-5: REPAIR:
It shall be the duty of the person maintaining the driveway to keep the same in
good repair where it crosses the sidewalk, and free from obstructions and
openings. (1966 Code, §8.205)
CHAPTER 3
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Permit Required
8-3-2: Application for Permit, Issuance
8-3-3: Bond Required
8-3-4: Deposit Required
8-3-5: Barricades and Lights
8-3-6: Manner of Excavating
8-3-7: Sidewalks
8-3-8: Time Limits
8-3-9: Restoring Surface
8-3-10: Supervision
8-3-11: Exemptions
8-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to tunnel under or to make an excavation in
any street, alley or other public place in the Village without having obtained
a permit as is herein required, or without complying with the provisions of
this Chapter or in violation of or variance from the terms of any such permit.
(1966 Code, §8.301)
8-3-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT, ISSUANCE:
Application for such permit shall be made to the Village Clerk, and shall
describe the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof,
the purpose therefor, and the person doing the actual excavating work, and the
name of the person for whom or which the work is being done, and shall contain
an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws
relating to the work to be done. (1966 Code, §8.302)
No such permit shall be issued except on order of the Village President and
Board of Trustees. (1966 Code, §8.303)
8-3-3: BOND REQUIRED:
No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has
filed with the Village Clerk a bond in the sum of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss, liability or
damage that may result or accrue from or because of the making, existence or
manner of guarding or constructing any such tunnel or excavation. Such bond
shall have as surety a corporation listed to do business in the State of
Illinois as a surety company. (1966 Code, §8.305)
8-3-4: DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has
deposited with the Village Clerk a cash deposit in the sum of at least twenty
dollars ($20.00), if no pavement is involved, and at least one hundred dollars
($100.00) if the excavation is in a paved area, to insure the proper
restoration of the ground and laying of the pavement, if any. From this deposit
shall be deducted the expense to the Village of relaying the surface of the
ground or pavement and of making the refill if this is done by the Village or
at their expense, and the balance shall be returned to the applicant without
interest after the tunnel or excavation is completely refilled and the surface
or pavement is restored. (1966 Code, §8.306)
8-3-5: BARRICADES AND LIGHTS:
Any person making or maintaining any excavation in any street or alley shall
keep the same adequately guarded by barricades and lights to protect persons
and property from injury. (1966 Code, §8.307)
8-3-6: MANNER OF EXCAVATING:
It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way contrary
to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper bracing shall
be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground; and in excavations,
the excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface any portion which
extends beyond the opening at the surface.
No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making of such
excavations or tunnel; and notice shall be given to the persons maintaining any
such pipes, cables or conduits or to the Village department or officer charged
with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or affected by the taking
of any such excavation or tunnel before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be
disturbed.
No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or the roots
thereof. (1966 Code, §8.308)
8-3-7: SIDEWALKS:
If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for
users. (1966 Code, §8.309)
8-3-8: TIME LIMITS:
Each application for a permit shall state the length of time it is estimated
will elapse from the commencement of the work until the restoration of the
surface of the ground, or until the refill is made ready for the pavement to be
put on by the village if the village restores such surface pavement. It shall
be unlawful to fail to comply with this time limitation unless permission for
an extension of time is granted by the village president and board of trustees.
(1966 Code, §8.310)
8-3-9: RESTORING SURFACE:
Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public street, alley
or public place in the village shall restore the surface to its original
condition if there is no pavement there. Refills shall be properly tamped down,
and any bracing in such tunnel or excavation shall be left in the ground.
Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be repaired and
the surface relaid by the applicant, in compliance with the village ordinances
and subject to the supervision of the superintendent of streets; and if such
work is not done within ten (10) days after restoration is possible, the
village may restore the surface and charge the cost thereof to the permittee.
(1966 Code, §8.311)
8-3-10: SUPERVISION:
The superintendent of streets shall, from time to time, inspect all excavations
and tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley or other public
place in the village to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. Notice shall be given to the superintendent of streets at least ten
(10) hours before the work of refilling any such excavation or tunnel
commences. (1966 Code, §8.312)
8-3-11: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter relative to securing permits shall not apply to
officers or employees of the village engaged in doing work for the village; nor
to persons or corporations doing work for the village under contract; nor to
persons or corporations which are operating under a franchise or grant from the
village, if such franchise provides for the making of excavations and tunnels
without securing a permit therefor. (1966 Code, §8.313)
CHAPTER 4
SIGNS AND AWNINGS
(Rep. by Ord. 522, 11-10-2009)
CHAPTER 5
TREE ORDINANCE
SECTION:
8-5-1: Title
8-5-2: Purpose And Intent
8-5-3: Definitions
8-5-4: Application And Permit For Tree Removal/Replacement And New Street
Plantings
8-5-5: Cause For Tree Removal
8-5-6: Tree Removal; Liability
8-5-7: Tree Removal/Replacement Fund
8-5-8: Tree Planting And Care Standards
8-5-9: Advertisements Or Notices
8-5-10: Notices; Violations
8-5-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the STOCKTON TREE
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 395, 12-14-1999)
8-5-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the
public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of
the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants upon
village property within the village of Stockton, Jo Daviess County, Illinois.
   B.   Intent: It is the intent of the board of trustees of the village of
Stockton, Jo Daviess County, Illinois, that the terms of this chapter shall be
construed so as to promote:
      1.   The planting, maintenance, restoration and survival of desirable
trees, shrubs and other plants upon village property within the village; and
      2.   Protection from personal injury and property damage caused or
threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs,
or other plants located upon village property within the village. (Ord. 395,
12-14-1999)
8-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used within this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth in this section:
DOWNTOWN TREES: Trees located in the sidewalks on both sides of Main Street
from Benton Avenue on the north to Railroad Avenue on the south and on both
sides of Front Avenue from Hudson Street on the east to Pearl Street on the
west.
PROPERTY OWNER: The owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: All grounds and right-of-way (ROWs) owned or maintained by the
village.
PUBLIC TREE: Any tree or woody vegetation on village-owned or village-
maintained property or right-of-way.
STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation located on
village property.
VILLAGE PROPERTY: Property within the village limits of the village of
Stockton, Jo Daviess County, Illinois, and
   A.   Owned by the village, or
   B.   Implied or expressly dedicated to the public for the use of vehicular
or pedestrian traffic or for public utility easements (including, but not
limited to, road and street rights of way, alleys, parkway and terrace areas).
(Ord. 395, 12-14-1999; amd. Ord. 758, 12-12-2023)
8-5-4: APPLICATION AND PERMIT FOR TREE REMOVAL/REPLACEMENT AND NEW STREET
PLANTINGS:
   A.   With the exception of downtown trees, the village shall have the
exclusive right to remove, replace or plant new street trees as well as to
control the removal, replacement or planting of street trees. The adjoining
property owner shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of grass and
existing street trees as well as for the care and maintenance of replacement
street trees. The Stockton chamber of commerce shall be responsible for the
care and maintenance as well as removal and replacement of downtown trees.
(Ord. 523, 11-10-2009)
   B.   The property owner shall make a written application to the village
clerk for removal or replacement of any street tree located on village property
adjoining that of the property owner, or for the planting of any new street
tree(s) to be located on village property adjoining that of the property owner,
which application shall then be considered in sequential order by the streets,
sidewalks, forestry, building and grounds committee of the village's board of
trustees. (Ord. 523, 11-10-2009; amd. Ord. 583, 5-14-2013)
8-5-5: CAUSE FOR TREE REMOVAL:
   A.   Good and sufficient cause for tree removal shall be:
      1.   Diseased or dead trees or limbs.
      2.   Roots, trunks or limbs injurious or detrimental to sidewalks, alleys
or streets or other traffic thereon.
      3.   Roots injurious or detrimental to the operation of utilities,
including, but not limited to, sewer, water, gas, electric and telephone. (Ord.
395, 12-14-1999)
   B.   As a guideline in making their decisions, the streets, sidewalks,
forestry, building and grounds committee shall consider that the trees
exhibiting the greatest hazard shall be the first designated for removal. (Ord.
395, 12-14-1999; amd. Ord. 583, 5-14-2013)
8-5-6: TREE REMOVAL; LIABILITY:
The actual job of street tree removal shall be done by a professional tree
removal service or contractor who shall demonstrate proof of liability and
damage insurances to the village. (Ord. 395, 12-14-1999)
8-5-7: TREE REMOVAL/REPLACEMENT FUND:
   A.   An amount shall be allocated from the village general fund by the board
of trustees on an annual basis, which amount shall be designated the "tree
removal and replacement" fund. (Ord. 395, 12-14-1999)
   B.   The tree removal and replacement fund and its annual allocation shall
be under the administration of the streets, sidewalks, forestry, buildings and
grounds committee with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. (Ord.
395, 12-14-1999; amd. Ord. 583, 5-14-2013)
   C.   The use of the tree removal and replacement fund shall be restricted to
the removal and replacement of street trees. If the location of a street tree
is in doubt, the services of a registered land surveyor shall be engaged and
paid for from the fund. The surveyor's determination shall be final. (Ord. 395,
12-14-1999)
8-5-8: TREE PLANTING AND CARE STANDARDS:
   A.   All planting and maintenance of public trees shall conform to the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A-300 “Standards for Tree Care
Operations” and shall follow all tree care Best Management Practices (BMPs)
published by the International Society of Arboriculture.
   B.   The village shall maintain an official list of desirable tree species
for planting on public property in two size classes: Ornamental (20 feet or
less in height at maturity) and Shade (greater than 20 feet at maturity). Trees
from this approved list may be planted without special permission; other
species may be planted with approval from the village.
   C.   The village shall develop and maintain an official set of spacing
requirements for the planting of trees on public property. No tree may be
planted within the visibility triangle of a street intersection or within 10
feet of a fire hydrant.
   D.   Only trees listed as Ornamental trees on the official village tree
species list may be planted under or within 15 lateral feet of any overhead
utility wire.
   E.   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public
place in the village in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic,
travel or the visibility of vehicles, pedestrians or any traffic sign shall be
trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises on which such trees or shrubs
grow so that the obstruction shall cease. A minimum clear, unobstructed space
of eight feet (8') above the surface of a sidewalk and fourteen feet (14')
above the surface of a street shall be maintained at all times.
   F.   Any limb of a tree or growth of a shrub which has become likely to fall
on or across any street, sidewalk or alley shall be removed by the owner of the
premises on which such tree or shrub grows or stands. The superintendent of
streets may trim or cause to be trimmed any such tree or shrub or remove any
such tree or branch thereof so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or
passage shall be eliminated.
   G.   Any person given the right to maintain poles and wires in the streets,
alleys or other public places in the village shall, in the absence of provision
in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from
and away from any trees or shrubs in such places so far as may be possible and
shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed and subject to the
supervision of the superintendent of streets, so that no injury shall be done
to the poles or wires or shrubs and trees by contact therewith. The maintenance
of public trees for utility clearance shall conform to all applicable State
laws and utility industry standards. (Ord. 395, 12-14-1999; amd. Ord. 758, 12-
12-2023)
8-5-9: ADVERTISEMENTS OR NOTICES:
It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any street
tree. (Ord. 395, 12-14-1999)
8-5-10: NOTICES; VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Any notice as may be required or appropriate under this chapter shall
be, if to a resident property owner, by personal service, and if to a
nonresident property owner, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
said person's last known address coupled with publication at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation within the village. Notice shall be deemed
made when served or mailed and published.
   B.   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction or plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 395, 12-14-1999)
CHAPTER 6
WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Turning On
8-6-2: Application For Service
8-6-3: Deposit Required
8-6-4: Service Connection
8-6-5: Inspections
8-6-6: Plumbing
8-6-7: Service Pipes
8-6-8: Water Meters
8-6-9: Resale Of Water
8-6-10: Tampering With Water System
8-6-11: Cross Connections
8-6-1: TURNING ON:
No water from the village water supply shall be turned on for service into any
premises by any person but the waterworks superintendent or some person
authorized by him to perform this service. (1966 Code, §10.101)
8-6-2: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
Application to have water turned on shall be made in writing and shall contain
an agreement by the applicant to abide by and accept all of the provisions of
this chapter as conditions governing the use of the village water supply. (Ord.
421, 5-13-2003)
8-6-3: DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
A deposit in an amount to be determined by the village board in each instance
shall be made with each application and shall be retained by the village to
ensure payment of all bills. When service to the applicant is discontinued
permanently, this deposit, less any amount still owing to the village for water
service, shall be refunded. (Ord. 421, 5-13-2003)
8-6-4: SERVICE CONNECTION:
   A.   No connections with a water main shall be made without a permit being
issued and twenty four (24) hours' notice having been given to the waterworks
superintendent.
   B.   All such connections shall be made by or under the supervision of the
waterworks superintendent.
   C.   Before connection is made with the water distribution system, the
premises to be served must be equipped with a meter and buffalo box properly
installed on the service pipe. When the meter is located within a building,
service pipe shall be installed from the buffalo box to the meter and shall be
at least four feet (4') underground. (1966 Code, §10.105; amd. Ord. 748, 8-8-
2023)
8-6-5: INSPECTIONS:
Each and every part of a water connection shall be inspected and approved by
the waterworks superintendent before being concealed and backfilled. Employees
of the waterworks and sewage system shall have the right of access at all times
to any person's premises for the purpose of ascertaining the number and type of
water connections of the combined system. Any person refusing the right to
permit the said employee access to his premises shall be subjected to the
penalty provided for in this chapter. (1966 Code, §10.106)
8-6-6: PLUMBING:
No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the plumbing does
not comply with the provisions of the plumbing regulations of the village 1 ;
provided, that water may be turned on for construction work in unfinished
buildings, subject to the provisions of this chapter. (1966 Code, §10.104)
 
Notes
  1. See section
1 9-1-3 of this code and subsection
  8-6-7B of this chapter.
8-6-7: SERVICE PIPES:
   A.   Installation: All service pipes from the mains to the premises served
shall be installed by, and at the cost of, the owner of the property to be
served or the applicant for the service. Such installation shall be under the
supervision of the village. (1966 Code, §10.201)
   B.   Pipes: No service shall be installed unless it conforms to the
specifications of the BOCA basic plumbing code, which is hereby adopted, three
(3) copies of which are kept on file in the office of the village clerk. (1966
Code §10.202; amd. 1982 Code)
   C.   Repairs: All repairs for service pipes and plumbing systems of
buildings shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises
served. The village may, in case of an emergency, repair any service pipes and
if this is done, the cost of such repair work shall be repaid to the village by
the owner of the premises served. (1966 Code §10.203)
   D.   Excavations: Excavations for installing service pipes or repairing the
same shall be made in compliance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this title
relating to excavations in streets. Provided, that it shall be unlawful to
place any service pipe in the same excavation with, or directly over, any
drainpipe or sewer pipe. (1966 Code §10.204)
   E.   Shutoff Boxes: Shutoff boxes or service boxes shall be placed on every
service pipe, and shall be located between the curb line and the sidewalk line
where this is practicable. Such boxes shall be so located that they are easily
accessible and shall be protected from frost. (1966 Code §10.205)
8-6-8: WATER METERS:
   A.   Required: Except as provided in subsection B of this section, all
premises using the village water supply must be equipped with an adequate water
meter or meters furnished by the village, and paid for by the consumer. For
purposes of this section, the consumer shall be considered to have paid for any
meter required by virtue of his payment of his initial service hookup fee to
the village. Any building, structure or mobile home park not essentially
completed prior to the effective date hereof shall be so constructed and
equipped as to allow for the separate metering of each individual tenant's,
occupant's or mobile home's water usage according to water rates established
from time to time by the village pursuant to chapter 8 of this title. Any
building, structure or mobile home park which has been essentially completed
prior to the effective date hereof shall not be required to have separate
meters as required above; however, each occupied unit shall be charged the
minimum water rate as established from time to time by the village pursuant to
said chapter 8 of this title.
   B.   Installation: All remote meters required to be installed or otherwise
located pursuant to this chapter shall be installed on the building’s exterior
in a location that shall afford reasonably convenient access for the purpose of
reading said meters.
   C.   Testing And Protection:
      1.   All municipal water meters shall be taken out and tested upon the
complaint of the consumer, upon payment of the current testing fee as
determined by the board of trustees. If, upon testing, the meter is not within
three percent (3%) accurate, it shall be repaired or replaced and the testing
fee returned to the consumer. The village will be responsible for repairing or
replacing defective water meters, unless any such malfunction, defect or damage
is caused by the consumer.
      2.   All municipal water meters shall be protected by the consumer from
freezing or physical damage. In case of wilful damage to, or frost breakage of
the meter, it shall be repaired or replaced at the consumer’s expense. (Ord.
232, 5-3-1983; amd. Ord. 544, 2-8-2011; Ord. 757, 12-12-2023)
8-6-9: RESALE OF WATER:
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the
village water supply to any premises other than that for which application has
been made and the meter installed, except in case of emergency. (1966 Code
§10.107)
8-6-10: TAMPERING WITH WATER SYSTEM:
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the village to tamper
with, alter or injure any part of the village waterworks or supply system, or
any meter. (1966 Code §10.108)
8-6-11: CROSS CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply:
    BACKFLOW: Water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants
entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow. "Back
siphonage" is one type of "backflow".
   CROSS CONNECTION: A connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenance
through which a backflow could occur.
   SAFE AIR GAP: The minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above the
minimum high water level or overflow rim in a fixture, device or container to
which public water is furnished which shall be at least two (2) times the
inside diameter of the water inlet pipe; but shall not be less than one inch
(1") and need not be more than twelve inches (12").
   SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY: A water supply system maintained in addition to a
public water supply, including, but not limited to, water systems from ground
or surface sources or water from a public water supply which in any way has
been treated, processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or stored in
other than an approved storage facility.
   SUBMERGED INLET: A water pipe or extension thereto from a public water
supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain
water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is
unprotected against backflow.
   WATER UTILITY: The water system maintained by the village of Stockton.
   B.   Compliance With Existing Laws: A connection with a public water supply
system shall comply with the existing laws and rules. The Illinois state
plumbing code, the provisions of the village code and the rules and regulations
of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   C.   Cross Connections Prohibited: Cross connection of the public water
supply system and any other water supply system or source, including, but not
limited to, the following is prohibited:
      1.   Between a public water supply system and a secondary water supply.
      2.   Between a public water supply system and a submerged outlet.
      3.   Between a lawn sprinkling system and the public water supply system.
      4.   Between a public water supply system and piping which may contain
sanitary waste or a chemical contaminant.
      5.   Between a public water supply system and piping immersed in a tank
or vessel which may contain a contaminant.
   D.   Local Cross Connection Control Program: The village shall develop a
comprehensive control program for the elimination and prevention of all cross
connections, and removal of all existing cross connections and prevention of
all future cross connections.
   E.   Corrections And Protective Devices: Any user of the public water supply
system shall obtain written approval from the Stockton water department of any
proposed corrective action or protective device intended to eliminate or
prevent a cross connection before its use or installation. The time allowed for
completion of the necessary corrective action required to eliminate cross
connections shall be dependent upon the degree of hazard involved and the time
required to obtain and install the equipment. If the cross connection has not
been removed within the time as hereinafter specified, the village shall
physically separate the public water supply system from the on site piping
system in such manner that the two (2) systems cannot be connected by any
unauthorized person.
   F.   Piping Identification: When a secondary water source is used in
addition to the public water supply system, the public water supply and the
secondary water piping shall be identified by distinguishing colors or tags and
so maintained that each pipe may be readily traced in its entirety to its
origin in order to protect the public water supply system at the service
connection in a manner acceptable to the water department.
   G.   Private Water Storage Tanks: A private water storage tank supplied from
the public water supply system shall be deemed a secondary water supply unless
it is designed and approved for potable water usage.
   H.   Elimination Of Existing Cross Connections: Within one year from the
effective date of this section, all existing cross connections to the Stockton
water supply system shall be eliminated. The expenses of such elimination shall
be that of the property owner on which such cross connection exists.
   I.   Inspection: The Stockton water department or any representative thereof
shall have the authority to inspect any premises to determine the presence of
an existing cross connection and to order the elimination of such cross
connection.
   J.   Discontinuance Of Water Service: The Stockton water department is
hereby authorized to discontinue water service after a reasonable notice to any
person owning any property where a cross connection exists in violation of this
code. The Stockton water department may take such measures as necessary to
eliminate any danger of the contamination of the public water supply system.
Water service to such property shall not be restored until such cross
connection has been eliminated.
   K.   Prohibition: No user of the village water supply system shall cause or
allow any cross connection to exist on his premises. (Ord. 267, 1986)
CHAPTER 7
SEWER SERVICE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Definitions
8-7-2: Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-7-3: Private Sewage Disposal
8-7-4: Building Sewers And Connections
8-7-5: Use Of Public Sewers
8-7-6: Special Agreements
8-7-7: Protection From Damage
8-7-8: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
8-7-9: Penalties
8-7-10: Validity
8-7-11: Chapter In Force
8-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter and chapter 8 of this title shall be as follows:
ACT or "THE     The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
ACT":           amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
ADMINISTRATOR:  The administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
APPROVING       The president and board of Trustees of the Village of Stockton acting by and
AUTHORITY:      through the Waterworks Superintendent, being their duly authorized agent or
                representative.
BASIC USER      The assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system for debt service,
CHARGE:         operation, maintenance and replacement expenses.
BIOCHEMICAL     The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
OXYGEN DEMAND   under standard laboratory procedures as described in the Standard Methods.
(BOD):
                The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge
BUILDING DRAIN: from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and
                conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning
                five feet (5') (1.5m) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
                disposal.
COMMERCIAL      Transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in selling
USER:           merchandise or rendering services.
COMPATIBLE      Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, pH and fecal
POLLUTANT:      coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit.
CONNECTION
CHARGE, WATER   A charge levied on users for connecting to the water and sewerage system.
AND SEWER:
DIRECTOR:       The director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
EASEMENT:       An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT        Defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
CRITERIA:
                The U.S. Government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment
FEDERAL GRANT:  works, as provided for by Title II - Grants for Construction of Treatment Works of
                the Act and implementing regulations.
FIVE DAY        The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
BIOCHEMICAL     under standard laboratory procedures described in Standard Methods for five (5)
OXYGEN DEMAND   days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
(BOD5):
FIXED
ADMINISTRATIVE  A charge levied on users for the cost of administrating the sewerage system.
SERVICE CHARGE:
                Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from
FLOATABLE OIL:  wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be
                considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater
                does not interfere with the collection system.
GARBAGE:        Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing
                of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
INCOMPATIBLE    Any pollutant which is not a "compatible pollutant" as defined herein.
POLLUTANT:
INDUSTRIAL      A source of indirect discharge.
USER:
                Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping
INDUSTRIAL      from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process
WASTE:          of from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct
                from sanitary sewage.
INSTITUTIONAL/  Schools, churches, penal institutions and users associated with Federal, State, and
GOVERNMENTAL    local governments.
USER:
                A unit of concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is one-thousandths
MILLIGRAMS PER  gram (0.001 g) of the constituent in one thousand milliliters (1,000 mL) of water.
LITER:          It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is
                approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
                analysis.
                Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the Administrator, or
NPDES PERMIT:   where appropriate by the Director, after enactment of the Federal Clean Water Act
                to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the Act.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground
                water.
                Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation,
PERSON:         association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other
                legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition
                includes all Federal, State, and local governmental entities.
                A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
pH:             More technically, the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of hydrogen-ion
                concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division of
                Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
                A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment
                works or stream. One population equivalent is one hundred (100) gallons of sewage
POPULATION      per day, containing seventeen hundredths (0.17) pounds of BOD and twenty-hundredths
EQUIVALENT:     (0.20) pounds of suspended solids. The impact on a treatment works is evaluated as
                the equivalent of highs and of three (3) parameters. Impact on a stream is the
                higher of the BOD and suspended solids parameters.
                The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
                alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to (or in lieu
PRETREATMENT:   of) introducing such pollutants into the public sewer. This reduction or alteration
                can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes;
                or by other means (except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless
                allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard).
PROPERLY        The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been
SHREDDED        shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
GARBAGE:        conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-
                half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in any dimension.
                A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the Village. It shall also
PUBLIC SEWER:   include sewers within or outside the Village boundaries that serve one or more
                persons and ultimately discharge into the Village sanitary sewer system, even
                though those sewers may not have been constructed with Village funds.
                A treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which
PUBLICLY OWNED  is owned by the Village of Stockton. This definition includes any devices or
TREATMENT WORKS systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of
(POTW):         sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey
                wastewater to a treatment plant.
                Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances
REPLACEMENT:    which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain
                capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The
                term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement.
                All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments, and permanent multi-
RESIDENTIAL     family dwellings that discharge wastewater, which is similar in volume and/or
USER:           chemical make-up to the discharge of a residential dwelling unit, into the Village
                sewer system.
                A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into
SANITARY SEWER: which storm, surface and ground waters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not
                intentionally admitted.
                Used interchangeably with "wastewater", a combination of the water-carried wastes
SEWAGE:         from residences, business building, institutions, and industrial establishments,
                together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
SEWER:          A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or other waste liquids, including storm,
                surface and ground water drainage.
SEWERAGE:       The system of sewers and appurtenances for collection, transportation and pumping
                of sewage.
SHALL; MAY:     Shall is mandatary; may is permissible.
                (1)   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
                (2)   An industrial user that:
                   a.   Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of
                process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler
SIGNIFICANT     blowdown wastewater);
INDUSTRIAL USER    b.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%) or more
(SIU):          of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
                plant; or
                   c.   Is designated as such by the Village on the basis that it has a reasonable
                potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
                pretreatment standard or requirement.
                Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any
SLUG:           given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer
                than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24)
                hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STANDARD        The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of
METHODS:        "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater", published jointly by
                the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation.
STATE ACT:      The Illinois Antipollution Bond Act of 1970.
                The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of
STATE GRANT:    treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Antipollution Bond Act and for
                making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of Illinois.
STORM SEWER:    A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage, but excludes sewage
                and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
STORMWATER      That portion of precipitation that is drained into the sewer.
RUNOFF:
                The waterworks superintendent of the Village of Stockton or his authorized deputy,
SUPERINTENDENT: agent or representative is also known as the water superintendent or sewer
                superintendent, see section
                1-8-3 of this code.
                The assessment in addition to the fixed administrative service charge and basic
SURCHARGE:      user charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength
                than the concentration values established for average strength sewage as defined
                herein.
                The total concentration of organic and ammonia nitrogen as measured by the Kjeldahl
TOTAL KJELDAHL  method. Quantitative determination of total Kjeldahl nitrogen shall be made in
NITROGEN:       accordance with procedures set forth in the most recent edition of standard
                methods.
TOTAL SUSPENDED The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in,
SOLIDS or       water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that are removable by laboratory
SUSPENDED       filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in
SOLIDS:         accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of
                Laboratory Methods.
                Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect of water
UNPOLLUTED      that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not
WATER:          be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment
                facilities provided.
USEFUL LIFE:    The estimated period during which the collection system and/or treatment works will
                be operated.
USER CHARGE:    A charge levied on users of treatment works for debt service, operation,
                maintenance and replacement costs.
USER CLASS:     The type of user, residential, institutional/governmental, commercial or industrial
                as defined herein.
VILLAGE:        The Village of Stockton, Illinois, and any reference to "within the Village" shall
                mean all territory within the perimeter of the Village of Stockton boundaries.
                The spent water of a community. From this standpoint, of course, it may be a
WASTEWATER:     combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
                buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any ground water,
                surface water and stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER      The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat
FACILITIES:     domestic and industrial wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse.
                The charge per quarter or month levied on all users of the wastewater facilities.
WASTEWATER      The service charge shall be computed as outlined in subsection
SERVICE CHARGE: 8-8-1B of this title and shall consist of the total or fixed administrative service
                charge, a basic user charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
WASTEWATER      An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes
TREATMENT       and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or
WORKS:          "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".
WATER QUALITY   Defined in the water pollution regulations of Illinois.
STANDARDS:
WATERCOURSE:    A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
                The principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation of
                the waterworks and/or sewerage system. These revenues shall be segregated so that
WATERWORKS AND  water system revenues shall be credited to the waterworks account of the waterworks
SEWERAGE FUND:  and sewerage fund and revenues of the sewerage system shall be credited to the
                sewerage account of the waterworks and sewerage fund. (Ord. 651, 5-8-2018; amd.
                Ord. 702, 12-8-2020)
 
8-7-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
Village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
Village, or any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for disposal of sewage.
   D.   The owner of all houses, building or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the
Village and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the
Village, is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety
(90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public
sewer is within two hundred feet (200') (61m) of the property line. (Ord. 651,
5-8-2018; amd. Ord. 702, 12-8-2020)
8-7-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
subsection D of this section, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   B.   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the Village, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the
Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
shall be paid to the Village at the time the application is filed.
   C.   A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
The Superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty
eight (48) hours of the receipt of the notice by the Superintendent.
   D.   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State of Illinois private
sewage disposal licensing act and code and with the State of Illinois
environmental protection agency. No permit shall be issued for any private
sewage disposal system employing insufficient subsurface soil absorption
facilities. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet.
   E.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection D of this
section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable materials.
   F.   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Village.
   G.   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Village.
   H.   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sanitary sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage
disposal system shall be cleaned out of sludge and filled with clean bank-run
gravel or dirt. (Ord. 651, 5-8-2018; amd. Ord. 702, 12-8-2020)
8-7-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
   B.   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful, except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the Act and more stringent State and local standards.
   C.   There shall be two (2) classes of building permits: 1) for residential
and commercial service, and 2) for service to establishments producing
industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the Village. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. A permit and
inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a residential or commercial
building sewer permit and fifty dollars ($50.00) for an industrial building
sewer permit shall be paid to the Village at the time the application is filed.
   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall
only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sanitary sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately handle the
additional anticipated waste load. Additionally, industrial users considered
significant industrial users as defined in this chapter will need to obtain an
individual wastewater discharge permit per chapter 13 of this title.
   D.   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
Village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
   E.   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
   F.   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
   G.   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing codes, or other applicable rules and regulations of
the Village.
   H.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings, in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   I.   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   J.   Each connection shall be made at the "Y" designed for that property.
Only where the designated "Y" is not located within three (3') feet of the
point of measurements furnished by the Superintendent, will a tap-in connection
be allowed.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules
and regulations of the Village. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Superintendent before installation.
   K.   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. Each and every part of a sewer connection shall be
inspected and approved by the Waterworks Superintendent or his representative
before concealed and backfilled.
   L.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall comply with the
provisions of this code relating to excavations in streets and shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed during
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Village.
   M.   Sewer connection charges shall be as outlined in section
8-8-2 of this title.
   N.   Building Sewer Repair Or Replacement:
      1.   Requirements For Building Sewer Repair Or Replacement: The
Superintendent shall issue a notice to repair to the property owner when the
building sewer has conditions which would result in an unacceptable amount of
inflow or infiltration to enter the sewer system or which would result in an
unacceptable risk of blockages. The Superintendent shall have the sole
discretion to determine when repair and/or replacement is required due to
unacceptable conditions of a building sewer. A building sewer shall be
considered in compliance with the provisions of this chapter if inspection
verifies all of the following conditions to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent:
         a.   The building sewer is free of roots, deposits of fat, oil and
grease (FOG) and/or solids which may impede or obstruct the flow of sewage;
         b.   There are no illicit or illegal connections to the building sewer
which would cause inflow, such as roof leaders, sump pumps or yard drains;
         c.   All joints in the building sewer are tight and sound to prevent
the exfiltration of sewage or infiltration of groundwater;
         d.   The building sewer is free of structural defects, cracks, breaks,
or missing portions and the grade is reasonably uniform without major sags or
offsets;
         e.   The building sewer is equipped with cleanouts, if required, as
determined by the Superintendent;
         f.   The building sewer is constructed of materials that are corrosive
resistant, nonabsorbent, durable, and with a remaining design life of at least
twenty five (25) years. "Orangeburg pipe", a bituminized fiber pipe made from
layers of wood pulp and pitch pressed together, shall be considered to be at
the end of its design life and not compliant with the provisions of this
chapter.
      2.   Owner's Duty To Make Connection: When any street or alley is ordered
to be paved or otherwise permanently improved, it shall be the duty of all
owners of property abutting upon such street or alley upon written notice of
the Village to at once make permanent and substantial connections meeting the
conditions listed within this chapter with sewer, along such street or alley at
their own expense. The Village shall order such connections made as are
necessary, stating generally the location of the street, and the kind and
character of connections to be made with the kind of materials to be used and
when the work of making such connections shall be completed.
      3.   Notice To Connect: In case any property owner or title holder fails
to make such connections within the time allotted within the provided notice
for the improvements of any such street or alley, the Village may order the
same and cause the Superintendent to prepare notices to such delinquent
property owners to make such connections within ten (10) days thereafter. The
notices shall be mailed by certified mail to the last known address of the
property owner or personally served on the property owner. The Superintendent
may at their option, also publish notice in an newspaper in the Village stating
the particular lot or lots or parcel of ground in front of which connections
shall be made.
      4.   Completion Of Work: The Village shall include the connections the
property owner fails to make within the capital improvement project.
      5.   Connections made By The Village: If any owner of abutting property
fails to comply with the provisions of this section by the time stated in the
notice to connect, the Village may proceed to have such connections made under
the supervision and direction of the Superintendent, and keep accurate account
of the expenses incurred.
      6.   Assessment: The Village shall send a statement of total expense
incurred, by certified mail, to the last known address of the property owner
who has failed to abide by the notice to connect. If the amount shown on the
statement is not paid within thirty (30) days of mailing, the cost and expenses
of putting in connections by the Village as provided herein shall be levied as
a special tax against the property abutting or adjacent thereto and the method
of estimating, assessing, levying and collecting the tax shall be the same as
the prescribed for general taxes.
      7.   Excavations After Pavement Laid: Whenever any street or alley has
been ordered to be paved, and the property owners owning property abutting or
lying along such street or alley, have been notified by the Village to connect
their property by laying down pipes within the right of way in front of or
along the property, any person so notified who has refused to comply with the
requirements of the notice shall not enter upon such street or alley after it
has been paved and make excavation in the paved portion of thereof for the
purpose of connecting their property with such mains within four (4) years
after such paving is laid and not thereafter within written authorization by
the Village. (Ord. 383, 6-23-1999; amd. Ord. 651, 5-8-2018; Ord. 702, 12-8-
2020)
8-7-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   B.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling waters or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm
sewer or natural outlet.
   C.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, or to cause the effluent from
the treatment works to violate applicable effluent standards.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five tenths
(5.5), or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
   D.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and maximum limit established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited include:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65.6°C).
      2.   Any water or waste containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100
mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°F) (0°C) and one hundred fifty
degree Fahrenheit (150°F) (65.6°C).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation of
any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three quarters horsepower (3/4 HP)
(0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the approval of the
Superintendent.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions, unless neutralized.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement to such a degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage of the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Superintendent for such materials.
      The Superintendent will evaluate each toxic or objectionable substance
waste on a concentration-dilution basis and will establish maximum allowable
discharge concentrations for each individual person to protect against the
following:
         a.   Decrease sewage plant treatment process efficiencies and degraded
effluent qualities exceeding the current requirements of the regulatory
agencies.
         b.   Concentrations of any toxic or objectionable substance in the
sewage treatment plant effluent exceeding the current maximum limits
established by the regulatory agencies for such plant effluent flows.
         c.   Any concentrations of toxic or objectionable substances in the
plant effluent flows which will result in concentrations of such substances in
the receiving waters which will exceed the regulatory agency's maximum
allowable limits for these substances in the receiving water.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols, or other taste or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies
of jurisdiction for such drainage to receiving waters.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in the
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      8.   Any waters having a pH in excess of nine and five-tenths (9.5).
      9.   Any mercury or any of the compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l of Hg
at any time except as permitted by the Superintendent in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations.
      10.   Any cyanide in excess of one-tenth milligram per liter (0.1 mg/l)
at any time except as permitted by the Superintendent in compliance with
applicable State and Federal regulations.
      11.   Materials which exert or cause:
         a.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
         b.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions)
         c.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements, in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
         d.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs as defined herein.
      12.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are
amendable to treatment only to such a degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
   E.   Additional prohibited discharges for industrial users are outlined in
chapter 13 of this title.
   F.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, in which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection D or subsection E of this
section and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment
provided in 40 CFR 403, June 26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which in
the judgement of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage treatment works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:
      1.   Reject the wastes and require the violator to cease and desist
discharging said materials into the sewer system immediately.
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers, as outlined above and in chapter 13 of this title.
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
      4.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treatment
of the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the
provisions of subsection
8-8-1B of this title.
      If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Superintendent, subject to the requirements
of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   G.   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or
other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   H.   Where preliminary treatment of flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any water or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
   I.   Requirements for the installation of monitoring facilities by
industrial users are outlined in chapter 13 of this title.
   J.   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory analysis results required per
chapter 13 of this title.
   K.   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of the IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual
of Laboratory methods, and shall be determined at the monitoring facility
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said monitoring facility.
      1.   In the event that no monitoring facility has been required, the
monitoring facility shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
      2.   Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all
outfalls on a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites from all outfalls, whereas
pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.
      Any person discharging wastes having concentrations greater than the
normal concentrations as set forth herein shall upon notification by the
approving authority, install a composite sampler with a compatible pacing
(metering) device for monitoring said substances. The pacing and sampling
devices shall be of the type approved by the Superintendent. (Ord. 383, 6-23-
1999)
      Additional sampling and laboratory analysis requirements for industrial
users are outlined in chapter 13 of this title.
   L.   Upon the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standard
(NCPS) for a particular industrial user, the said standard, if more stringent
than the limitations imposed upon chapter 13 of this title for sources in that
category, shall, when effective, immediately supersede the limitations and
conditions imposed under chapter 13 of this title and said standard shall be
complied with by all industrial users subject to said national categorical
pretreatment standards.
   M.   Per chapter 13 of this title, industrial users shall not dilute process
water as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with a discharge limitation.
   N.   Each user having the ability to cause interference with the sewage
treatment plant or to violate the regulatory provisions of this chapter shall
provide protection from accidental discharge to the sewage treatment plant of
prohibited materials or other substances that may impact the ability of the
sewage treatment plant to adequately treat wastewater. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained
at the owner's cost and expense.
      1.   Immediate Notification: In the case of an accidental or intentional
discharge of materials which may cause interference or pass through at the POTW
or violate requirements of this chapter, it shall be the responsibility of the
user to immediately telephone and notify the Village wastewater treatment plant
of the incident. The notification shall include name of caller, location of
discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and
corrective action taken.
      2.   Written Report: Within fifteen (15) days of an accidental or
intentional discharge, the user shall submit to the Village a detailed written
report on forms to be provided by the Village, describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Follow up reports may be required by the Village. Such a report,
or reports, shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills,
or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such report relieve the
user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by
this chapter or otherwise. Failure to report accidental or intentional
discharges may, in addition to any other remedies available to the Village;
result in the revocation of the user's individual wastewater discharge permit.
      3.   Notice To Employees: Signs shall be permanently posted in
conspicuous places on the user's premises advising employees whom to call in
the event of a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all
employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency
notification procedures..
      4.   Additional Remedies: In addition to the remedies set forth
elsewhere, if the Village is fined by the IEPA or USEPA for violation of the
NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as a result of the users
discharge of an incompatible pollutant, then the fine, including all Village
legal, sampling, analytical testing costs and any other related costs shall be
charged to the responsible user. Such charge, shall be in addition to, not in
lieu of, any other charges.
      5.   The user shall control production or all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon
reduction, loss or failure of it's pretreatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies to the situation, where among other things, the primary source of power
is reduced, lost or fails. (Ord. 383, 6-23-1999; amd. Ord. 651, 5-8-2018; Ord.
702, 12-8-2020)
8-7-6: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Village and an industrial user.
The Village reserves the right to enter into special agreement with an
industrial user setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the
POTW. This may include the Village accepting industrial waste of unusual
strength or character. Sewer/wastewater treatment charges for industrial users
shall be set in accordance with title 8, chapter 8, or as outlined in said
special agreement. All charges shall be in accordance with Federal and State
guidelines for user charge systems.
Additional requirements for industrial users discharging to the Village
sanitary sewer system are included in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 651, 5-8-
2018; amd. Ord. 702, 12-8-2020)
8-7-7: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct. (Ord. 651, 5-8-2018; amd. Ord. 702, 12-8-2020)
8-7-8: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Village,
the IEPA, and USEPA, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties to verify compliance with this chapter, any
individual wastewater discharge permit, and other chapters of this code related
to the Village POTW and sanitary sewer system. Users shall allow the Village
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection,
sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any
additional duties. Any representatives of the Village shall have no authority
to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining,
ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on
the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for
waste treatment.
   B.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection A of this section, the Superintendent or duly authorized
representative of the Village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be
held harmless for the injury or death to the Village employees and the Village
shall indemnify the company against liability claims and demands for personal
injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the
gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by the negligence
for failure of the company to maintain monitoring facilities as required in
chapter 13 of this title.
   C.   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Village
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the Village holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 651, 5-8-2018; amd. Ord.
702, 12-8-2020)
8-7-9: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
section
8-7-7, shall be served by the Village with a written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   The Village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of
violation of any provision of this chapter.
   B.   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection A of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and on conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   C.   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall become liable
to the Village by reasons of such violation.
   D.   Industrial Users shall be subject to penalties and enforcement actions
outlined in Chapter 13 of this Title. (Ord. 383, 6-23-1999; amd. Ord. 651, 5-8-
2018; Ord. 702, 12-8-2020)
8-7-10: VALIDITY:
   A.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
replaced.
   B.   The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this
chapter shall not affect the validity of any other part of this chapter which
can be given effect without such invalid part or parts. (Ord. 651, 5-8-2018;
amd. Ord. 702, 12-8-2020)
8-7-11: CHAPTER IN FORCE:
   A.   This chapter shall be in force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, recording and publication as provided in law. (Ord. 651, 5-8-2018;
amd. Ord. 702, 12-8-2020)
CHAPTER 8
WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
8-8-1: Rates And Charges Established
8-8-2: Water And Sewer Connection Charges
8-8-3: Rendition Of Bills
8-8-4: Delinquent Bills
8-8-5: Nonpayment, Water Shutoff
8-8-6: Contractors; Pool Filling
8-8-7: Lien; Notice Of Delinquency
8-8-8: Foreclosure Of Lien
8-8-9: Revenues Kept Separate
8-8-10: System Of Accounts
8-8-11: Notice Of Rates
8-8-12: Notice Of Wastewater Service Charge Rate
8-8-13: Access To Records
8-8-14: Appeals
8-8-15: Garbage User Fee
8-8-1: RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
There shall be and there are hereby established separate water and wastewater
rates and charges for the use of and for the services supplied by the combined
waterworks and sewerage systems of the Village, based upon the amount of water
consumed as recorded and/or sewage meters as follows:
   A.   Water Service Charge
      1.   For water service charges:
         a.   For service up to and including two hundred thousand (200,000)
gallons per month, the water service charge per month shall be as follows:
 
For the first 1,000 gallons  @ $27.93 (minimum charge or “base” rate)
All over first 1,000 gallons @ $0.40 per 100 gallons
 
         b.   For the service over two hundred thousand (200,000) gallons per
month, the water service charge per month shall at minimum, one-dollar ($1.00)
per one thousand (1,000) gallons, not to exceed the per gallon rate shown in
subsection Ala of this section: subject to annual adjustment on May 1 of each
year.
      2.   The water minimum charge or “base” rate shown above shall be subject
to an annual increase on May 1 of each year according to the percentage
increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI), said increase not to be greater
than five percent (5%) nor less than two percent (2%).
   B.   Non-Industrial Wastewater Service Charges:
      1.   General: The wastewater service charge shall consist of a basic user
charge, debt service charge, and an administrative service charge and or
surcharge, if applicable.
      The fixed administrative service charge is for administrative expenses of
the wastewater system and is computed by dividing the budgeted fixed
administrative costs by the number of users. Through further division, the
monthly fixed administrative charges can be computed.
      The basic user charge is for debt service retirement, operation,
maintenance and replacement expenses and is based upon water usage as recorded
by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal
domestic concentrations:
         a.   A five (5) day, twenty-degree centigrade (20°C) Biochemical
Oxygen Demand (BOD5) concentration of two hundred twenty milligrams per liter
(220 mg/L).
         b.   A suspended solids (SS) concentration of two hundred forty
milligrams per liter (240 mg/L)
         c.   A total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) concentration of forty-five
milligrams per liter (45 mg/L).
      The basic user charge is computed by multiplying the water/wastewater
volume in one thousand (1,000) gallons by a basic user rate which is computed
as follows:
         a.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required for principal and
interest payment of all outstanding sewage revenue bonds and loans.
         b.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities including equipment replacement.
         c.   Estimate the billable wastewater volume
         d.   Compute the costs (rate) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of
billable volume.
      A surcharge will be levied to all commercial or residential users whose
wastes exceed the normal domestic concentrations for BOD (220 milligrams per
liter), SS (240 milligrams per liter), and TKN (45 milligrams per liter), or to
all industrial users whose wastes exceed the limits identified within the
pretreatment agreement as referenced herein. The surcharge will be based on
water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes
which exceed the limitations herein stipulated. Subsection B6 of this section
specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.
      The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed annually
and shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in debt service, a change
in the fixed administrative costs, or a change in operation and maintenance
costs including equipment replacement.
      The users of wastewater treatment services will be notified annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to the wastewater treatment operation,
maintenance and replacement.
      2.   Measurement of flow:
         a.   The volume of flow used for computing the basic user charges and
surcharges shall be metered water consumption read to the lowest even increment
of one thousand (1,000) gallons.
         b.   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures
any part, or all, of his/her water from sources other than the public
waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers,
the person shall install and maintain, at his/her expense, water meters of a
type approved by the Superintendent for the purpose of determining the volume
of water obtained from these other sources.
         c.   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be
required by the Superintendent if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined
from the metered water consumption records.
         d.   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed without the consent of the
Superintendent.
      3.   Administrative Service Charge:
         a.   In recognition of the need to acquire (and accumulate) additional
funds for payment of permitting fees, if any, billed to the Village by the
IEPA, the sewer rate schedule shall be adjusted and there is hereby imposed on
all users of the Municipal sewer system and services, an additional amount for
each user’s pro rate or proportionate share of the total of such fees billed to
the Village on a periodic basis by the IEPA.
      4.   Basic User Charge: There shall be and there is hereby established a
minimum charge and a basic user rate for the use of and for service supplied by
the wastewater facilities of the Village.
         a.   A basic user rate of ten dollars and twenty cents ($10.20) per
one thousand (1,000) gallons for the first one thousand (1,000) gallons shall
be applied to metered water users with one thousand (1,000) gallons being the
minimum. Above 1,000 gallons, the rate shall be fifty cents ($0.50) per one
hundred (100) gallons.
         b.   The basic user rate, including both the rate for minimum usage
and rate for usage above minimum as identified above, and shall be subject to
an annual increase on May 1 of each year according to the percentage increase
in the Consumer Price Index (CPI), said increase not to be greater than five
percent (5%) nor less than two percent (2%).
         c.   Debt Service Charge: a debt service charge of fifteen dollars
($15.00) per user per month shall be applied to all non-industrial sewage
generators starting January 1, 2021.
            (1)   Starting January 1, 2022, the Debt Service Charge will
increase to a total of thirty dollars ($30.00) per user per month.
            (2)   Starting January 1, 2024, the Debt Service Charge will
increase to a total of forty two dollars and fifty cents ($42.50) per user per
month.
         d.   All non-metered residential users of the wastewater facilities
shall pay the Debt Service Charge and basic user charge identified above and a
flat rate charge per month with the assumption that 4,000 gallons of sewage has
been generated. Current rates identified above are used to calculate the flat
rate charge, and are subject to CPI increases as outlined above.
 
Basic User Rate for First 1,000 gallons $10.20 per month
Service for 3,000 gallons               $15.00 per month
Debt Service Charge                     $30.00 per month
Total flat rate                         $55.20 per month
 
   Rates are further subject to base rate and debt service rate increases as
outlined above.
         e.   In the event use of the wastewater facilities is determined by
the Superintendent to be in excess of four thousand (4,000) gallons per month,
they may require such flat rate users to install appropriate metering devices
to measure the amount of service supplied.
      5.   Surcharge Rate: The rates of surcharge for BOD5, SS, and TKN shall
be as follows:
 
a.   For biochemical oxygen demand (BO$0.70 per pound
b.   For suspended solids (SS)        $0.30 per pound
c.   For total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN)$1.36 per pound
 
      6.   Computation of Surcharge: The surcharge per user shall be computed
by the following formula:
S = V (0.00834) [A(BOD5-220) + B(SS-240) + C(TKN-45)]
Where:
 S       = Amount of surcharge ($) per day
 V       = Wastewater volume in thousand gallons per day
 0.00834 = Unit weight of water x 106 per thousand gallons
 A       = Unit charge of BOD5 strength (See subsection B5a of this section)
 BOD5    = 5 day biochemical oxygen demand of wastewater (mg/L)
 220     = Allowable BOD5 strength
 B       = Unit charge for SS per pound (see subsection B5b of this section)
 SS      = Suspended solids concentration of wastewater (mg/L)
 240     = Allowable SS (mg/L)
 C       = Unit charge for TKN per pound (see subsection B5c of this section)
 TKN     = Total Kjeldahl nitrogen concentration of wastewater (mg/L)
 45      = Allowable TKN strength
 
      Each calendar day in which any discharge is not compliant with the
limitations shall be deemed a separate occurrence. Some tests may not occur
daily. If no tested sample is taken that day, then the last tested sample shall
be used for that day.
      7.   Computation of Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service
charge per user shall be computed by the following formula:
 
WC = A + (V)(R) + S
Where:
 WC = Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period
 A  = Fixed administrative service charge (see subsection B3a of this section)
 V  = Wastewater volume in thousand gallons per billing period, but never less
       than 2,000 gallons
 R  = Basic user rate for debt service, operation, maintenance and replacement
       (see subsection B4 of this section)
 S  = Amount of surcharge (see subsection B5 and B6 of this section)
 
   C.   Industrial Wastewater Service Charges: Industrial users shall be
subject to at least the following wastewater service charges:
      1.   Wastewater System Capital Improvement. The cost for wastewater
system capital improvement projects shall be distributed to all industrial and
non-industrial users. The Village shall require payments from industrial users
that are proportional to each industrial user’s allocated capacity following
completion of said project(s). Industrial user costs associated with wastewater
system capital improvement projects shall be detailed within an Agreement
between the industrial user and Village.
      2.   Replacement. Some financing options for wastewater system capital
improvement projects require a replacement/ depreciation account. The payments
to be allocated to said account shall be distributed to all industrial and non-
industrial users. The Village shall require payments from industrial users that
are proportional to each industrial user’s allocated capacity following
completion of said project(s). Industrial user costs associated with potential
replacement/ depreciation accounts shall be detailed within an Agreement
between the industrial user and Village.
      3.   Debt Service Reserve Account. Some financing options for wastewater
system capital improvement projects require a debt service reserve account. The
payments to be allocated to said account shall be distributed to all industrial
and non-industrial users. The Village shall require payments from industrial
users that are proportional to each industrial user’s allocated capacity
following completion of said project(s). Industrial user costs associated with
potential debt service reserve accounts shall be detailed within an Agreement
between the industrial user and Village.
      4.   Fixed Operations and Maintenance. Costs incurred by the Village
associated with operations and maintenance activities that are not expected to
change significantly from year to year are stated as Fixed Operations and
Maintenance costs. These costs shall be distributed to all industrial and non-
industrial users. Each industrial user shall be responsible for the percentage
of the annual Fixed Operations and Maintenance costs incurred by the Village
that is proportional to their allocated capacity.
         8.33 percent or one twelfth of the Fixed Operations and Maintenance
costs incurred by the Village from the prior fiscal year shall be multiplied by
an industrial user’s allocated capacity to determine that industrial user’s
monthly Fixed Operations and Maintenance charge for the upcoming year. At the
conclusion of a year of charges, the Village will determine the actual Fixed
Operations and Maintenance costs incurred and either issue each industrial user
a credit for any payments made in excess of actual costs or bill for additional
charges owed.
      5.   Variable Operations and Maintenance. Costs incurred by the Village
associated with operations and maintenance activities that are expected to
fluctuate from year to year are stated as Variable Operations and Maintenance
costs. These costs shall be distributed to all industrial and non-industrial
users based on actual wastewater parameter sampling results.
   Industrial users shall be charged variable operations and maintenance costs
monthly based on the 30-day running average monitoring results for flowrate,
Ammonia, BODs, Total Suspended Solids (TSS), and TKN. The below table shows the
variable operations and maintenance rates as of the publication date of this
ordinance. These variable operations and maintenance rates are subject to
change by the Village through a resolution.
 
Parameter        Variable Operations and Maintenance Rate
Flowrate         $0.07 per 1,000 gal
Ammonia          $0.17 per lb
BOD5             $0.07 per lb
TSS              $0.16 per lb
TKN              $0.41 per lb
Total Phosphorus $2.05 per lb
 
      6.   Surcharges. Industrial users with discharges above the 30-day
running average limit listed in their permit for flowrate, Ammonia, BODs, TSS,
and TKN are required to pay monthly surcharges. Surcharges will only be charged
for the amount by which a parameter exceeds the 30-day running average limit.
The below table shows the surcharge rates as of the publication date of this
ordinance. These surcharge rates are subject to change by the Village through a
resolution.
 
Parameter        Surcharge Rate
Flowrate         7 times the Variable Operations and Maintenance Rate
Ammonia          6 times the Variable Operations and Maintenance Rate
BOD5             7 times the Variable Operations and Maintenance Rate
TSS              4 times the Variable Operations and Maintenance Rate
TKN              6 times the Variable Operations and Maintenance Rate
Total Phosphorus 6 times the Variable Operations and Maintenance Rate
 
      7.   Exceedances. Industrial users with discharges above the maximum
daily limits listed in their permit for flowrate, Ammonia, BODs, TSS, and TKN
are required to pay exceedance fees. Exceedance Fees will only be charged for
the amount by which a parameter exceeds the maximum daily limit. While
exceedance fees will be calculated based on daily monitoring results that
exceed the maximum daily limits, the total of all exceedance fees for a month
will be added together and charged to the relevant industrial user monthly. The
below table shows the exceedance fees as of the publication date of this
ordinance. These exceedance fees are subject to change by the Village through a
resolution.
 
Parameter        Exceedance Fee
Flowrate         14 times the Variable Operations and Maintenance Rate
Ammonia          12 times the Variable Operations and Maintenance Rate
BOD5             14 times the Variable Operations and Maintenance Rate
TSS              8 times the Variable Operations and Maintenance Rate
TKN              12 times the Variable Operations and Maintenance Rate
Total Phosphorus 12 times the Variable Operations and Maintenance Rate
 
      In the event an industrial user consistently exceeds their allocated
capacity, which is defined by agreement between an industrial user and the
Village, the Village shall recalculate that industrial user’s allocated
capacity based on proportional use annually.  (Ord. 652, 6-12-2018; amd. Ord.
703, 12-8-2020; Ord. 723, 1-11-2022; Ord. 725, 2-8-2022; Ord. 751, 11-14-2023;
Ord. 779, 12-10-2024)
8-8-2: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES:
Prior to connecting to any building sewer (lateral), community sewer or private
interceptor to the Village sewer or building water service to the Village main,
the applicant shall pay and/or provide the following to the Village:
   A.   A minimum fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a residential
water service connection; a minimum fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
a residential sewer service connection; a minimum fee of one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for an industrial or commercial water service
connection; and a minimum fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00)
for an industrial or commercial sewer service connection. Additional costs may
be assessed and added to the minimum dependent upon or determined by actual
time (labor) and material expense(s).
   B.   All outstanding charges, including special assessments and interest
thereon , due against the land for local sewers, water mains, force mains, lift
stations previously installed by the Village or other authority.
      1.   A developer or owner who has installed utilities and infrastructure
improvements that are to become part of the Municipal utility and street system
shall provide the Village with any and all information (such as construction
specifications, "as built" drawings, engineering and test data, etc.) that may
be required by the Village or its engineer.
   C.   All costs of services performed by third parties on behalf of the
Village, including, but not limited to, consultation with the Village Engineer
and/or Attorney, with respect to the applicant's permit or application.
   D.   All costs incurred by the Village for special meetings, publication of
notices and other similar costs associated with the applicant's permit or
application.
Any person failing to pay the connection fees and charges due or providing the
required technical information as required shall be subject to the penalties
otherwise provided in this Code and the Village may withhold issuing a permit
for the particular structure until such fees are paid or such technical
information is provided. (Ord. 652, 6-12-2018; amd. Ord. 703, 12-8-2020; Ord.
725, 2-8-2022)
8-8-3: RENDITION OF BILLS:
Said rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly. The owner of the
premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and
severally liable for the service on such premises and the service is furnished
to the premises by the Village only upon the condition that the owner of the
premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable
therefor to the Village.
Bills for water and/or sewer service shall be sent out by the Village Utility
Clerk succeeding the period for which the service is billed.
All water and sewer bills are due and payable fifteen (15) days after being
sent out. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all bills not paid
by the fifteenth day after they have been rendered. (Ord. 652, 6-12-2018; amd.
Ord. 703, 12-8-2020; Ord. 725, 2-8-2022)
8-8-4: DELINQUENT BILLS:
If the rates or charges for such service are not paid within twenty five (25)
days after the rendition of such services, such services shall be discontinued
upon three (3) days' notice and shall not be reinstated until all claims are
settled. (Ord. 652, 6-12-2018; amd. Ord. 703, 12-8-2020; Ord. 725, 2-8-2022)
8-8-5: NONPAYMENT, WATER SHUTOFF:
   A.   The water supply may be shut off from any premises for which the bill
remains unpaid for twenty five (25) days. When shut off, such service shall not
be renewed except upon payment of $100.00.
   B.   The water supply may be shut off voluntarily by any party for a
vacation, etc. When shut off, such service shall have a turn on fee of $50.00.
(Ord. 652, 6-12-2018; amd. Ord. 703, 12-8-2020; Ord. 725, 2-8-2022; Ord. 726,
4-12-2022)
8-8-6: CONTRACTORS; POOL FILLING:
During construction of any building, and before any water meter is installed,
as is herein provided, the contractor so constructing such building may be
permitted to use the Village water supply by making application therefor, and
paying the flat fee prescribed by the Board of Trustees. Non-Village residents
may be permitted to use the Village water supply for pool filling by making
application therefor and paying the flat fee prescribed by the Board of
Trustees. (Ord. 652, 6-12-2018; amd. Ord. 703, 12-8-2020; Ord. 725, 2-8-2022)
8-8-7: LIEN; NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY:
Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid for twenty five (25) days
after such bill has been rendered, the Village may file with the County
Recorder a statement of claim for lien. This statement shall contain the legal
description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice
that the Village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges for
water subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
If the consumer of water whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises
and the Village Utility Clerk has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the
owner of the premises if his address is known to the Clerk, whenever such bill
remains unpaid for the period of twenty five (25) days after it has been
rendered.
The failure of the Village to record such lien or to mail such notice of the
failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid water bills as mentioned herein. (Ord. 652, 6-12-
2018; amd. Ord. 703, 12-8-2020; Ord. 725, 2-8-2022)
8-8-8: FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
Property subject to a lien for unpaid water charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay
the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings in the name of the Village in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill for
water has remained unpaid twenty five (25) days after it has been rendered.
(Ord. 652, 6-12-2018; amd. Ord. 703, 12-8-2020; Ord. 725, 2-8-2022)
8-8-9: REVENUES KEPT SEPARATE:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of waterworks system shall
be deposited in the waterworks account of the combined Waterworks and Sewerage
Fund and all revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the combined Waterworks
and Sewerage Fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the Village
Treasurer separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from
all other funds of the Village, and all of said sum, without any deductions
whatever, shall be delivered to the Village Treasurer not more than ten (10)
days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from
time to time be directed by the President and Board of Trustees.
The Village Utility Clerk shall receive all such revenues from the waterworks
and sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in
separate accounts of the fund designated as the "Waterworks and Sewerage Fund
to the Village of Stockton", said Utility Clerk shall administer such fund in
every respect in the manner provided by statute. (Ord. 652, 6-12-2018; amd.
Ord. 703, 12-8-2020; Ord. 725, 2-8-2022)
8-8-10: SYSTEM OF ACCOUNTS:
   A.   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the waterworks and
sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the waterworks and sewerage system.
   B.   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the separate revenues and operating expenses of the
wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost. In this regard, the
financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the
following:
      1.   Flow data showing the total gallons received at the wastewater plant
for the current fiscal year.
      2.   Billing data to show the total number of gallons billed for the
current fiscal year.
      3.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      4.   Number of users connected to the system.
      5.   Number of non-metered users.
      6.   A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users)
and volume of waste discharged. (Ord. 652, 6-12-2018; amd. Ord. 703, 12-8-2020;
Ord. 725, 2-8-2022)
8-8-11: NOTICE OF RATES:
A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the Village Clerk, may be filed
in the County Recorder's and/or Clerk's Office, if and as necessary and
appropriate, which will be deemed notice to all owners of real estate in the
Village of the charges of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the
Village as applied to their properties. (Ord. 652, 6-12-2018; amd. Ord. 703,
12-8-2020; Ord. 725, 2-8-2022)
8-8-12: NOTICE OF WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE RATE:
Each user will be notified annually by the Village in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges, which are
attributable to the wastewater treatment services, including the financial
information of section
8-8-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 652, 6-12-2018; amd. Ord. 703, 12-8-2020; Ord.
725, 2-8-2022)
8-8-13: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or their authorized representatives shall have
access to any books, documents, papers and records of the Village which are
applicable to the Village system of user charges for the purpose of making
audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance
with the terms of the special and general conditions to any State grant and to
ensure compliance with the terms of the regulations and conditions of any
Federal grant. (Ord. 652, 6-12-2018; amd. Ord. 703, 12-8-2020; Ord. 725, 2-8-
2022)
8-8-14: APPEALS:
The method of computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges in section
8-8-1 of this chapter shall be made available to a user within thirty (30) days
of receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used
in the computations thereof shall be remedied by committee within sixty (60)
days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies.
The committee shall consist of the user, a member appointed by the Village and
a third member appointed by the other two (2) members. Except where Board
approval is needed, the decision of the committee shall be final. (Ord. 652, 6-
12-2018; amd. Ord. 703, 12-8-2020; Ord. 725, 2-8-2022)
8-8-15: GARBAGE USER FEE:
   A.   All residential and commercial units without a dumpster shall pay a
monthly user fee as determined by the Board of Trustees to cover the expenses
of the collection and disposal of refuse, payable monthly. Commercial units or
users with their own onsite dumpster shall contact the Village's Utility
Billing Department to confirm the presence of and payment for said dumpster.
   B.   The garbage user fee shall be billed together with the water and sewer
bills previously described in this title and chapter. All user fee bills are
due and payable fifteen (15) days after being sent out. A penalty of ten
percent (10%) shall be added to all bills not paid by the fifteenth day after
they have been rendered.
   C.   Payments rendered in collection of the garbage user fees, wastewater
and sewer service bills shall be first applied to the garbage user fee, then
the sewer/wastewater service, then the water service.
   D.   The Village shall have a lien upon all real estate of any person
failing to pay the fee as provided hereby. In addition, the Village may, at its
option, pursue any other available legal remedy, including suspension of any
other service provided by the Village, including water and revoking any license
granted by the Village whether used in conjunction with the property or not, as
well as any other remedy that may be appropriate. (Ord. 652, 6-12-2018; amd.
Ord. 703, 12-8-2020; Ord. 725, 2-8-2022)
CHAPTER 9
CATV FRANCHISE
(Rep. by Ord. 593, 6-10-2014)
CHAPTER 10
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
SECTION:
8-10-1: Definitions
8-10-2: Registration Of Telecommunications Providers
8-10-3: Fee Imposed
8-10-4: Collection, Enforcement, And Administration
8-10-5: Compliance With Other Laws
8-10-6: Existing Franchises And Licenses
8-10-7: Penalties
8-10-8: Enforcement
8-10-9: Severability
8-10-10: Conflict
8-10-11: Waiver And Fee Implementation
8-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the Village,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the Village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within
the Village, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel
provided within the Village. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
   A.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made under:
1) the fee imposed by this Chapter, 2) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, 3)
amounts collected under section
8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 4) the tax imposed by the
Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, 5) 911 surcharges, or 6) the tax imposed by
section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
   B.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
Village;
   C.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information
intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not
limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment,
tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of
computers under a time- sharing agreement;
   D.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   E.   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the Village;
   F.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
   G.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   H.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin- operated telecommunications
devices;
   I.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
to the Village.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any Municipal street, alley, water or public right of way
dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements
wherein the Village has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit
the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal Village property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include Village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right of way.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes, any retailer having or maintaining within the State of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this State.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to- ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless
telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: A. Any telecommunications retailer; and
   B.   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail
as defined in this Section. The Village may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction
of the Village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the Village.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 United States Code
section 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile
radio services, and paging services. (Ord. 369, 12-9-1997)
8-10-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:
   A.   Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this Chapter shall
register with the Village within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
this Chapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on
a form to be provided by the Village, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection
8-10-4C of this Chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with
this Section.
   B.   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the Village
pursuant to subsection A of this Section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by subsection
8-10-4C of this Chapter, as the case may be, to the Village within thirty (30)
days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided
by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent
return on file with the Village. (Ord. 369, 12-9-1997)
8-10-3: FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   A Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent 1
(1.0%) of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to
service addresses within the Village for telecommunications originating or
received in the Village.
   B.   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this Chapter, the Village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights of way within the Village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this Chapter
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
   C.   The Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this Chapter shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in Section
8-10-4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 369, 12-9-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. Fee may be imposed in quarter percent increments of not more than 1.0%.
8-10-4: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the Village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
   B.   Unless otherwise approved by the Village, the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
Village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in
which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%)
of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   C.   Remittance of the Municipal infrastructure fee to the Village shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Village, which shall
contain such information as the Village may reasonably require.
   D.   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to
this Chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village. The charge imposed under subsection
A of this Section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this Chapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
   E.   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has
been paid that was not due under the provisions of this Chapter, whether as a
result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this Chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the Village may request, and telecommunications
retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no
claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years after the date of
the erroneous payment unless: 1) the credit is used only to offset a claim of
underpayment made by the Village within the applicable statutory period of
limitations, and 2) the credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.
   F.   Amounts paid under this Chapter by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
      1.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act;
      2.   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in section
8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
      3.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax
as prescribed in section
8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
      4.   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
   G.   The Village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books
and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this Chapter to
determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the
Village for the Village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the
amount of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the Village by the
telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the Village plus five percent (5%)
of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs
incurred by the Village in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed
five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an
audit. Said sum shall be paid to the Village within twenty one (21) days after
the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
   H.   The Village, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further or
additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this
Chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time
and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant
to Section
8-10-2 of this Chapter of such regulations. (Ord. 369, 12-9-1997)
8-10-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Generally applicable taxes; and
   B.   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair
of the public rights of way, including standards relating to freestanding
towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as provided; and
   C.   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
   D.   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning uses
or structures not located on, over, or within the rights of way. (Ord. 369, 12-
9-1997)
8-10-6: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the Village entered into before the effective date of this
Chapter regarding the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according
to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other
compensation to the extent waived. (Ord. 369, 12-9-1997)
8-10-7: PENALTIES:
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject
to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this Code. (Ord.
369, 12-9-1997)
8-10-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
(Ord. 369, 12-9-1997)
8-10-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 369, 12-9-1997)
8-10-10: CONFLICT:
This Chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto
which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. (Ord. 369, 12-
9-1997)
8-10-11: WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION:
   A.   The Village hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation
that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the Village by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing Village franchise,
license, or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the
time the Village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee.
This waiver shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure
maintenance fee provided for in this Chapter is subject to being lawfully
imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by the
telecommunications retailer from the customer.
   B.   The Village Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
Village has a franchise.
   C.   The Village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this Chapter
shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not less than
ninety (90) days after the Village provides written notice by certified mail to
each telecommunications retailer with whom the Village has an existing
franchise, license, or similar agreement that the Village waives all
compensation under such existing franchise, license, or similar agreement
during such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected
by the retailer and remitted to the Village. The infrastructure maintenance fee
shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective date as
established in the preceding sentence. (Ord. 369, 12-9-1997)
CHAPTER 11
CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS
ARTICLE A. CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
SECTION:
8-11A-1: Definitions
8-11A-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
8-11A-3: PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
8-11A-4: Applicable Principles
8-11A-5: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
8-11A-6: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
8-11A-7: Late Fees/Payments
8-11A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
   A.   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
without limitation, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, without limitation, activation, installation and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, without limitation, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this
definition.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the divisions or exclusions of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   B.   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that reduce the amount
of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued authorization to
the extent the refund, rebate, credit or discount is attributable to cable
service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules,
regulations, standards or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers, to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   C.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, educational and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this article and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this article and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to the village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider, as defined in 47 USC section 332(d), or
any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content information, electronic mail or other services offered
over the public internet. (Ord. 593, 6-10-2014)
8-11A-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service to the village.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues, provided, however, that such
amount shall be no greater than the fee paid to the village by an incumbent
cable operator providing cable service.
   C.   Notice To Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten
(10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the village.
   D.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this article by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this article shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
   E.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
   F.   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees may deduct the amount of such
credit from the fees that operator owes under subsection B of this section.
(Ord. 593, 6-10-2014)
8-11A-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to
8-11A-2 of this article.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village
or its designee for PEG access support in the village.
   C.   Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village
or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth
in subsection 8-11A-2D of this article.
   D.   Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
   E.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be
credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 593, 6-10-2014)
8-11A-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this article shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 593, 6-10-2014)
8-11A-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including, without
limitation, any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through
the holder with respect to cable service. A state issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it
applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to
payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
(Ord. 593, 6-10-2014)
8-11A-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Requirements: The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayer's bill of rights act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the municipality's submission of an invoice
for the sum. (Ord. 593, 6-10-2014)
8-11A-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by the village pursuant to the local government taxpayer's bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 593, 6-10-2014)
ARTICLE B. CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
SECTION:
8-11B-1: Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law
8-11B-2: Enforcement
8-11B-3: Penalties
8-11B-4: Customer Credits
8-11B-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
   A.   Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village's boundaries.
   B.   Amendments: Any amendment to the cable or video customer protection law
that becomes effective after the effective date of this article shall be
incorporated into this article by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this article by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 593, 6-10-
2014)
8-11B-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
village. (Ord. 593, 6-10-2014)
8-11B-3: PENALTIES:
The village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501(r)(1), does
hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the cable
and video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the
penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per
customer.
   A.   "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   B.   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least
thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach.
   C.   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 593, 6-10-2014)
8-11B-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts the schedule for customer credits for violations.
Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/22-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the
customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the
discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for
providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the
credit. (Ord. 593, 6-10-2014)
CHAPTER 12
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
8-12-1: Purpose And Scope
8-12-2: Definitions
8-12-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
8-12-4: Dispute Resolution
8-12-5: Indemnification
8-12-6: Insurance
8-12-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act.
   B.   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances
or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
   C.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws
or regulations. (Ord. 659, 8-14-2018)
8-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Uniform Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical
Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to
those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5),
as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as
amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the National
Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at
47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or
local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in
public rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or
initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
659, 8-14-2018)
8-12-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
subsection C9 of this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but not
subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in rights-of-
way in any zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned
exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
   B.   Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the
Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      1.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the Village, together with the Village's Small Cell
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         a.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         b.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         c.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
         d.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         e.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         f.   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
         g.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      2.   Application Process: The Village shall process applications as
follows:
         a.   Priority: The first completed application shall have priority
over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         b.   Existing Utility Pole Or Wireless Support Structure: An
application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole
or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and
shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the
application within ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed
application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75)
days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this chapter.
         c.   New Utility Pole: An application to collocate a small wireless
facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails
to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after
the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five
(105) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this chapter.
         d.   Denial Of Application: The Village shall deny an application
which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that
concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions contained
herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced
before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of
the provider.
The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code
provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the
documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies an
application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit
the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of denial is
sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village
shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial shall
require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the Village's review period.
The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed
with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted
with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited
in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure
requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
         e.   Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an
approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility
pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment
Agreement, provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a Municipal
utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate
on a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Village and the
applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment
Agreement.
      3.   Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving
an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within
thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the
applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
      4.   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         a.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
Village; or
         b.   A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      5.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may
remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      6.   Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period
of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities
or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village
codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits
shall be subject to the applicable Village Code provisions or regulations in
effect at the time of renewal.
      7.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal
delivery at the Village's designated place of business, by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail.
   C.   Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
      1.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on
Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably
determines that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      2.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      3.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with
industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a
public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the
interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such
interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of
Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      4.   Electrical Distribution Or Transmission System: The wireless
provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles
that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the
communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the
pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may
be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and on the
top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      5.   Public Safety: The wireless provider shall comply with all
applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety.
      6.   Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written
design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth
in a Village ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village, a comprehensive
plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the
rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      7.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation
requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required
to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or
category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems
on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole,
the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred
feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant
shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the
criteria in this paragraph.
      8.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
         b.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
      9.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for an Administrative Waiver with the Village Board of Trustees.
      10.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground- mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      11.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      12.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
      13.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   D.   Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
      1.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
      2.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
      3.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      4.   The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights- of-way, for:
         a.   Routine maintenance;
         b.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with subsection B1d of this section; or
         c.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
      5.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   E.   Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      1.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      2.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      3.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to
that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a) to obtain a
franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video
service or b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or
operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject
to this chapter.
   F.   Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the Village and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject
to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Village
makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
(2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the Village
that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement
remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small
wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Village's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before the
wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this
paragraph.
   G.   Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an
annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village
utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year or 2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the
wireless provider's use of space on the Village utility pole.
If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs,
the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after
the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent
to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   H.   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or
transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village.
Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider. (Ord. 659, 8-14-2018)
8-12-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Jo Daviess shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per Municipal
utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 659, 8-14-2018)
8-12-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
Village improvements or right- of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability. (Ord. 659, 8-14-2018)
8-12-6: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and
expense, the following insurance:
   A.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   B.   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
   C.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection
limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village improvements
or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to
the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self- insure the
insurance coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 659, 8-14-2018)
CHAPTER 13
USEPA/INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT
SECTION:
8-13-1: General Provisions
8-13-1-1: Purpose And Policy
8-13-1-2: Administration
8-13-1-3: Abbreviations
8-13-1-4: Definitions
8-13-2: General Sewer Use Requirements
8-13-2-1: Prohibited Discharge Standards
8-13-2-2: National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
8-13-2-3: Deadline For Compliance With Applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards
8-13-2-4: State Pretreatment Standards
8-13-2-5: Local Limits
8-13-2-6: Right Of Revision
8-13-2-7: Special Agreement
8-13-2-8: Dilution
8-13-3: Pretreatment Of Wastewater
8-13-3-1: Pretreatment Facilities
8-13-3-2: Additional Pretreatment Measures
8-13-3-3: Slug Discharges
8-13-3-4: Hauled Wastewater
8-13-4: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permits
8-13-4-1: Wastewater Dischargers
8-13-4-2: Wastewater Surveys
8-13-4-3: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement
8-13-4-4: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing Connections
8-13-4-5: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections
8-13-4-6: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents
8-13-4-7: Application Signatories And Certifications
8-13-4-8: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
8-13-5: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance
8-13-5-1: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
8-13-5-2: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
8-13-5-3: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals
8-13-5-4: Permit Modification
8-13-5-5: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
8-13-5-6: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
8-13-5-7: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
8-13-6: Reporting Requirements
8-13-6-1: Baseline Monitoring Reports
8-13-6-2: Compliance Schedule For Meeting Applicable Pretreatment Standards
8-13-6-3: Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standards
Deadline
8-13-6-4: Periodic Compliance Reports
8-13-6-5: Reports Of Changed Conditions
8-13-6-6: Reports Of Potential Problems
8-13-6-7: Reports From Unpermitted Users
8-13-6-8: Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting
8-13-6-9: Notification Of The Discharge Of Hazardous Waste
8-13-6-10: Date Of Receipt Of Reports
8-13-6-11: Record Keeping
8-13-6-12: Certification Statements
8-13-7: Sampling And Analytical Requirements
8-13-7-1: Sampling Collection Requirements
8-13-7-2: Analytical Requirements
8-13-7-3: Village Monitoring Of User's Wastewater
8-13-8: Compliance Monitoring
8-13-8-1: Right Of Entry: Inspection And Sampling
8-13-8-2: Monitoring Facilities
8-13-8-3: Monitoring Facility Operation
8-13-8-4: Monitoring Facility Device Malfunction
8-13-8-5: Verification Of Laboratory Analysis
8-13-8-6: Search Warrants
8-13-8-7: Vandalism
8-13-9: Confidential Information
8-13-10: Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance
8-13-11: Administrative Enforcement Remedies
8-13-11-1: Notification Of Violation
8-13-11-2: Consent Orders
8-13-11-3: Show Cause Hearing
8-13-11-4: Compliance Orders
8-13-11-5: Cease And Desist Orders
8-13-11-6: Administrative Fines
8-13-11-7: Emergency Suspensions
8-13-11-8: Termination Of Discharge
8-13-12: Judicial Enforcement Remedies
8-13-12-1: Injunctive Relief
8-13-12-2: Civil Penalties
8-13-12-3: Criminal Prosecution
8-13-12-4: Remedies Nonexclusive
8-13-13: Supplemental Enforcement Action
8-13-13-1: Liability Insurance
8-13-13-2: Payment Of Outstanding Fees And Penalties
8-13-13-3: Water Supply Severance
8-13-13-4: Public Nuisances
8-13-13-5: Informant Rewards
8-13-13-6: Contractor Listing
8-13-14: Affirmative Defenses To Discharge Violations
8-13-14-1: Upset
8-13-14-2: Prohibited Discharge Standards
8-13-14-3: Bypass
8-13-15: Sewer/Wastewater Treatment Charges
8-13-16: Miscellaneous Provisions
8-13-16-1: Pretreatment Charges And Fees
8-13-16-2: Severability
8-13-17: Effective Date
8-13-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
8-13-1-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned
treatment works (POTW) for the Village of Stockton, Illinois and enables the
Village to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws, including the
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are:
   A.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with its operation;
   B.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass
shrough the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the POTW;
   C.   To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and
sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
   D.   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from
the POTW;
E.   To enable the Village to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and
any other Federal or State laws to which the POTW is subject.
   This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. The chapter authorizes
the issuance of individual wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review
procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-1-2: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the public works coordinator shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The public
works coordinator may delegate authority and responsibilities granted by this
chapter. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-1-3: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
BOD    Biochemical Oxygen Demand
BOD5   Five-day Biochemical Oxygen Demand
BMP    Best Management Practice
BMR    Baseline Monitoring Report
CFR    Code of Federal Regulations
CIU    Categorical Industrial User
COD    Chemical Oxygen Demand
gpd    gallons per day
IAC    Illinois Administrative Code
IEPA   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
IU     Industrial User
mg/l   milligrams per liter
NPDES  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NSCIU  Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User
POTW   Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIU    Significant Industrial User
SNC    Significant Noncompliance
TKN    Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen
TSS    Total Suspended Solids
U.S.C. United States Code
USEPA  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
 
(Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
ACT or "THE    The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
ACT":          amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
ADMINISTRATOR: The administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
APPROVING      The president and board of trustees of the Village of Stockton acting by and through
AUTHORITY:     the waterworks superintendent, being their duly authorized agent or representative.
               (1)   If the user is a corporation:
                  a.   The president or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-
               making functions for the corporation; or
                  b.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities,
               provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the
               operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of
               making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other
               comprehensive measures to assure long term environmental compliance with environmental
AUTHORIZED or  laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions
DULY           taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge
AUTHORIZED     permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
REPRESENTATIVE delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
OF THE USER:   (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or
               proprietor, respectively.
               (3)   If the user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or
               highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
               the activities of the government facility, or their designee.
               (4)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such
               representative is responsible for the overall operation or environmental matters of
               the facility from which the discharge originates, and written authorization is
               submitted to the Village.
BEST           Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
MANAGEMENT     management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in this chapter. BMPs
PRACTICE(S)    include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant
(BMPs):        site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
               materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL    The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
OXYGEN DEMAND  standard laboratory procedures as described in Standard Methods.
(BOD):
CATEGORICAL    An industrial user subject to one of the USEPA's National Categorical Pretreatment
INDUSTRIAL     Standards.
USER:
CATEGORICAL    Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by USEPA in
PRETREATMENT   accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a
STANDARD or    specific category of industrial users and that appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter
CATEGORICAL    N, parts 405 through 471.
STANDARD:
CHEMICAL       The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of all compounds, both
OXYGEN DEMAND  organic and inorganic, in water.
(COD):
COMMERCIAL     Transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engage in selling
USER:          merchandise or rendering services.
COMPATIBLE     Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, pH and fecal
POLLUTANT:     coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit.
CONTROL        The Village of Stockton.
AUTHORITY:
DAILY MAXIMUM: The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a
               calendar day, shown in mg/L.
               The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where
DAILY MAXIMUM  daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total
LIMIT:         mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed
               in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement
               of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
DIRECT         The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to waters of the State of
DISCHARGE:     Illinois.
DIRECTOR:      Unless indicated otherwise, the Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection
               Agency.
DOMESTIC USER  All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments, and permanent multi-
or RESIDENTIAL family dwellings that discharge wastewater, which is similar in volume and/or chemical
USER:          make-up to the discharge of a residential dwelling unit, into the Village sewer
               system.
EFFLUENT       Are defined in any applicable NPDES permit or individual wastewater discharge permit.
CRITERIA:
               A categorical industrial user, the construction or operation of whose facility
EXISTING       commenced prior to publication by the USEPA of proposed categorical pretreatment
SOURCE:        standards, which would be applicable to such source if and when the standard is
               thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act.
FIVE DAY       The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
BIOCHEMICAL    standard laboratory procedures described in Standard Methods for five (5) days at
OXYGEN DEMAND  twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
(BOD5):
GRAB SAMPLE:   A sample taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in
               the wastestream and without consideration of time.
               The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the terms may also
ILLINOIS       be used as a designation for the Director or other duly authorized official of said
ENVIRONMENTAL  agency. Further defined as that agency or agencies of the State, any divisions thereof
PROTECTION     or successors thereto, authorized by present and subsequent acts of the legislature
AGENCY (IEPA): thereof to regulate and control matters in respect to the environment, and
               particularly in respect to wastewater discharge, management, maintenance, and
               operations of the POTW.
INCOMPATIBLE   Any pollutant which is not a "compatible pollutant" as defined herein.
POLLUTANT:
INDIRECT
DISCHARGE OR   The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source.
DISCHARGE:
INSTANTANEOUS  The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time,
LIMIT:         determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected,
               independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INSTITUTIONAL/ Schools, churches, penal institutions and users associated with Federal, State, and
GOVERNMENTAL   local governments.
USER:
INDUSTRIAL     Establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or
USER or USER:  chemical transformation of materials of substance into products. A source of a direct
               or indirect discharge to the POTW other than a domestic user.
               Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from
INDUSTRIAL     any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process of from
WASTE:         the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from
               sanitary sewage.
               A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
               sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its
               sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the
               Village's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
               compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
INTERFERENCE:  thereunder, or any more stringent State or local regulations: section 405 of the Act;
               the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title II commonly referred to as the
               Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any
               State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA); the Clean
               Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and
               Sanctuaries Act.
               Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the Village upon industrial or
LOCAL LIMIT:   commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions
               listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
               Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological
MEDICAL WASTE: wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially
               contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
               A unit of concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is one-thousandths gram
MILLIGRAMS PER (0.001 g) of the constituent in one thousand milliliters (1,000 mL) of water. It has
LITER:         replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is
               approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater analysis.
MONTHLY        The sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the
AVERAGE:       number of "daily discharges" measured during that month.
MONTHLY        The highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated
AVERAGE LIMIT: as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the
               number of "daily discharges" measured during that month.
NATURAL        Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground
OUTLET:        water.
               (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may
               be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
               publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act that
               will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
               accordance with that section, provided that:
                  a.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at
               which no other source is located; or
                  b.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the
               process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing
               source; or
                  c.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure,
               facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the
               same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as
               the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the
               extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
               the existing source, should be considered.
NEW SOURCE:    (2)   Construction of a site at which an existing source is located results in a
               modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new
               building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b
               or c above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
               equipment.
               (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if
               the owner or operator has:
                  a.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction
               program:
                     i.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
                     ii.   Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or
               removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the
               placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
                  b.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities
               or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time.
               Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
               substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do
               not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
NONCONTACT     Water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
COOLING WATER: intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
               Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the Administrator, or
NPDES PERMIT:  where appropriate by the Director, after enactment of the Federal Clean Water Act to
               regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the Act.
               A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or
PASS THROUGH:  concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from
               other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Village's NPDES
               permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
               Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association,
PERSON:        joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or
               their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal,
               State, and local governmental entities.
               A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
pH:            More technically, the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of hydrogen-ion
               concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division of
               Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
               Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage,
               sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials,
POLLUTANT:     radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
               municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of
               wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or
               odor).
               The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
               alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to (or in lieu
PRETREATMENT:  of) introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be
               obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by
               other means (except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by
               an applicable pretreatment standard).
PRETREATMENT   Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user,
REQUIREMENTS:  other than a pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT   Prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits
STANDARDS or   established by the Village.
STANDARDS:
PROHIBITED
DISCHARGE      Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
STANDARDS or   appear in section
PROHIBITED     8-13-2-1 of this chapter.
DISCHARGES:
               A treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is
PUBLICLY OWNED owned by the Village. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
TREATMENT      collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial
WORKS (POTW):  wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment
               plant.
               The public works coordinator is the Village of Stockton public works coordinator. The
PUBLIC WORKS   public works coordinator is designated by the Village to supervise the operation of
COORDINATOR:   the POTW, and is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter. The
               term also means a duly authorized representative of the public works coordinator.
SANITARY       A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into
SEWER:         which storm, surface and ground waters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not
               intentionally admitted.
SEPTIC TANK    Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers,
WASTE:         septic tanks, trucked waste, and waste tanks.
               Used interchangeably with "wastewater", a combination of the water-carried wastes from
SEWAGE:        residences, business building, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
               with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
SEWER:         A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or other waste liquids, including storm,
               surface and ground water drainage.
SHALL; MAY:    Shall is mandatory; may is permissible.
               (1)   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
               (2)   An industrial user that:
                  a.   Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process
SIGNIFICANT    wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
INDUSTRIAL     wastewater);
USER (SIU):       b.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of
               the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
                  c.   Is designated as such by the Village on the basis that it has a reasonable
               potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
               pretreatment standard or requirement.
               Any discharge at a flowrate or concentration, which could cause a violation of this
SLUG LOAD OR   chapter. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature,
SLUG           including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non customary batch discharge,
DISCHARGE:     which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any
               other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
STATE ACT:     The Illinois Antipollution Bond Act of 1970.
STANDARD       The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of
METHODS:       "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater", published jointly by the
               American Water Works Association and Water Environment Federation.
STORMWATER:    Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and
               resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
TOTAL KJELDAHL The total concentration of organic and ammonia nitrogen as measured by the Kjeldahl
NITROGEN:      method. Quantitative determination of total Kjeldahl nitrogen shall be made in
               accordance with procedures set forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods.
TOTAL          The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water,
SUSPENDED      wastewater, or other liquids, and that are removable by laboratory filtration device.
SOLIDS or      Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with
SUSPENDED      procedures set forth in the IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory
SOLIDS:        Methods.
VILLAGE:       The Village of Stockton, Illinois and any reference to "within the Village" shall mean
               all territory within the perimeter of the Village of Stockton boundaries.
               The spent water of a community. From this standpoint, of course, it may be a
WASTEWATER:    combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
               buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any ground water, surface
               water and stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER
TREATMENT      That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage
PLANT or       and industrial waste.
TREATMENT
PLANT:
WATERCOURSE:   A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
               (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
 
8-13-2: GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS:
8-13-2-1: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
   A.   General Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or
interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether
or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
National, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   B.   Specific Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      1.   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard, including, but
not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one
hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      2.   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 9.5, or otherwise
causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
      3.   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater
than 0.5 inch or 1.27 centimeters;
      4.   Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flowrate and/or pollutant concentration that,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
      5.   Wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65.6°C), or which will inhibit biological activity
in the treatment plant resulting in Interference, but in no case wastewater
which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to
exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) (40°C);
      6.   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral
oil origin, or synthetic oils in amounts that will cause interference or pass
through;
      7.   Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      8.   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the public works coordinator in accordance with section
8-13-3-4 of this chapter;
      9.   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or health, or to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
      10.   Wastewater which imparts color that cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating the Village's NPDES permit;
      11.   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes;
      12.   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized in writing by the public works coordinator;
      13.   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes or from industrial processes;
      14.   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the public
works coordinator or in an individual wastewater discharge permit;
      15.   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the
treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      16.   Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances that might
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
      17.   Any liquid, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive
readings on an explosion meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or
at any point in the system), be more than five percent (5%) nor any single
reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter;
      18.   Grease, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides
or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent
lime, stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings,
rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt
residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud,
or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
      19.   Any substance which will cause the Village to violate its NPDES
permit and/or other disposal system permits;
      20.   Any wastewater, which in the opinion of the Public Works
Coordinator can cause harm either to the sewers, sewage treatment process, or
equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise
endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance;
      21.   The contents of any tank or other vessel owned or used by any
person in the business of collecting or pumping sewage, effluent, septic tank
waste, or other wastewater unless said person has first obtained testing and
approval by the Village and paid all fees assessed for the privilege of said
discharge;
      22.   Any hazardous wastes as defined in State regulations or in 40 CFR
Part 261;
      23.   Persistent pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA);
      24.   Sewage sludge, except in accordance with the Village's NPDES
permit.
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be
processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
(Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-2-2: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR
chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471.
   A.   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the public
works coordinator may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
   B.   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the public works
coordinator may, as per 40 CFR 403.6(c)(2), convert the limits to equivalent
limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or
effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations
applicable to individual industrial users. Once included in its permit, the
industrial user must comply with the equivalent limitations developed in lieu
of the promulgated categorical pretreatment standards from which the equivalent
limitations were derived.
   C.   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed
with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the public works
coordinator may impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
   D.   A CIU may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment
standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
   E.   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four (4) day average, limitations.
Where such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure
shall be used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent
limitation, as per 40 CFR 403.6(c)(8). (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-2-3: DEADLINE FOR COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE NATIONAL CATEGORICAL
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
Compliance by existing sources covered by categorical pretreatment standards
shall be within three (3) years of the date the standard is effective unless a
shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate standard. The Village
shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any existing user not
covered by categorical pretreatment standards or for any categorical user when
the local limits for said user are more restrictive than the federal
categorical pretreatment standards.
New sources and new users are required to comply with applicable pretreatment
standards within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed ninety (90) days
from the beginning of discharge. New sources and new users shall install, have
in operating condition, and shall start up all pollution control equipment
required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to
discharge.
Any wastewater discharge permit issued to a categorical user shall not contain
a compliance date beyond any deadline date established in the USEPA's
categorical pretreatment standards. Any other existing user or a categorical
user that must comply with a more stringent local limit and is in non-
compliance with any local limits shall be provided with a compliance schedule
placed in an industrial wastewater permit to ensure compliance within the
shortest time feasible. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-2-4: STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
State requirements and limitations shall be met by all users which are subject
to such standards if they are more stringent than Federal requirement and
limitations or this chapter. State requirements and limitations are included in
the IAC title 35, subtitle C, chapter I, part 310. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-2-5: LOCAL LIMITS:
   A.   The Village is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5(c).
   B.   The pollutant limits established in this section are intended to
protect against pass through and interference at the Village's wastewater
treatment plant.
   C.   The pollutant limits shown below are for heavy metals and other
pollutants.
Pollutant Maximum Daily Concentration (mg/L)
Pollutant   Maximum Daily Concentration (mg/L)
Arsenic     0.0063
Cadmium     0.0037
Chromium    0.22
Copper      0.13
Cyanide     0.037
Lead        0.037
Mercury     0.0005
Molybdenu m 0.015
Nickel      0.039
Selenium    0.015
Silver      0.045
Zinc        0.18
pH          6.0 - 9.0 s.u.
 
   The pollutant limits shown below are for conventional pollutants.
Significant industrial users will by permit and/or agreement be allocated an
average daily flowrate (based on a thirty (30) day running average) and a
maximum daily flowrate. Significant industrial users will be subject to the
pollutant limit concentrations shown below along with the corresponding loading
for each pollutant that is calculated using the significant industrial user's
allocated average daily flowrate.
 
Pollutant                30-day Running Average Maximum Daily Concentration
                         Concentration (mg/L)   (mg/L)
Ammonia                  17                     34
5-day Biochemical Oxygen 100                    200
Demand (BOD5)
Total Suspended Solids   100                    200
(TSS)
Fats, Oils, and Grease   100                    200
(FOG)
Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen  40                     80
(TKN)
Total Phosphorus         8                      10
 
   Discharges in excess of the pollutant limits detailed in this section shall
be subject to enforcement actions and other penalties outlined in this chapter,
individual wastewater discharge permits, and industrial user agreements.
   D.   The local limits detailed in this section apply at the point where the
wastewater is discharged to the POTW unless dilution beyond typical domestic
flows occurs between the end of the process/pretreatment and discharge to the
POTW. If significant dilution occurs local limits will apply at the point where
the process/pretreatment ends.
      All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metals unless
indicated otherwise. The Village may impose mass limitations in addition to the
concentration-based limitations above. Where a user is subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard and a local limit for a given pollutant, the more
stringent limit or applicable pretreatment standard shall apply.
      Compliance with the above local limits shall be required no later than
three hundred and sixty five (365) days following the effective date of this
chapter.
   E.   The Village may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance
or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits and
the requirements of section
8-13-2-1. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020; amd. Ord. 780, 12-10-2024)
8-13-2-6: RIGHT OF REVISION:
The Village reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in individual
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on
discharges to the POTW consistent with the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 701,
12-8-2020)
8-13-2-7: SPECIAL AGREEMENT:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Village and an industrial user.
The Village reserves the right to enter into special agreement with an
industrial user setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the
POTW. This may include the Village accepting industrial waste of unusual
strength or character. Sewer/wastewater treatment charges for industrial users
shall be set in accordance with title 8, chapter 8, or as outlined in said
special agreement. All charges shall be in accordance with Federal and State
guidelines for user charge systems.
Acceptance of industrial waste per special agreement shall in no case waive
compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or Federal pretreatment
requirement. However, users may request a net/gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request a variance
from the categorical pretreatment standard from the administrator in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.13. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-2-8: DILUTION:
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to
dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized
by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The Village may impose
mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition
of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-3: PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER:
8-13-3-1: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
All significant industrial users, unless deemed unnecessary by the public works
coordinator, shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in this chapter within
the time limitations specified by the USEPA, State, or Village, whichever is
more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level
acceptable to the Village shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the
user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the Village for review and shall be
acceptable to the Village before such facilities are constructed. The review of
such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge
acceptable to the Village under the provisions of this chapter.
Other users may be required to provide wastewater treatment as necessary and at
the discretion of the public works coordinator. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-3-2: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
   A.   Whenever deemed necessary, the public works coordinator may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW
and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Each user discharging into the Village sewer system more than twenty
five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more than five percent (5%) of the
average daily flow into the POTW, whichever is less, shall install and
maintain, on its property and at its expense, a suitable storage and flow-
control facility to ensure equalization of flow over a twenty four (24) hour
period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least fifty percent (50%) of
the daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and a rate of
discharge controller, and shall be regulated as directed by the Village. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   C.   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Village, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Village and shall be
located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors
shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired by the user at their expense.
   D.   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-3-3: SLUG DISCHARGES:
   A.   Slug Control Plans: All users shall provide protection from accidental
or intentional discharges of materials that may cause interference or pass
through at the POTW. Facilities necessary to prevent accidental discharge or
slug discharges of pollutants shall be provided and maintained at the user's
cost and expense. The Village may require any user to develop, submit for
approval, and then implement a slug control plan or take such other action that
may be necessary to control slug discharges. Significant industrial users are
required to submit a slug control plan. Any required slug control plan
submitted to the Village shall show facilities and operating procedures. Review
and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the Village shall not
relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to
meet the requirements of this chapter. The slug control plan shall be posted
and available for inspection at the facility during normal business hours.
   Any user required to develop and implement a slug control plan shall submit
a plan that, at a minimum, addresses the following:
      1.   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      2.   Description of stored chemicals;
      3.   Procedures for immediately notifying the public works coordinator of
any accidental or slug discharge; and
      4.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
   B.   Immediate Notification: In the case of an accidental or intentional
discharge of materials which may cause Interference or pass through at the POTW
or violate requirements of this chapter, it shall be the responsibility of the
user to immediately telephone and notify the Village wastewater treatment plant
of the incident. The notification shall include name of caller, location of
discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and
corrective action taken.
   C.   Written Report: Within fifteen (15) days of an accidental or
intentional discharge, the user shall submit to the Village a detailed written
report on forms to be provided by the Village, describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Follow up reports may be required by the Village. Such a report,
or reports, shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills,
or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such report relieve the
user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by
this chapter or otherwise. Failure to report accidental or intentional
discharges may, in addition to any other remedies available to the Village,
result in the revocation of the user's individual wastewater discharge permit.
   D.   Notice To Employees: Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous
places on the User's premises advising employees whom to call in the event of a
slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may
cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification
procedures.
   E.   Additional Remedies: In addition to the remedies set forth elsewhere,
if the Village is fined by the IEPA or USEPA for violation of the NPDES permit
or violation of water quality standards as a result of the user's discharge of
an incompatible pollutant, then the fine, including all Village legal,
sampling, analytical testing costs and any other related costs shall be charged
to the responsible user. Such charge, shall be in addition to, not in lieu of,
any other charges.
   F.   The user shall control production or all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon
reduction, loss or failure of its pretreatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies to the situation, where among other things, the primary source of power
is reduced, lost or fails. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-3-4: HAULED WASTEWATER:
   A.   If permitted by the public works coordinator, septic tank waste may
only be introduced into the POTW at a designated receiving structure within the
Village wastewater treatment plant area, and at such times as are established
by the public works coordinator. Such waste shall not violate section
8-13-2 of this chapter or any other requirements established by the Village.
   B.   Septic tank waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the public works coordinator. No load may be discharged without
prior consent of the public works coordinator. The public works coordinator may
collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards. The public works coordinator may require the industrial
waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
   C.   Septic tank waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste
hauler, permit number, truck identification, sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste.
   D.   The public works coordinator may require haulers of industrial waste to
obtain individual wastewater discharge permits. The public works coordinator
may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain individual
wastewater discharge permits. The public works coordinator also may prohibit
the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial
waste is subject to all other requirements of this chapter.
   E.   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the public works coordinator. No load may be discharged without
prior consent of the public works coordinator. The public works coordinator may
collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards. The public works coordinator may require the industrial
waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
   F.   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The
form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. (Ord. 701, 12-
8-2020)
8-13-4: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS:
8-13-4-1: WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS:
It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge without an
individual wastewater discharge permit to the Village of Stockton sewer system
any wastewater except as authorized by the Village in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-4-2: WASTEWATER SURVEYS:
When requested by the public works coordinator, a user must submit information
on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of
the request. The public works coordinator is authorized to prepare a form for
this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.
Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating
service to the industrial user and shall be considered a violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-4-3: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
   A.   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW
without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit from the
Village, except a significant industrial user that has filed a timely
application pursuant to section
8-13-4-4 of this chapter may continue to discharge for the time period
specified therein.
   B.   The Village may require other users, including liquid waste haulers, to
obtain individual wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
   C.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this chapter.
Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a
permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State pretreatment
standards or requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State, and
local law. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-4-4: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: EXISTING CONNECTIONS:
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who was
discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within
ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the Village for an individual
wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section
8-13-4-6 of this chapter, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW
to continue after ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter except
in accordance with an individual wastewater discharge permit issued by the
Village. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-4-5: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: NEW CONNECTIONS:
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such
permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application
for this individual wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section
8-13-4-6 of this chapter, must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the
date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. New sources and new
users shall be required to include in their application information on the
method of pretreatment they intend to use to meet applicable pretreatment
standards. New sources and new users shall give estimates of the information
requested in subsections
8-13-4-5A6 and A7. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-4-6: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS:
   A.   All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
must submit a permit application that includes at a minimum the following
information. The Village shall approve a form to be used as a permit
application.
      1.   Identifying Information:
         a.   The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator(s) and owner(s);
         b.   Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and
plant production processes on the premises;
      2.   Permits: A list of all environmental control permits held by or for
the facility;
      3.   Description Of Operations:
         a.   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of
production), and Standard Industrial Classification(s) of the operation(s)
carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process
diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes;
         b.   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
         c.   Number and type of employees and proposed or actual hours of
operation;
         d.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day);
         e.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation, and all points of discharge;
      4.   Time and duration of discharges;
      5.   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
      6.   Flow Measurement:
         a.   Categorical User: The user shall submit information showing the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW
from each of the following:
            (1)   Regulated or manufacturing process streams; and
            (2)   Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e));
         b.   Non-Categorical User: The user shall submit information showing
the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the
POTW from each of the following:
            (1)   Total process flow, wastewater treatment plant flow, total
plant flow or individual manufacturing process flow as required by the Village.
The Village may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified
by cost or feasibility considerations;
      7.   Measurement Of Pollutants:
         a.   Categorical User:
            (1)   The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards
for each regulated or manufacturing process.
            (2)   In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling
and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass where required
by the categorical pretreatment standard or as required by the Village) of
regulated pollutants (including standards contained in sections
8-13-2-1 through
8-13-2-5, as appropriate) in the discharge from each regulated or manufacturing
process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required)
shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and
shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures outlined in section
8-13-7.
            (3)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
            (4)   Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been
calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) for a categorical user, this
adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the
application.
         b.   Non-Categorical User:
            (1)   The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards
for its wastewater discharge.
            (2)   In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling
and analysis identifying the nature and concentration in the discharge (or mass
where required by the Village) of regulated pollutants, as appropriate. Both
daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be
reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall
conform to sampling and analytical procedures outlined in section
8-13-7 of this chapter.
            (3)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
      8.   Certification: The user shall submit a statement that has been
reviewed by an authorized representative of the user, and certified by a
qualified professional, indicating whether the applicable pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for
the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
      9.   Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, the user shall submit
the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The user's schedule shall conform to the requirements
of section
8-13-6-2. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established pursuant to section
8-13-2-3 of this chapter.
         a.   Where the user's categorical pretreatment standard has been
modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream
formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance
(40 CFR 403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by this
subsection, the information required by this section shall pertain to the
modified limits.
         b.   If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal
allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)),
and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) after the
user submits the report required by this section, then a report containing
modified information shall be submitted by the user within sixty (60) days
after the new limit is approved.
      10.   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the public
works coordinator to evaluate the permit application.
   B.   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-4-7: APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATIONS:
   A.   All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports, and
certification statements must be signed by a duly authorized representative of
the user and contain the certification statement in subsection
8-13-6-12A.
   B.   If the designation of an duly authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the
requirements of this section must be submitted to the Village prior to or
together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. (Ord.
701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-4-8: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS:
The Village will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete permit
application, the Village will determine whether to issue an individual
wastewater discharge permit. The Village may deny any application for an
individual wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-5: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE:
8-13-5-1: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION:
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. An
individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than
five (5) years, at the discretion of the public works coordinator. Each
individual wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which
it will expire. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-5-2: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS:
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are
deemed reasonably necessary by the public works coordinator to prevent pass
through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the
treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
   A.   Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:
      1.   A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, expiration date, and effective date;
      2.   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the Village in accordance with section
8-13-5-5 of this chapter, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or
operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
      3.   Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards, including any special State requirements;
      4.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, submittal of
technical reports, compliance schedules, and record-keeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants (or best management
practice) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample
type based on Federal, State, and local law;
      5.   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable Federal, State, or local law;
      6.   Requirement for immediate notification to the Village where self-
monitoring results indicate noncompliance;
      7.   Requirement to report a bypass or upset of a pretreatment facility;
      8.   Requirement to report immediately to the Village all discharges, and
facility changes, including slug loadings, that could cause problems to the
Village sewer system;
      9.   Requirement for the SIU who reports noncompliance to repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit results to the Village within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation;
      10.   Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the
public works coordinator to be necessary;
   B.   Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:
      1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      2.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
      3.   Requirements for the development and implementation of slug control
plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;
      4.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      5.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      6.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
      7.   A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the individual wastewater discharge permit;
      8.   Any special agreements the public works coordinator chooses to
continue or develop between the Village and user; and
      9.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the public works
coordinator to ensure compliance with this chapter, and State and Federal laws,
rules, and regulations. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-5-3: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS:
Any person, including the user, may petition the Village to reconsider the
terms of an individual wastewater discharge permit within sixty (60) days of
its issuance or denial.
   A.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   B.   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the individual
wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
individual wastewater discharge permit.
   C.   The effectiveness of the individual wastewater discharge permit shall
not be stayed pending the appeal.
   D.   If the public works coordinator fails to act within sixty (60) days, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider an individual wastewater discharge permit, not to issue an
individual wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify an individual
wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final administrative actions
for purposes of judicial review.
   E.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
individual wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the Circuit Court of the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit, Jo Daviess
County, Illinois within appropriate State statute of limitations. (Ord. 701,
12-8-2020)
8-13-5-4: PERMIT MODIFICATION:
The Village may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   A.   To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
   B.   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the
individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
   C.   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   D.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the Village's POTW, Village personnel, or the receiving waters;
   E.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit;
   F.   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
   G.   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
   H.   To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater
discharge permit; or
   I.   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a
new owner and/or operator where requested in accordance with section 8-13-5-5.
(Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-5-5: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER:
Individual wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a
new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least ninety (90) days
advance notice to the Village and the Village approves the individual
wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Village must include a
written certification by the new owner or operator which:
   A.   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes;
   B.   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
   C.   Assumes full responsibility for complying with the existing individual
wastewater discharge permit beginning on the date of transfer.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the individual
wastewater discharge permit voidable as of the date of facility transfer.
Provided that the notice required above occurred and that there were no
significant changes to the manufacturing operation or wastewater discharge, the
new owner will be considered an existing user and will be covered by the
existing limits and requirements in the previous owner's permit. (Ord. 701, 12-
8-2020)
8-13-5-6: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION:
The Village may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   A.   Failure to notify the Village of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the changed discharge;
   B.   Failure to provide prior notification to the Village of changed
conditions pursuant to section
8-13-6-5 of this chapter;
   C.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
   D.   Falsifying self monitoring reports and certification statements;
   E.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
   F.   Refusing to allow Village staff timely access to the facility premises
and records;
   G.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
   H.   Failure to pay fines;
   I.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
   J.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
   K.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge
permit application;
   L.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of
the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter;
   M.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership
of a permitted facility; or
   N.   If the Village has to invoke its emergency provision as cited in
section 8-13-10-7 of this chapter.
Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual wastewater
discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a
new individual wastewater discharge permit to that user. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-5-7: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE:
A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete
permit application, in accordance with this chapter, a minimum of ninety (90)
days prior to the expiration of the user's existing individual wastewater
discharge permit. A User whose existing wastewater discharge permit has expired
and who failed to timely submit its re-application will be deemed to be
discharging without a wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-6: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
8-13-6-1: BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS:
   A.   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of
a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the Village a report which contains the information
listed in subsection B, below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement
of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial
users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard, shall submit to the Village a report which contains the information
listed in subsection B, below. A new source shall report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical pretreatment
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   B.   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
      1.   All information required in subsections
8-13-4-6A1a, A2, and A3a.
      2.   Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      3.   Measurement Of Pollutants:
         a.   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.
         b.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the Village)
of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average concentrations (or mass,
where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
section
8-13-7 of this chapter.
         c.   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in section
8-13-7 of this chapter.
      4.   Compliance Certification: A statement, reviewed by the user's duly
authorized representative as defined in this chapter and certified by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met
on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
      5.   Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section
8-13-6-2 of this chapter.
      6.   Signature And Report Certification: All baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection
8-13-6-12A. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-6-2: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE FOR MEETING APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, conducting routine operation, etc.);
   B.   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
   C.   The user shall submit a progress report to the Village no later than
fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for any delay,
and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse
between such progress reports. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-6-3: REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS
DEADLINE:
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Village a
report containing the information described in subsections
8-13-4-6A6 and A7 and subsection
8-13-6-1B3 of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in section
8-13-2-2, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long
term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 8-13-6-12A
of this chapter. All sampling will be done in conformance with section
8-13-7. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-6-4: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS:
   A.   Any user that is required to have an industrial waste discharge permit
and performs self-monitoring shall comply with all applicable requirements
under 40 CFR 403.12 and submit to the Village during the months of June and
December, unless required on other dates or more frequently by the Village, a
report indicating the nature of the effluent over the previous reporting
period. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed within the
industrial waste discharge permit. At a minimum, users shall sample their
discharge at least twice per year. In cases where the pretreatment standard
requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention
alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the Village or the
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
   B.   The report shall include a record of the concentrations (and mass if
specified in the wastewater discharge permit) of the pollutants listed in the
wastewater discharge permit that were measured and a record of all flow
measurements (average and maximum) taken at the designated sampling locations
and shall also include any additional information required by this chapter or
the wastewater discharge permit. Production data shall be reported if required
by the individual wastewater discharge permit or applicable categorical
standards. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where
required) shall be reported. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently
than what was required by the Village or by this chapter, using methodologies
in 40 CFR Part 136 and the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, it must submit all results of sampling and
analysis of the discharge during the reporting period.
   C.   Significant non-categorical industrial users must submit to the Village
at least once every six (6) months a description of the nature, concentration,
and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the Village. The reports
must be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the
report, and in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR Part 136. Any
user with a discharge not subject to categorical pretreatment standards must
perform appropriate reporting under 40 CFR 403.12.
   D.   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with subsection
8-13-6-12A of this chapter.
   E.   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   F.   The Village may require reporting by users that are not required to
have an individual wastewater discharge permit if information or data is needed
to establish a sewer charge, determine the treatability of the effluent, or
determine any other factor which is related to the operation and maintenance of
the sewer system. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-6-5: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
Each user must notify the Village of any significant changes to the user's
operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its
wastewater at least ninety (90) days before the change.
   A.   The Village may require the user to submit such information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of
a wastewater discharge permit application under section
8-13-4-6 of this chapter.
   B.   The Village may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit under
section
8-13-5-7 of this chapter or modify an existing individual wastewater discharge
permit under section
8-13-5-4 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-6-6: REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS:
   A.   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch
discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might cause potential problems
for the POTW, the User shall immediately telephone and notify the Village of
the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge,
type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken
by the user.
   B.   Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the Village, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s)
of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result
of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in subsection A, above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   D.   Significant industrial users are required to notify the Village
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug
discharge. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-6-7: REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS:
All users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
shall provide appropriate reports to the Village as the Village may require.
(Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-6-8: NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
Village within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The
user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the Village within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of
the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the Village
performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the
Village performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial
sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the Village receives the
results of this sampling, or if the Village has performed the sampling and
analysis in lieu of the industrial user. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-6-9: NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE:
   A.   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the USEPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR Part 261. Such notification must include:
      1.   The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261;
      2.   The USEPA hazardous waste number; and
      3.   The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
   B.   If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such
waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the
following information to the extent such information is known and readily
available to the user:
      1.   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes;
      2.   An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the wastestreams discharged during that calendar month; and
      3.   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestreams
expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
   C.   All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty
(180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this section
needs to be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However,
notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section
8-13-6-5 of this chapter.
   D.   The notification requirements in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under the self monitoring requirements of sections
8-13-6-1,
8-13-6-3, and
8-13-6-4 of this chapter.
   E.   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements in this section, above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15)
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen
(15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33
(e), requires a one time notification. Subsequent months during which the user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
   F.   In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the Village,
the USEPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety
(90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
   G.   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically
practical.
   H.   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-6-10: DATE OF RECEIPT OF REPORTS:
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked.
For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility
serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-6-11: RECORD KEEPING:
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and
make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained
pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any additional
records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by
the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with
best management practices established under subsection
8-13-2-5C. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the Village, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Village. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-6-12: CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS:
   A.   Certification Of Permit Applications, User Reports And Initial
Monitoring Waiver: The following certification statement is required to be
signed and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance with
section
8-13-4-7; users submitting baseline monitoring reports under subsection
8-13-6-1B6; users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical
pretreatment standard deadlines under section
8-13-6-3; and users submitting periodic compliance reports required by
subsections
8-13-6-4A through D. The following certification statement must be signed by an
authorized representative as defined in section
8-13-1-4:
      I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.
(Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-7: SAMPLING AND ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
8-13-7-1: SAMPLING COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfides, temperature, and volatile organic compounds. For all other
pollutants, twenty four (24) hour flow-proportional composite samples must be
obtained, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is
authorized by the Village. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by the Village, the samples must be representative of
the discharge. The decision to allow alternative sampling must be documented in
the industrial user file for that facility or facilities. Using protocols
(including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136, the most
recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during the twenty
four (24) hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for
cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the
laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease the
samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA
methodologies may be authorized by the Village, as appropriate.
   B.   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standards, a minimum of four (4) grab
samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide
and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling
data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are
available, the Village may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required
by this chapter and 40 CFR 403.12 (e) and (h), the industrial user is required
to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance
by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   C.   Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist, immediately downstream from the regulated process if
no pretreatment exists, or at a location determined by the Village and
specified in the user's individual wastewater discharge permit. For categorical
users, if other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to
pretreatment, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to
allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to
evaluate compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standards.
Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data
shall be submitted to the Village;
   D.   All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling,
and methods of analysis and shall certify that the wastestream sampled is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the
user. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently that what was required in
its wastewater discharge permit, using methodologies in 40 CFR Part 136 and the
most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the
discharge as part of its self-monitoring report. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-7-2: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard.
If 40 CFR Part 136 and the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater do not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant, or where the USEPA determines that the Part 136
sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance with
procedures approved by the USEPA. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-7-3: VILLAGE MONITORING OF USER'S WASTEWATER:
The Village will follow the procedures outlined in section
8-13-7 when sampling to monitor compliance. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-8: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
8-13-8-1: RIGHT OF ENTRY: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
   A.   The public works coordinator and other duly authorized employees of the
Village, the IEPA, and USEPA, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be authorized to enter all properties to verify compliance with this
chapter, any individual wastewater discharge permit, and other chapters of this
code related to the Village POTW and sanitary sewer system. Users shall allow
the Village ready access to all parts of the premises for the purpose of
inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of
any additional duties. Any representatives of the Village shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil
refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or
facilities for waste treatment.
   B.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection A of this section, the public works coordinator or duly
authorized representative of the Village, the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety
rules applicable to the premises established by the user and the user shall be
held harmless for the injury or death to the Village employees and the Village
shall indemnify the User against liability claims and demands for personal
injury or property damage asserted against the user and growing out of the
gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by the negligence
for failure of the user to maintain monitoring facilities as required in this
chapter.
   C.   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, Village representatives shall be authorized to
enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   D.   The Village shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/
or metering of the user's operations.
   E.   The Village may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary and at the expense of the user. The facility's sampling and flow
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the user at its own expense.
   F.   The user and Village shall have access to the facility's sampling and
flow monitoring equipment and may perform any inspections deemed necessary or
desirable.
   G.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the Village and shall not be replaced. The
user is responsible for the cost of clearing obstructions.
   H.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Village access to the user's
premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-8-2: MONITORING FACILITIES:
Significant industrial users, unless deemed unnecessary by the public works
coordinator, shall provide at its own expense a monitoring facility (including
installation of a wastewater sample port), to allow inspection, sampling,
continuous monitoring and flow measurements of each sewer discharge to the
Village. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the user's premises,
except, where such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on
the user, the Village may concur with the facility being constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area, providing that the facility is located so that
it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. The Village,
whenever applicable, may require the construction and maintenance of sampling
facilities at other locations (for example, at the end of a manufacturing line
or a wastewater treatment system).
The Village may require other users to provide at its own expense a monitoring
facility (including installation of a wastewater sample port), to allow
inspection, sampling, continuous monitoring and flow measurements of each sewer
discharge to the Village.
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling facility to allow accurate
sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, including the
sampling and measuring equipment, shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
The Village may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary.
All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance
with all applicable local construction standards and specifications.
The Village my require the user to provide shipping, shipping labels, delivery
pickup location and access for pickup, ice for samples and other items needed
and/or requested by the Village to facilitate the storage and shipping of
samples associated with the user’s monitoring requirements. (Ord. 701, 12-8-
2020; amd. Ord. 781, 12-10-2024)
8-13-8-3: MONITORING FACILITY OPERATION:
   A.   The operation of monitoring facility flow meters and sampling devices,
including the reading and recording of discharge volume and water quality
sampling, shall be performed by the Village unless otherwise specified in a
user's individual wastewater discharge permit.
   B.   The user may request split samples of its wastewater at any time,
provided the additional cost to the Village of splitting the sample, if any, is
paid by the user. The user shall provide the Village at least five (5) days
written notice of its request for a split sample. The user may obtain samples
with its own resources as well.
   C.   Samples required by a user's individual wastewater discharge permit
shall be collected as required and analyzed by the Village's laboratory. If the
Village's laboratory is unable to analyze samples for any reason, an
alternative analysis laboratory shall be used. The alternative laboratory shall
be chosen and agreed to by the Village and user. The costs of laboratory
analysis shall be billed to and paid by the user on a monthly basis.
   D.   All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated semiannually by a manufacturer's representative or other independent
party to ensure their accuracy. The Village or user may initiate special
procedures to verify that the wastewater sampler is collecting representative
samples. If a party does initiate verification of a sampler, the party shall
provide notice to the other party no less than two (2) days before the
verification is to be made. The user shall organize semiannual calibrations of
wastewater flow and quality devices. The user shall pay any expenses related to
the calibration or verification of monitoring facility devices, whether
initiated by the Village or user. Calibration test results shall be furnished
to both the Village and user. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-8-4: MONITORING FACILITY DEVICE MALFUNCTION:
The Village and user shall attempt to resolve any disputes regarding monitoring
facility device inaccuracies in accordance with the guidelines prescribed
below:
   A.   If a monitoring device malfunctions or is demonstrated to have provided
incorrect readings, or if an identifiable consistent sampling bias or error can
be established, the volume and strength of wastewater discharged by a user
shall be based on historical data and reasonable engineering estimates of flow
and strength. This extrapolation, as determined by the Village with
consultation with the user, shall take into account all materially known
product variations.
   B.   The Village may install or require the user to install a temporary
monitoring device until a permanent monitoring device is operating properly.
The data generated by the temporary monitoring device shall be used in lieu of
historical data.
   C.   Retroactive billing adjustments made as a result of monitoring device
malfunction shall follow the terms of a user's individual wastewater discharge
permit or other agreement between the Village and said user. (Ord. 701, 12-8-
2020)
8-13-8-5: VERIFICATION OF LABORATORY ANALYSIS:
The User may request that the Village provide a split sample to the user to
verify laboratory analysis accuracy. The user may not make this request more
than once a year. Samples shall be analyzed by the Village or their designated
analysis laboratory (the "Village Sample") and by a Village-approved state-
certified laboratory employed by the user (the "Industry Sample"). The user
shall pay for all laboratory analysis costs.
No action need be taken unless the result for a parameter of the industry
sample is different from the Village sample in an amount equal to at least
twenty five percent (25%). Where the industry sample and Village sample differ
by an amount equal to at least twenty five percent (25%), the burden is on the
user to prove that all preservation, chain-of-custody, analytical, and QA/QC
methods were followed. If the user cannot prove the proper methods were
followed, no further verifications shall be made. If it is determined the user
followed the proper methods, then the Village shall review the methods used for
the Village sample.
If it is determined both parties have followed the proper methods, the Village
may choose to accept the validity of the results provided by their designated
laboratory or agree to terms with the user for further verifications.
Alternatively, if it is determined the Village did not follow the proper
methods an additional split sample analysis shall be conducted using the
procedures described above. The Village and user shall be responsible for the
costs associated with analysis of their respective sample. If the results of
this split sample differ by an amount equal to at least twenty five percent
(25%) and it is determined the Village and user followed the proper methods, a
resolution shall be agreed upon that is acceptable to both parties. (Ord. 701,
12-8-2020)
8-13-8-6: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the Village has been refused access to a building, structure, or property,
or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect
and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the
Village designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare
of the community, the Village may seek issuance of a search warrant from the
Circuit Court of the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit, Jo Daviess County, Illinois.
(Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-8-7: VANDALISM:
No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or
equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this
requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in this chapter. (Ord.
701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-9: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, individual
wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge
permits, monitoring programs, and from the Village inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Village, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable State law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the
user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to
the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other "effluent data", as defined at 40 CFR 2.302 shall not
be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the public
without restriction. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-10: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The Village shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that
provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW,
a list of the users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months,
were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all
significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates
subsections C, D or H of this section) and shall mean:
   A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six (6 ) month period exceed
(by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1);
   B.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH);
   C.   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by section 40 CFR 403.3(1) (Daily Maximum, long term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Village determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, Interference or pass
through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public);
   D.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Village's exercise of
its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   E.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
   F.   Failure to provide within forty five (45) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   H.   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the Village determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-11: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
8-13-11-1: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION:
When the Village finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Village may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within fifteen
(15) days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a
plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Village.
Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Village to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-11-2: CONSENT ORDERS:
The Village may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the
user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the
document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued under this chapter and shall be judicially
enforceable. Use of a consent order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-11-3: SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
The Village may order a user which has violated (or continues to violate) any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear
before the Village and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place
for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action,
and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the User. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 701, 12-8-
2020)
8-13-11-4: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
When the Village finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Village may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing
that the user come into compliance within a specified time in the order. If the
user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may
be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional
self monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be
a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-11-5: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
When the Village finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Village may issue an order
to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing
the user to:
   A.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   B.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 701, 12-8-
2020)
8-13-11-6: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
   A.   When the Village finds that a user has violated (or continues to
violate) any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Village may fine such user in an amount not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) a day. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-
violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average
discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of
violation.
   B.   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid
balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of ten percent (10%)
per month. A lien against the user's property shall be sought for unpaid
charges, fines, and penalties.
   C.   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the Village to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount
within thirty (30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has
merit, the Village may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's
appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto,
shall be returned to the user. The Village may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
   D.   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 701, 12-8-
2020)
8-13-11-7: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The Village may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after informal notice
to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent
or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Village
may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity
to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or
which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
   A.   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Village may take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The Village shall allow the user to recommence
its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Village
that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings
of this chapter are initiated against the user.
   B.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the Village prior to the date of any show
cause or termination hearing under this chapter.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to
any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-11-8: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
In addition to the provisions in section
8-13-5-6 of this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
   A.   Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions;
   B.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
   C.   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
   D.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
   E.   Violation of the pretreatment standards in section
8-13-2 of this chapter.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be
offered an opportunity to show cause under section
8-13-11-3 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise
of this option by the Village shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-12: JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
8-13-12-1: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the Village finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Village may petition the Circuit Court of the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit, Jo
Daviess County, Illinois through the Village Attorney for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the individual wastewater discharge permit, order,
or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The
Village may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or
equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental
remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-12-2: CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the
Village for a minimum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long term average
discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the
violation.
   B.   The Village may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the
Village.
   C.   In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent
of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation,
any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by
the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice
requires.
   D.   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-12-3: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
   A.   A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine, up to the maximum allowed under
state law, per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six (6)
months, or both.
   B.   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine, up to the maximum allowed under
state law, per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six (6)
months, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action
for personal injury or property damage available under State law.
   C.   A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, individual
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine, up
to the maximum allowed under state law, per violation, per day, or imprisonment
for not more than six (6) months, or both.
   D.   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a
fine, up to the maximum allowed under state law, per violation, per day, or
imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-12-4: REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The Village may
take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user.
Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the
Village's enforcement response plan. However, the Village may take other action
against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Village is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant
user. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-13: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION:
8-13-13-1: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The Village may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge
to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a
previous individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits
proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair
damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-13-2: PAYMENT OF OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES:
The Village may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or
penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this chapter, a previous
individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. (Ord. 701,
12-8-2020)
8-13-13-3: WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE:
Whenever a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user
may be severed. Service will recommence, at the user's expense, only after the
user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Ord. 701, 12-8-
2020)
8-13-13-4: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A violation of any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, is a public nuisance and may be corrected or abated as provided
by this chapter. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-13-5: INFORMANT REWARDS:
The Village may pay a reward for information leading to the discovery of
noncompliance by a user. In the event that the information provided results in
an administrative fine or civil penalty levied against the user, the Village
may disperse up to one hundred percent (100%) of the collected fine or penalty
to the informant. However, a single reward payment may not exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-13-6: CONTRACTOR LISTING:
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale
of goods or services to the Village. Existing contracts for the sale of goods
or services to the Village held by a user found to be in significant
noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at
the discretion of the Village. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-14: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS:
8-13-14-1: UPSET:
   A.   For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   B.   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of subsection C, below, are met.
   C.   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      1.   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      2.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman
like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      3.   The user has submitted the following information to the Village
within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five (5) days.
         a.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         b.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         c.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   D.   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   E.   Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   F.   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-14-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
   A.   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in
subsection
8-13-2-1A of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in subsections
8-13-2-1B3 through B7 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or
have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and
that either:
      1.   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through
or interference; or
      2.   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when
the Village was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case
of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-14-3: BYPASS:
   A.   For the purposes of this section:
      1.   "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user's treatment facility.
      2.   "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   B.   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of subsections C and D of this section.
   C.   Bypass Notifications:
      1.   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the Village, at least ten (10) days before the date of the
bypass, if possible.
      2.   A user shall submit oral notice to the Village of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty four (24)
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and
its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The Village may waive the written report on a case
by case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty four (24)
hours.
   D.   Bypass Conditions:
      1.   Bypass is prohibited, and the Village may take an enforcement action
against a user for a bypass, unless:
         a.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         c.   The user submitted notices as required under subsection C of this
section.
      2.   The Village may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the Village determines that it will meet the three (3)
conditions listed in subsection D1 of this section. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-15: SEWER/WASTEWATER TREATMENT CHARGES:
Sewer/wastewater treatment charges shall be set per title 8, chapter 8 or
special agreement between the Village and industrial user. (Ord. 701, 12-8-
2020)
8-13-16: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
8-13-16-1: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The Village may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up
and operating the Village's pretreatment program, which may include:
   A.   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of
processing such applications;
   B.   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users;
   C.   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   D.   Fees for filing appeals; and
   E.   Other fees as the Village may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties
chargeable by the Village. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-16-2: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue
in full force and effect. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
8-13-17: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately following its
passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law. (Ord. 701, 12-8-2020)
CHAPTER 14
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-14-1:    Regulations On Solar Energy Systems
8-14-1: REGULATIONS ON SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
   A.   The Village has adopted this regulation to achieve the following goals:
   B.   To preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the Village's citizens
by promoting the safe, effective, and efficient use of active solar energy
systems installed to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels.
   C.   Setbacks: All solar energy systems operated as a principal use must
meet the setback for the zoning district and primary land use associated with
the lot on which the system is located.
   D.   Plan Approval Required: All solar energy systems allowed as permitted
uses shall require administrative plan approval by the building official via
the review of the application for an accessory permit.
   E.   Utility Notification: All grid-connected solar energy systems shall
comply with the interconnection requirements of the electric utility. An
interconnection agreement must be completed with the electric utility in whose
service territory the system is located prior to issuance of a building permit.
   F.   Solar gardens are subject to the Village's storm water management and
erosion and sediment control provisions and NPDES permit requirements.
   G.   A qualified engineer shall certify that the foundation and design of
the solar mounting devices are within accepted development standards, given
local soil and climate conditions.
   H.   All solar energy systems shall be designed to generate enough power for
each residence or building and no additional power.
   I.   All solar energy systems shall be designed to be screened from routine
view from public rights-of-way and residential uses on adjacent parcels. The
commercial solar energy system shall be set back from the screening device or
landscaping so as to not affect the operation of the system.
   J.   All solar energy systems shall be designed and installed to prohibit
light reflection towards adjacent rights-of-way and any habitable portion of
nearby structures that are not integrated into the system.
   K.   All solar energy systems shall be installed on the roof of a structure
or in the form of a solar tree.
   L.   Power and communication lines running between banks of solar panels
shall be buried underground. Power and communication lines running to nearby
electric substations or interconnections with buildings shall be buried
underground to the extent practicable, subject to utility requirements.
   M.   A detailed site plan for both existing and proposed conditions must be
submitted, showing location of all solar arrays, other structures, property
lines, zoning and uses of adjacent property, rights-of-way, service roads,
floodplains, wetlands and other protected natural resources, topography,
electric equipment, and all other characteristics requested by the Village.
(Ord. 737, 11-7-2022)
CHAPTER 15
CAMPING WITHIN THE MUNICIPAL LIMITS
SECTION:
8-15-1: Incorporation Of Recitals
8-15-2: Purpose
8-15-3: Definitions
8-15-4: Unlawful Camping
8-15-5: Occasional Camping In Residential Zones
8-15-6: Special Events
8-15-7: Exclusions
8-15-1: INCORPORATION OF RECITALS:
The foregoing recitals shall be and are hereby incorporated as findings of fact
as if said recitals were fully set forth herein. (Ord. 775, 11-12-2024)
8-15-2: PURPOSE:
The street, parks and public areas within the village should be readily
accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these
areas for camping purposes interferes with the rights of others to use the
areas for which they were intended. Such activity can constitute a public
health and safety hazard and a nuisance which adversely impacts neighborhoods
and commercial areas.
Camping on private property without the consent of the owner, without proper
sanitary facilities and measures and for other than a minimal duration
adversely affects private property rights as well as public health, safety, and
welfare of the village.
The purpose of this chapter is to maintain streets, parks and other public and
private areas within the village in a clean, sanitary and accessible condition
and to adequately protect the health, safety and public welfare of the
community, while recognizing that, subject to reasonable conditions, camping
and camp facilities associated with special events can be beneficial to the
cultural and educational climate in the village. (Ord. 775, 11-12-2024)
8-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
 
          To reside or dwell temporarily in a place, with shelter, and to
CAMP AND  conduct activities of daily living such as eating, sleeping or
CAMPING:  storage of personal possessions in such place. "Camp" and "camping"
          do not include residing inside any single-family, duplex, or multi-
          family building that is a principal use of a zoning lot.
          A place:
CAMPSITE: A.   Where camping occurs;
          B.   On which shelter exists for the purpose of future camping; or
          C.   On which shelter exists and camping has occurred in the past.
PRIVATE   All property other than public property.
PROPERTY:
PUBLIC    All property belonging to the village of Stockton or other
PROPERTY: governmental entity, including, but not limited to, streets,
          sidewalks, alleys, improved or unimproved land and parks.
          Includes any tent, tarpaulin, lean-to, sleeping bag, bedroll,
SHELTER:  blanket, or other form of cover or protection from the elements other
          than clothing. (Ord. 775, 11-12-2024)
 
8-15-4: UNLAWFUL CAMPING:
Except as permitted pursuant to sections
8-15-5 and
8-15-6 of this chapter, it is unlawful and a public nuisance:
   A.   For any person to camp or to establish or maintain a campsite on any
public property or private property in the village of Stockton; or
   B.   For any person to allow camping to occur, or a campsite to be
established or maintained, on property owned, occupied or controlled by such
person. (Ord. 775, 11-12-2024)
8-15-5: OCCASIONAL CAMPING IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
Camping and campsites are permitted in the rear yard of any private
residentially zoned lot so long as:
   A.   The owner or occupant of the private residential lot consents;
   B.   An adult owner or occupant of the private residential lot is present on
the lot between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. while camping is occurring;
   C.   The owner or occupant of the private residential lot provides access by
persons who are camping to a working toilet and sink in a building located on
the same zoning lot as the campsite, and to that purpose, has an active water
and sewer account with the village;
   D.   Camping or maintenance of a campsite on any zoning lot is limited to
not more than three (3) consecutive nights and to not more than three (3)
nights in any calendar week; and
   E.   No consideration, whether in money, goods, services, or otherwise, is
given to the owner of the residential lot in exchange for the privilege of
camping. (Ord. 775, 11-12-2024)
8-15-6: SPECIAL EVENTS:
The village board may, in its discretion, authorize campsites on public or
private property in connection with a special event. A special event includes,
but is not limited to, programs operated by the village departments, youth,
school, church and club events, marathons or other sporting events and scouting
activities. (Ord. 775, 11-12-2024)
8-15-7: EXCLUSIONS:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit or make unlawful the ownership
or storage of a camping trailer or other vehicle on public or private property
if otherwise not prohibited by law or ordinance, and so long as the vehicle is
not occupied. (Ord. 775, 11-12-2024)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Standards, Conformity Required
9-1-2: Building Permit
9-1-3: Adoption Of Technical Codes
9-1-1: STANDARDS, CONFORMITY REQUIRED:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to
safeguard life, limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy,
location and maintenance of all buildings and structures within the village.
   B.   Compliance Required: No structure shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, or enlarged, except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 291, 7-5-1988)
9-1-2: BUILDING PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall erect, enlarge or construct any
building or structure or cause the same to be done in the village, without
first obtaining a separate building permit therefor, as defined in this
chapter, for each such building, structure, or premises.
   B.   Application; Plans To Accompany: To obtain a permit, the owner or his
representative shall submit, prior to the start of construction, an application
therefor with the village's building inspector providing the following
information:
      1.   A diagram of the property, indicating the dimensions of the
property, the existing improvements, if any, and the size and location of
proposed construction;
      2.   The approximate value of construction;
      3.   Owner's name, address, and telephone number;
      4.   The common street address and legal description of the property; and
      5.   Name(s), address(es) and phone number(s) of the owner's contractor
(s), if any.
All applications submitted to the building inspector will be brought before the
building management committee with the inspector's recommendation(s) at the
committee's scheduled meeting. The permit application must be approved by the
committee, signed by the village president and clerk, and delivered to the
owner or his representative.
   C.   Application Fee: There shall be no fee necessary to accompany such
permit application.
A permit issued hereunder shall remain valid for a period of six (6) months
from the date of issuance. A building permit shall not be required for the
installation of a fence.
   D.   Fine: Any person who erects, constructs, or enlarges a building or
structure without having a valid building permit in effect shall be fined a sum
of seventy five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 320, 12-3-1991)
9-1-3: ADOPTION OF TECHNICAL CODES:
For the proper enforcement of this chapter, the following codes are adopted as
part of this chapter:
   A.   The BOCA basic building code, in its current edition, as promulgated by
the Building Officials Conference of America, Inc., together with the
accumulative supplements thereto. The provisions of such code shall govern all
matters covered therein to the extent that the same are not in conflict with
any provision of this code or other ordinances of the village.
   B.   The national electrical code, in its current edition, as published by
the National Fire Protection Association, together with the accumulative
supplements thereto. The provisions of such code shall govern all matters
covered therein to the extent that the same are not in conflict with this code
or other ordinances of the village.
   C.   The BOCA basic mechanical code, in its current edition, as promulgated
by the Building Officials Conference of America, together with the cumulative
supplements thereto. The provisions of such code shall govern all matters
covered therein to the extent that the same are not in conflict with any
provisions of this code or other ordinances of the village.
   D.   The BOCA basic plumbing code, in its current edition, as promulgated by
the Building Officials Conference of America, together with cumulative
supplements thereto. The provisions of such code shall govern all matters
covered therein to the extent that the same are not in conflict with any
provisions of this code or other ordinances of the village. (Ord. 291, 7-5-
1988)
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 291, 7-5-1988)
CHAPTER 3
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Definition
9-3-2: Prohibition
9-3-3: Abatement, Notice
9-3-4: Buildings Within Fire Limits
9-3-1: DEFINITION:
The term "dangerous buildings" as used in this Chapter is hereby defined to
mean and include:
   A.   Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which is
dangerous to the public health because of its condition, and which may cause or
aid in the spread of disease or injury to the health of the occupants of such
building or neighboring structures.
   B.   Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, because of
faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard.
   C.   Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, by reason
of faulty construction or other cause, is liable to cause injury to damage by
collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any part of such structure.
   D.   Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, because of
its condition or because of lack of doors or windows, is available to and
frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of
such structure.
Any such dangerous building in the Village is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
1  (1966 Code, §12.301)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 6, Chapter 2 of this Code.
9-3-2: PROHIBITION:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the Village; and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or
person in charge of any dangerous building to permit such building to be
occupied while such building is or remains in a dangerous condition. (1966
Code, §12.302)
9-3-3: ABATEMENT NOTICE:
Whenever the Police Chief, the Fire Chief or the Health Officer shall be of the
opinion that any building or structure in the Village is a dangerous building,
he shall file a written statement to this effect with the Village Clerk. The
Clerk shall thereupon cause written notice to be served upon the owner thereof,
and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by registered mail or by personal
service. Such notice shall state that the building has been declared to be in a
dangerous condition, and that such dangerous condition must be removed or
remedied by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing the same; and
that the condition must be remedied at once. Such notice may be in
substantially the following form:
"To                 (owner-occupant of the premises) of the premises known and
described as                .
You are hereby notified that (describe building) on the premises abovementioned
has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after inspection by
the Chief of Police, Fire Chief or Health Officer.
The causes for this decision are (here insert the facts as to the dangerous
condition).
You must remedy this condition or demolish the building immediately, or the
Village will proceed to do so."
If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith or taken an
appeal from the determination of the officer or employee finding that a
dangerous building exists, within ten (10) days from the time when this notice
is served upon such person by personal service or registered mail, the Chief of
Police may, upon order of the Village President and Board of Trustees, proceed
to remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous building. (1966 Code,
§12.303; amd. 1982 Code)
9-3-4: BUILDINGS WITHIN FIRE LIMITS:
Any frame building or structure within the fire limits of the Village, as
hereinbefore prescribed in Section
7-1-1 of this Code, which has or may be damaged by fire, decay or other cause
to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its current market value shall be torn
down and removed, or rebuilt with nonflammable walls.
Upon written notice by the Building Inspector, the Health Officer or the Chief
of the Fire Department to the effect that such building has been so damaged,
filed with the Clerk, the said Clerk shall notify the President and Board of
Trustees of the receipt of such notice.
The President and Board of Trustees shall then appoint three (3) persons to
determine whether or not such building or structure has been damaged to the
extent of fifty percent (50% ) of its current market value.
A copy of the notice of the appointment of this board of three (3) persons to
determine the damage shall be served upon the owner of the premises by personal
service or by registered mail at his last known address.
Such notice shall be in substantially the following form:
"To                
You are hereby notified that the Village President and Board of Trustees has
determined that the building owned by you at                , located within
the fire limits of the Village has been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to
the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its current market value and that a board
of three (3) persons has been appointed to verify this finding, which board
will hold its first meeting in the Village Hall on the       day of           
at the hour       o'clock, at which time it will determine whether or not this
finding is correct.
If this finding is verified by the board, you must tear down and remove the
said building or rebuild it with nonflammable walls."
If this finding is verified by the board of three (3) members and it determines
that the building in question has been damaged to the extent of fifty percent
(50%) of its current market value, it shall be the duty of the owner to tear
down and remove the said building within twenty (20) days after the finding of
such board, or to remodel it to comply with the requirements of new buildings
in the fire limits; and it shall be unlawful to occupy or permit the occupancy
of such building after such finding until such building is so remodeled. (1966
Code, §12.304; amd. 1982 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Permit Required, Approval
9-4-2: Bond Required
9-4-3: Lights and Warnings
9-4-4: Wires, Cutting or Removal
9-4-1: PERMIT REQUIRED, APPROVAL:
No person shall move any building on, through or over any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place in the Village without having first obtained a
permit from the Village President and Board of Trustees. Application for such
permit shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk and shall state thereon
the proposed route and the number of days it is intended that the building
should occupy any portion of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place.
Upon the approval of the intended route by the President and Board of Trustees,
the permit shall be issued. (1966 Code, §§12.501, 12.502)
9-4-2: BOND REQUIRED:
Every person applying for a permit under this Chapter shall submit, with his
application, a bond in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
conditioned on his compliance with all the provisions of this Chapter, and
agreeing to pay, and holding the Village harmless from any claim which may be
made against the Village by reason of the occupation of any street, sidewalk,
alley or other public place by the building or structure moved. (1966 Code,
§12.503)
9-4-3: LIGHTS AND WARNINGS:
Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a house or structure which is being
moved, warnings to that effect shall be placed by the public engineer so as to
warn vehicles and persons from entering that portion of the street which is so
blocked. The person moving any building through the streets shall keep warning
signs and lanterns or lights at night on the building so as to guard against
any person or vehicle from colliding with such building. (1966 Code, §12.504)
9-4-4: WIRES, CUTTING OR REMOVAL:
   A.   Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere with wires or cables of a
public utility in moving a building, the terms of any special or franchise
ordinance governing shall apply and the bond therein specified shall be given.
If no such terms apply, then the village president and board of trustees shall
estimate the expense of fixing the wires and the bond to be given to cover this
provision. (1966 Code, §12.505)
   B.   When any such moving building shall approach any fire alarm wire or
pole which shall be endangered by the removal of such building, it shall be the
duty of the mover to notify the chief of the fire department at least six (6)
hours before reaching such wire or pole so that such wires may be removed or
cared for by the authorities of the village. (1966 Code, §12.506)
CHAPTER 5
BILLBOARDS
(Rep. by Ord. 522, 11-10-2009)
CHAPTER 6
NUMBERING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Numbering Required
9-6-2: Chart
9-6-3: Placement of Number
9-6-1: NUMBERING REQUIRED:
All lots, buildings and structures in the Village shall be numbered in
accordance with the following plan:
   A.   Numbers, both east and west and north and south, shall begin with one,
with the odd numbers on the north and east sides of the streets. One number or
digit shall be assigned to each twenty feet (20') of frontage.
   B.   East and west numbers shall begin with Main Street as a base line,
numbers lying east of this base line having the suffix "east", and numbers west
of this line having the suffix "west". Front Street shall be the base line for
north and south numbers. (1966 Code, §7.301)
9-6-2: CHART:
The Village Clerk shall keep a chart showing the proper street number of every
lot in the Village, which chart shall be open for inspection by anyone
interested therein. (1966 Code, §7.302)
9-6-3: PLACEMENT OF NUMBER:
It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant of every house in the Village to
have placed thereon, in a place visible from the street, figures at least two
and one-half inches (21/2") high showing the number of that house. (1966 Code,
§7.303; amd. 1982 code)
CHAPTER 7
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Purpose
9-7-2: Definitions
9-7-3: Permit Requirements
9-7-4: Permit Application
9-7-5: Duties Of The Zoning Administrator
9-7-6: Review Of Proposed Development
9-7-7: Review Of Permit Application
9-7-8: Reviews Of Subdivision Proposals
9-7-9: Water Supply Systems
9-7-10: Sanitary Sewage And Waste Disposal Systems
9-7-11: Variances
9-7-12: Penalty
9-7-13: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
9-7-14: Disclaimer Of Liability
9-7-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village of
Stockton by the Illinois municipal code 1  in order to accomplish the following
purposes:
   A.   Prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage hazards
to others;
   B.   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   C.   Lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public
facilities and utilities, as well as flood rescue and relief operations;
   D.   Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   E.   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   F.   Preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and
floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water
quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide
recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community
and economic development. (Ord. 541, 1-11-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
9-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage
and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
   A.   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
   B.   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
   C.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
   D.   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
   E.   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, or fences;
   F.   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
   G.   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks; and
   H.   Channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface water from any source.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see definition of Flood).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
STRUCTURE: For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including gas or liquid storage tanks, that is principally aboveground. The
term includes RVs and travel trailers on site for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is
started. "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: a) any
project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions or b) any alteration of a structure listed on the
national register of historic places or the Illinois register of historic
places. (Ord. 541, 1-11-2011)
9-7-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by state law
shall commence any development activity without first obtaining a development
permit from the zoning administrator. (Ord. 541, 1-11-2011)
9-7-4: PERMIT APPLICATION:
To obtain a permit the applicant must first file a permit application on a form
furnished for that purpose. The form must be completed and submitted to the
zoning administrator. (Ord. 541, 1-11-2011)
9-7-5: DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The zoning administrator shall be responsible for the general administration of
this chapter and ensure that all development activities under the jurisdiction
of the village of Stockton meet the requirements of this chapter. The zoning
administrator shall be responsible for receiving applications and examining the
plans and specifications for the application and he shall require any
additional measures which are necessary to meet the minimum requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 541, 1-11-2011)
9-7-6: REVIEW OF PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   The zoning administrator shall review proposed development to assure
that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies
from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404
of the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
   B.   If the development is proposed for a channel or adjacent area of a
stream draining one square mile or more, the applicant must first secure a
permit from the IDNR/OWR, or a letter stating "permit not required". (Ord. 541,
1-11-2011)
9-7-7: REVIEW OF PERMIT APPLICATION:
The zoning administrator shall review all permit applications to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a flood prone area, all new construction and
substantial improvements (including the placement of prefabricated buildings
and manufactured homes) shall:
   A.   Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure,
   B.   Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage,
   C.   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage,
   D.   Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during flooding. (Ord. 541, 1-11-2011)
9-7-8: REVIEWS OF SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
The zoning administrator shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed
new development to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe
from flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is
in a flood prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that:
   A.   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage within the flood prone area,
   B.   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage, and
   C.   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood hazards.
(Ord. 541, 1-11-2011)
9-7-9: WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS:
The zoning administrator shall require within flood prone areas new and
replacement water supply systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. (Ord. 541, 1-11-2011)
9-7-10: SANITARY SEWAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
The zoning administrator shall require within flood prone areas:
   A.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into floodwaters and
   B.   On site waste disposal systems to be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 541, 1-11-2011)
9-7-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the zoning board of appeals
for a variance. The zoning board of appeals shall review the applicant's
request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the village of
Stockton board of trustees. The village of Stockton board of trustees may
attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to
further the intent of this chapter.
   A.   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all
of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   B.   The zoning board of appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of the building protections standards that would
lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability. (Ord. 541, 1-11-2011)
9-7-12: PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 541, 1-11-2011)
9-7-13: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the village of
Stockton board of trustees to fulfill the requirements of the national flood
insurance program. This chapter does not repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and
other ordinance, easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 541, 1-
11-2011)
9-7-14: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the village of Stockton or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 541, 1-11-2011)
CHAPTER 9
BUILDING CODE AND NUISANCE ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
SECTION:
9-8-1: Administrative Adjudication Of Building Codes And Nuisances
9-8-2: Administrative Adjudication Procedures Not Exclusive
9-8-3: Code Hearing Division; Hearing Officer; Powers And Duties
9-8-4: Administrative Hearing Process
9-8-5: Prima Facie Case; Rules Of Evidence; Standard Of Proof
9-8-6: Subpoenas And Defaults
9-8-7: Continuances
9-8-8: Rights Of Property Occupants
9-8-9: Defenses To Code Violations And Nuisances
9-8-10: Findings, Decision, And Order
9-8-11: Judicial Review
9-8-12: Enforcement Of Administrative Orders
9-8-13: Sanctions Applicable To Owner
9-8-14: Vacant Or Unoccupied Residential Real Estate
9-8-1: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF BUILDING CODES AND NUISANCES:
The Village of Stockton, pursuant to authority of 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.,
establishes a system of administrative adjudication for resolution of the
Village’s building code and nuisance violations to the extent permitted by
statute and the Illinois Constitution. As used in this chapter, a “system of
administrative adjudication” means the adjudication of any violation of the
Village of Stockton Municipal Code pertaining to building code and nuisance
ordinances (hereinafter “building code and nuisance administrative
adjudication”). (Ord. 710, 6-8-2021)
9-8-2: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The adoption by the Village of a system of building code and nuisance
administrative adjudication procedures does not preclude the Village from using
other methods to enforce municipal building code violations and nuisances,
including, but not limited to, relief in the Circuit Court for the 15th
Judicial Circuit, Jo Daviess County, IL. (Ord. 710, 6-8-2021)
9-8-3: CODE HEARING DIVISION; HEARING OFFICER; POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   A code hearing division is established with the authority to oversee
the building code and nuisance administrative adjudication process of the
Village as herein provided.
   B.   Adjudicatory hearings shall be presided over by a hearing officer
designated by the Village President with the consent of the Board of Trustees.
   C.   The powers and duties of the hearing officer shall include the
authority to:
      1.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the existence
of the code violations;
      2.   Upon written request of the parties or their representatives, issue
subpoenas and direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearings;
      3.   Preserve and authenticate the record, including the exhibits and
evidence introduced at hearings;
      4.   Weigh the evidence presented at hearings based on relevancy and
competence, determine the credibility of witnesses, and resolve conflicts in
testimony;
      5.   Make ultimate findings and determinations, based on the relevant and
competent evidence presented at a hearing, of whether a code violation or
nuisance exists; and
      6.   Impose penalties consistent with the applicable code provisions and
assess costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation(s).
   D.   The determination of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall
include a written finding of fact, decision, and order, including the fine,
penalty or other action with which the defendant must comply.
   E.   The hearing officer shall not have the authority to impose a penalty of
incarceration or impose a fine in excess of Seven Hundred Fifty and No/100's
Dollars, ($750.00), for each violation.
   F.   The hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in
the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years and must successfully
complete a formal training program, which includes the following:
      1.   instructions on rules of procedure of the administrative hearings
that will be conducted;
      2.   orientation to each subject area of the code violations that will be
adjudicated;
      3.   observation of similar administrative hearings; and
      4.   participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders.
   G.   The process for building code and nuisance administrative adjudication
may be consolidated and organized in conjunction with and as a part of the
process for general administrative adjudication as may be provided in other
local municipalities in Jo Daviess County, IL.. (Ord. 710, 6-8-2021)
9-8-4: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCESS:
   A.   When a Village official with authority to enforce Village building
codes and nuisances makes a determination that a violation has occurred, he or
she shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report
form that indicates (i) the name and address of the defendant, (ii) the type
and nature of the violation or nuisance, (iii) the date and time the violation
or nuisance was observed, and (iv) the names of witnesses to the violation or
nuisance. The violation report form shall be forwarded to the general
administrative adjudication office or code hearing division where a docket
number shall be stamped on all copies of the report and a hearing date shall be
noted in the blank space provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing
date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days after the
notice is served. One copy of the violation notice and report form shall be
maintained in the files of the general administrative adjudication office or
code hearing division and shall be part of the record of the hearing; one copy
of the report form shall be returned to the individual representing the Village
in the case so that he or she may prepare evidence of the code violation or
nuisance for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated; and one copy of
the report form shall be served either in person or by first class mail to the
defendant along with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the
hearing.
   B.   The notice of an adjudicatory hearing shall include the type and nature
of the building code violation or nuisance to be adjudicated, the date and
location of the adjudicatory hearing, the legal authority and jurisdiction
under which the hearing is to be held, and the penalties for failure to appear
at the hearing.
   C.   Parties may request in writing to the hearing officer before the date
set for an administrative hearing that the hearing officer issue subpoenas to
direct attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses and the production of
relevant documents.
   D.   At the hearing, parties shall be provided with an opportunity to give
testimony, present witnesses, submit evidence, and cross-examine opposing
witnesses. Parties may be represented by legal counsel.
   E.   If the person who has been charged with the building code violation or
nuisance cannot be found or served by first class mail, the Village may post
the notice on the front door of or in some other prominent place on the
property on which the code violation or nuisance occurred, and the posting
shall be deemed sufficient notice. (Ord. 710, 6-8-2021)
9-8-5: PRIMA FACIE CASE; RULES OF EVIDENCE; STANDARD OF PROOF:
   A.   A prima facie case may be established if the notice served in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter is certified by the issuer.
   B.   The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the
adjudicatory hearing process. Any evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted,
but only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons
in the conduct of their affairs.
   C.   The burden of proof required to sustain a conviction of building code
violation or nuisance shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. (Ord. 710,
6-8-2021)
9-8-6: SUBPOENAS AND DEFAULTS:
At any time prior to the hearing date, but not less than two (2) working days
prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may,
at the request of either party, direct witness to appear and give testimony at
the hearing. If on the date set for hearing, the defendant or his or her
attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in default
and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the
existence of a code violation or nuisance in the defendant’s absence. (Ord.
710, 6-8-2021)
9-8-7: CONTINUANCES:
No continuance shall be authorized by the hearing officer except in cases in
which a continuance is necessary to protect the rights of the parties and for
good cause shown. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance.
(Ord. 710, 6-8-2021)
9-8-8: RIGHTS OF PROPERTY OCCUPANTS:
It is a violation of this chapter for any person to take action or threaten to
take action for eviction, forcible entry and detainer or similar proceeding or
other adverse action against an occupant of property solely because such
occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a building code and nuisance
administrative adjudication hearing. (Ord. 710, 6-8-2021)
9-8-9: DEFENSES TO CODE VIOLATIONS AND NUISANCES:
It shall be a defense to an owner of property for which a charge of a building
code violation or nuisance under this chapter is made if the owner of the
property, his or her attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to
the hearing officer’s satisfaction that:
   A.   The code violation or nuisance alleged in the notice does not in fact
exist, or at the time of the hearing, the violation or nuisance has been
remedied or removed;
   B.   The code violation or nuisance alleged in the notice has been caused by
the current property occupants and that, in spite of reasonable attempts by the
owner to maintain the dwelling free of such violation or nuisance, the current
occupants continue to cause the violation or nuisances; or
   C.   An occupant of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner or his or
her agent to all or part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting the code
violation or nuisance. (Ord. 710, 6-8-2021)
9-8-10: FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER:
At the conclusion of a hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination
on the basis of the relevant and competent evidence presented at the hearing
whether or not a building code violation or nuisance exists. The determination
shall be in writing and shall be designated as findings, decision and order.
The findings, decision and order shall include the hearing officer’s findings
of fact, a decision whether or not a building code violation or nuisance exists
based upon the findings of fact, and an order. If a violation or nuisance is
found, the order may impose a fine, direct the defendant to correct the
violation or abate the nuisance and/or impose such other sanction as may be
appropriate as allowed by law consistent with Village ordinances. If a
violation or nuisance is not found, the order shall include a statement to that
effect and dismiss the case, in the event a violation or nuisance is not
proved. A copy of the findings, decision and order shall be served on the owner
by first class mail proper postage prepaid within five (5) days after they are
issued. (Ord. 710, 6-8-2021)
9-8-11: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by a hearing officer that a code violation does or does not
exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review
and shall be subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law.
(Ord. 710, 6-8-2021)
9-8-12: ENFORCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS:
   A.   Any fine, costs or other sanction imposed that remains unpaid after the
exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law shall be considered a debt due and owing to
the Village and may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
   B.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under
Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a code
violation, the Village may commence a proceeding in the Circuit Court of the
15th Judicial Circuit, Jo Daviess County, IL for the purpose of obtaining a
judgment on the findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this chapter shall
prevent the Village from the consolidation of multiple findings, decisions, and
orders against a person in such a proceeding.
   C.   Issues such as whether a violation occurred and the penalties that are
imposed may not be raised in any enforcement proceeding after the period for
judicial review has passed. (Ord. 710, 6-8-2021)
9-8-13: SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO OWNER:
An order to correct a code violation or abate a nuisance and the fine or other
sanctions imposed by the Village as a result of a finding of a code violation
or nuisance under this chapter shall attach to the property as well as to the
owner of the property, so that a finding of a code violation against one owner
cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner.
Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes subject to the findings,
decision and order of a hearing officer under this chapter. (Ord. 710, 6-8-
2021)
9-8-14: VACANT OR UNOCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE:
   A.   A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its
agencies, including without limitation the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, to care for vacant or unoccupied residential real estate or a
mortgagee of record who initiates a judicial action of foreclosure shall be
responsible for maintaining the property to prevent and correct Village health
and safety code violations, especially during the time a mortgage foreclosure
proceeding is pending.
   B.   A person who violates this section is guilty of a business offense and
shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty and No/100's Dollars, ($250.00),
and not more than Seven Hundred Fifty and No/100's Dollars, ($750.00). (Ord.
710, 6-8-2021)
CHAPTER 9
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-9-1: Fast Track Demolition
9-9-1: FAST TRACK DEMOLITION:
Notwithstanding any of the terms and provisions of
9-1-1  through
9-1-3  of this chapter, the Village may utilize "fast-track" demolition
proceedings as provided for in and pursuant to the terms of 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1
(e) to expedite demolition of certain properties and obtain a lien thereon, if
a residential or commercial building is three stories or less in height, as
defined by the Village's Building Code, and the municipal official in charge of
enforcing the Building Code determines that the building is open and vacant and
an immediate and continuing hazard to the community, the building may be
demolished, repaired or enclosed by the city, or any garbage, debris and other
hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances or materials may be removed by the
city, without the necessity of court proceedings if the notice requirements as
stated in 65 ILCS 11-31-1(e) are complied with and no objections are raised, as
provided for in 65 ILCS 11-31-1(e). (Ord. 739, 2- 14-2023)
TITLE 10
SUBDIVISION AND RESUBDIVISION
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS; PLAT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-1-1: Definitions
10-1-2: Preliminary Approval By Village Board
10-1-3: Information Required On Preliminary And Final Plats
10-1-4: Minimum Standards Of Design And Development
10-1-5: Variations And Exceptions
10-1-6: Enforcement
10-1-7: Changes And Amendments
10-1-8: Validity
10-1-9: Conflicting Ordinances Repealed
10-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are herewith defined
as follows:
BUILDING LINE: A line on a plat between which line and a street, alley, or
private place, no building or structures may be erected.
METES AND BOUNDS: The method used to describe a tract of urban land intended to
be used for dwelling or other purposes, so that it can be recorded in the
county recorder's office, as contrasted with a description of a part of a
property approved and recorded as a subdivision plat by the lot and block
number.
PLAT: A map, drawing, or chart prepared by an Illinois licensed land surveyor
on which the subdivider's plan of the subdivision is presented and which he
submits for approval and intends in final form to record.
SUBDIVISION: For the purpose of this chapter, a subdivision of land is either:
   A.   The division of land into three (3) or more lots, sites or parcels;
   B.   Establishment or dedication of a road, highway, street or alley through
a tract of land regardless of division or area; or
   C.   Resubdivisions of land heretofore divided or platted into lots, sites
or parcels; provided, however, that the sale or exchange of small parcels of
land to or between adjoining property owners, where such sale or exchange does
not create additional lots, shall not be considered as a subdivision of land.
Any resubdivision of recorded lots or tracts, which now front and are proposed
to front upon an existing street and where a total of not more than four (4)
new lots or sites are proposed to be created, shall be submitted to the village
board for checking the proposed resubdivision with the design standards of this
chapter and with the requirements of other village regulations, and if the
proposed resubdivision conforms to such regulations and requirements, the
village board may waive the other requirements of this chapter and the lots may
be transferred by metes and bounds or by other legal descriptions.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE: This chapter may be referred to and be known as "The
Subdivision Ordinance" or "This Ordinance".
VILLAGE: Village of Stockton, Jo Daviess County, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: Duly elected members to the village board of the village of
Stockton, Jo Daviess County, Illinois. (Ord. 407, 2-13-2001)
10-1-2: PRELIMINARY APPROVAL BY VILLAGE BOARD:
   A.   Preliminary Plat Submission: Whenever the owner of any tract or parcel
of land within the corporate limits of the village wishes to make a subdivision
of the same, he shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat of said proposed
subdivision and shall submit three (3) copies of said preliminary plat together
with such other information as may be pertinent thereto to the village board
for its preliminary study and approval. The preliminary plat shall contain such
information and be in such form as is outlined in section
10-1-3 of this chapter.
   B.   Preliminary Plat Approval: The village board shall study the
preliminary plat to see if it conforms with the minimum standards and
requirements as outlined by this chapter, and shall approve or reject such plat
within forty five (45) days after the date of submission thereof. If the
village board does not act upon the same within forty five (45) days, the
preliminary plat shall be deemed to be approved; however, the subdivider may
agree to an extension of time for an additional time not to exceed sixty (60)
days. The approval of the preliminary plat by the village board shall
constitute authorization to proceed with the preparation of the final plat and
with the installation of the necessary improvements therein as set forth in
section
10-1-4 of this chapter.
   C.   Proposed Plat: Where a tract of land is proposed for subdivision and
the village board finds that the same would constitute a part of a larger
logical subdivision in relation to the existing development of the village, the
village board may cause to be prepared a proposed possible plat of the entire
area to be used by the village board as an aid to village planning, and
specifically in judging the proposed plat filed by such owner.
   D.   Fees:
      1.   Conditions: To help cover the cost of supervisory personnel, plat
examination, filing, recording and other expenses incidental to the approval of
a subdivision, the subdivider shall pay a fee at the time of application for
approval of a preliminary plat. Such fee shall be based on the projected number
of lots to be created, with a minimum fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each application for a subdivision. At the time of application
for approval of the final plat or the last portion thereof, the required fee
will be recalculated on the basis of the actual number of lots created and all
adjustment of the fee will be made, the subdivider to pay an additional amount
or to receive a refund. There shall be no refund of any portion of the fee if
the subdivider fails to apply for final approval of the subdivision or if the
preliminary plat expires. In addition, the subdivider shall be responsible for
the fees incurred by the village for the services of the village engineer in
connection with the plats prepared by the subdivider and for the village
engineer's document review of the subdivider documents.
      2.   Amount: The fee collected by the village clerk shall be paid by
check or money order and made payable to the village. The fees shall be
calculated as follows:
      Number Of Lots      Fee
      From 1 to 10         $20.00 per lot
      For every lot over 10   1.00 per additional lot
There shall be a minimum $150.00 application fee for each subdivision
application.
   E.   Other Information Required: The subdivider shall also submit to the
village board for its approval or rejection in the same manner as the
preliminary plat, a final plat of the proposed subdivision, which shall contain
the data and information outlined in section
10-1-3 of this chapter. If the village board approves the plat, such approval
and the date thereof shall be noted on the plat over the signature of the
village president or the village president pro tempore. Such acceptance by the
village board as herein specified shall constitute an acceptance of all
streets, alleys, ways, easements, parks, or other areas preserved for or
dedicated to the public. (Ord. 407, 2-13-2001)
10-1-3: INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS:
Each subdivider of land should confer with the village board before preparing
the preliminary plat in order to acquaint himself with such proposed village
planning as may exist or with any municipal regulations governing the territory
in which the proposed subdivision is located.
   A.   Preliminary Plat: The preliminary plat shall be drawn to scale and
shall show:
      1.   The location of present property and section lines and lines of
corporate limits and other legally established districts, streets, buildings,
watercourses, tree masses, and other existing features within the area to be
subdivided and on land immediately adjacent thereto.
      2.   The proposed location and width of streets, alleys, lots, buildings,
setback lines and easements, if any.
      3.   Existing sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts, and other
underground structures within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto. The
location and size of the nearest water main and sewer or outlet are to be
indicated in a general way upon the plat.
      4.   The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded and
the name of the subdivider platting the tract.
      5.   The names and adjoining boundaries of all adjoining subdivisions and
the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land.
      6.   Contours with intervals of two feet (2') or less.
      7.   Grades and profiles of streets and plans and written and signed
statements explaining how the subdivider proposes to provide and install
improvements meeting the requirements of section
10-1-4 of this chapter.
The preliminary plat shall be filed with the clerk of the village in
triplicate. If approved, two (2) copies shall be retained by the village clerk
and one signed copy returned to the subdivider. Receipt of this signed copy
shall be authorization for the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of
plans and specifications for the minimum improvements required in this chapter
and with the preparation of the final plat.
   B.   Final Plat: If the final plat conforms to the approved preliminary
plat, and if the necessary improvements are constructed in accordance with the
approved plans therefor, or a satisfactory surety bond is submitted by the
subdivider guaranteeing construction in accordance with the approved plans, the
final plat will be approved.
The final plat shall be submitted to the village board on mylar with two (2)
copies thereof together with copies of any deed restrictions where such are too
lengthy to be shown on the plat, together with three (3) prints of plans
showing the improvements to have been constructed within the subdivision and
certified that the same have been constructed in accordance therewith (or a
bond with sureties to be approved by the village clerk, guaranteeing
construction of said improvements in accordance with the plans previously
approved).
The final plat shall show:
      1.   The boundary lines of the area being subdivided with accurate
distances and bearings.
      2.   The lines of all proposed streets and alleys with their width and
names.
      3.   The accurate outline of any property which is offered for dedication
to public use.
      4.   The lines of all adjoining lands and the lines of adjacent streets
and alleys with their widths and names.
      5.   All lot lines and an identification system for all lots and blocks.
      6.   Building lines and easements for any rights of way provided for
public use, service or utilities, with figures showing their dimensions.
      7.   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating
boundaries of subdivisions, lots, streets, alleys and of any other areas for
public or private use; the linear dimensions to be expressed in feet and
decimals of a foot.
      8.   Radii, arcs and chords, points of tangency, central angles for all
curvilinear streets, and radii for all rounded corners.
      9.   All survey monuments and bench marks, together with their
descriptions.
      10.   Name of subdivision and description of property subdivided, showing
its location and extent, points of compass, scale of plan, and name of owner or
owners or the subdivider.
      11.   Certification by a land surveyor, licensed under the laws of the
state of Illinois, that such plat has been prepared by him and that all
necessary survey monuments are correctly shown thereon.
      12.   Private covenants or restrictions and limitations upon title, if
any, shall be shown by separate instrument attached to said plat and referred
to on said plat as a part thereof, unless the same be of such brevity as would
permit it to be shown on the plat. Plats shall contain proper acknowledgment of
the owners thereof and shall bear the consent of any mortgagee to said plat and
restrictions.
      13.   In addition to the foregoing, all requirements for platting as set
forth in the municipal code of Illinois and acts amendatory thereto, shall be
complied with before said plat is recorded in the office of the county
recorder. (Ord. 407, 2-13-2001)
10-1-4: MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT:
No subdivision plat shall be approved by the village board unless it conforms
to the following minimum standards:
   A.   Acre Subdivision: Whenever the area is divided into lots containing one
to three (3) acres, inclusive, and there are indications that such lots will
eventually be resubdivided into smaller building lots, consideration shall be
given to the street and lot arrangement of the original subdivision so that
additional minor streets can be opened which will permit of a logical
arrangement of smaller lots.
   B.   Relation To Adjoining Street System: The arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of the principal
existing streets in adjoining additions (or their proper projection where
adjoining property is not subdivided), insofar as they may be necessary for
public requirements. The width of such streets in new subdivisions shall not be
less than the minimum street widths established herein. The street and alley
arrangements also be such as to cause no hardship to owners of adjacent
property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient
access to it.
Whenever there exists a dedicated or platted half street or alley adjacent to
the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street or alley shall be
platted.
   C.   Street And Alley Width:
      1.   The minimum width for streets shall be sixty feet (60'), except that
the village board may, in certain cases, to conform with already existing
streets in the village, or because of topography or special conditions, require
a greater or lesser width.
      2.   Dead-end streets (cul-de-sacs) shall be avoided when possible, but
if deemed necessary in the opinion of the village board, they shall terminate
in a circular right of way with a minimum roadway diameter of ninety feet (90')
and a total diameter of one hundred twenty feet (120'), which will provide safe
and convenient space therefor.
      3.   The minimum width of all alleys shall be twenty feet (20').
      4.   Where alleys are not provided, easements of not less than ten feet
(10') in width shall be provided on all rear lot lines and side lot lines where
deemed necessary for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas and
water mains. Easements of greater width may be required along lines or across
lots when deemed necessary by the village board for the extension of main
sewers or other utilities.
   D.   Blocks: The length and width of blocks shall conform as nearly as
practicable to those in the existing development of the village. However, the
village board may permit a deviation therefrom when such deviation, in their
opinion, is necessary because of the size, location, or topography of said
tract, and the proposed deviation conforms to and is in harmony with a possible
larger subdivision unit of which said proposed subdivision is a part.
   E.   Lots:
      1.   All side lot lines of lots shall be as nearly as possible at right
angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines, unless a
variation to this rule will give a better street and lot plan.
      2.   The minimum dimensions for lots located within the future urban
area, except in areas for commercial and industrial uses, shall be eighty feet
(80') in width and one hundred feet (100') in depth, but in no case shall a
rectangular or irregular shaped lot that is to be used for residential
purposes, contain less area than is required by the lot area regulation of the
district in which the property is located.
      3.   Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the
maintenance of building lines on both front and side streets.
      4.   Lots at street intersections which are likely to be dangerous shall
have a radius of not less than fifteen feet (15') at the street corner.
   F.   Building Setback Lines: Building setback lines shall be shown on all
lots whenever the depth of such building lines are greater than those required
by other village regulations. When the subdivided area is not under zoning
control, the village board may require building setback lines in accordance
with the needs of each subdivision. Provision shall be made by deed requiring
all enclosed parts of buildings to be set back to such building setback lines.
   G.   Character Of Development: The village board shall have the right to
agree with the subdivider regarding the type and character of development that
will be permitted in the subdivision, and may require that certain minimum
regulations regarding this matter be incorporated in the deed restrictions.
Such regulations shall be intended to protect the character and value of the
surrounding development and shall also tend to secure the most appropriate
character of development in the property that is subdivided.
   H.   Easements Along Streams: Whenever any stream or important surface
watercourse is located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider
shall at his own expense make adequate provision for straightening or widening
the channel so that it will properly carry the surface water and shall also
provide and dedicate to the village an easement along each side of the stream,
which easement shall be for the purpose of widening, improving or protecting
the stream and for recreational use. The width of such easement shall not be
less than twenty feet (20') and the total width of the easement shall be
adequate to provide for any necessary channel relocations and straightening.
   I.   Improvements: Before the final plat of any subdivided area shall be
approved and recorded, the subdivider shall retain the services of a licensed
engineer in order to develop and design improvements described in this
subsection. In lieu of final completion of the minimum improvements, before the
plat is finally approved the subdivider may follow the following method:
      1.   Post a surety bond with the village ensuring the village that the
improvements shall be completed by the subdivider within two (2) years after
final approval of the plat. The form and type of bond shall be approved by the
village attorney, and the amount of the bond shall be not less than the
estimated cost of the improvements and the amount of the estimate must be
approved by the engineer for the village. If the improvements are not completed
within the specified time, the village board may use the bond or any necessary
portion thereof to complete same.
The minimum improvements installed in a subdivision before the plat can be
finally approved shall be in accordance with the following subsections:
         a.   Street Improvements: All streets shall be filled or excavated to
the grade approved by the village board, and the roadway improved by surfacing.
The minimum standards for surfacing shall be not less than the following
requirements:
            (1)   Whenever the subdivision is located within that portion of
the village that lies within the areas described in other village regulations
as urban areas, or may lie within the probable future residential areas, the
minimum width of surfacing shall be thirty feet (30'). Commercial/industrial
width shall not be less than thirty six feet (36') minimum. Such surfacing
shall be of a type conforming to the traffic requirements of each street, but
in no event shall it be less than an all-weather road capable of bearing
vehicles at all seasons, and shall consist of not less than eight inches (8")
of compacted crushed stone or gravel, of approved specifications. Curbs will be
required along each side of the surfacing. The subdivider shall be required to
install only one-half (1/2) the width of surfacing herein required when a
street along the outer edge of his subdivision borders adjacent property that
cannot bear its share of the cost of surfacing. All surfacing shall conform to
the appropriate specifications of, and the construction shall be supervised by,
the village board.
            (2)   Whenever the subdivision is located beyond the probable
future residential areas as described in other village regulations, the minimum
width of surfacing shall be thirty feet (30'), but on each side of this
surfacing there shall be an earth shoulder having a minimum width of ten feet
(10'). The surfacing shall be an all-weather surfacing capable of bearing
vehicles at all seasons and shall consist of at least twelve inches (12") of
compacted crushed stone or gravel, of approved specifications. The surfacing
shall be in accordance with appropriate specifications of, and the construction
shall be supervised by, the village board.
         b.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks are to be four feet (4') wide and four inch
(4") thick concrete. Sidewalks are to be installed on the street side of the
property line.
         c.   Water Lines: The cost of all procedural and physical improvement
requirements incurred under the auspices of this chapter are to be borne solely
by the applicant and/or the owner of the property with the exception of a
public water supply system. In those locations where water supply is reasonably
accessible the village will contribute the installation of a public water
supply system to the boundary of each lot.
         d.   Sewers:
            (1)   Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the
subdividers shall connect or provide for the connection with such sanitary
sewer, but in any event shall make provision in such subdivision for the
establishment of a sanitary sewer system accessible to each lot in the
subdivision, and such sewer system shall be approved by the village board.
            (2)   Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of storm
water, subject to the approval of the village board.
         e.   Public Facilities: Where public facilities ar not available,
sanitary sewers, water mains and all appurtenances necessary to extend and
provide effective, efficient, safe and potable public water and sewer service
to the development as determined by the village engineer shall be installed at
the cost of the subdivider.
         f.   Streetlights: The subdivider or land developer shall install
streetlights along all streets proposed to be dedicated of a design compatible
with the neighborhood and type of development proposed. Such lights shall be
placed at each street intersection and at such interior block spacing as may be
required by the village board. Plans and specifications shall be approved by
the village board.
         g.   Other Utilities: Whenever it is deemed necessary by the village
board, they may require the installations of electric lines, streetlights, gas
mains, street trees, and other similar facilities before said plat is approved.
(Ord. 407, 2-13-2001)
10-1-5: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   General Requirements: Where the board finds that extraordinary
hardships or particular difficulties may result from strict compliance with
these regulations, it may recommend variations or exceptions to the
regulations, provided that such variations or exceptions to the regulations
shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter,
and further provided that the board shall not recommend variations or
exceptions to the regulations of this chapter unless it shall make findings
based upon evidence that:
      1.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in
the neighborhood in which the property is located.
      2.   The conditions upon which the request for the variation is based are
unique to the property for which the variation is sought, and are not
applicable, generally, to other property.
      3.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of the regulations was carried out.
      4.   Cost to the subdivider of strict or literal compliance with the
regulations shall not be the sole reason for granting a variation or exception.
      5.   The granting of a variance shall not set a precedent which may be
utilized by others or subdividers to seek variances from the provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   Conditions: In recommending variations and exceptions, the board may
require such conditions as will, in their judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Procedure For A Variation: A petition for any such variation shall be
submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is
filed for the consideration of the board. The petition shall fully detail the
grounds for the application and all of the facts taken into consideration by
the petitioner.
   D.   Recommendation And Approval: Such variations and exceptions shall be
forwarded to the village board of trustees in writing, substantiating the
variations and/or exceptions. The board of trustees may approve such variations
or exceptions from the requirements of this chapter in specific cases as listed
on the final plat, which in its opinion do not adversely affect the intent and
purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 407, 2-13-2001)
10-1-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the county
recorder's office or have any validity until it shall have been approved in the
manner prescribed herein.
   B.   No building or repair permit shall issue for any structure located on a
lot in any subdivision within the village limits, the plat of which has been
filed after the effective date hereof but which has not been approved in
accordance with the provisions herein contained, or the plat of which was filed
before the effective date hereof, but did not conform to the requirements set
forth in the municipal code of Illinois, and acts amendatory thereto.
   C.   The village board shall not permit any public improvement over which it
has any control to be made or any money expended for improvements in any area
that had been subdivided or upon any street that has been plotted after the
date of the adoption of this chapter unless such subdivision or street has been
approved in accordance with the provisions contained herein. (Ord. 407, 2-13-
2001)
10-1-7: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
Any regulation or provision of this chapter may be changed and amended from
time to time by the village board; provided, however, that such changes or
amendments shall not become effective until after a public hearing has been
held, public notice of which shall have been given in a newspaper of general
circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing, or as otherwise
required by law. (Ord. 407, 2-13-2001)
10-1-8: VALIDITY:
If any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason
held to be unconstitutional or void, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 407, 2-13-2001)
10-1-9: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES REPEALED:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed,
except any ordinance that imposes more restrictive regulations than are imposed
herein. (Ord. 407, 2-13-2001)
TITLE 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Purpose
11-1-3: Intent
11-1-4: Authority
11-1-5: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
11-1-6: Interpretation
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the VILLAGE OF STOCKTON
ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to:
   A.   Assist in the implementation of the village of Stockton comprehensive
plan, adopted June 2007, and as subsequently amended.
   B.   Accomplish the objectives and provide for the administration of this
title pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1 et seq., as from time
to time amended, and to specifically:
      1.   Protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general
welfare.
      2.   Conserve property values throughout the village.
      3.   Lessen or avoid congestion in the public streets.
      4.   Avoid hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from storm
or flood waters. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-1-3: INTENT:
It is the general intent of this title to regulate and restrict the use of all
structures, lands, and waters; regulate and restrict lot coverage, population
distribution and density, and the size and location of all structures so as to:
lessen congestion in and promote the safety and efficiency of the streets and
highways, secure safety from fire, flooding, panic, and other dangers; provide
adequate light, air, sanitation and drainage; facilitate the adequate provision
of public facilities and utilities; stabilize and protect property values;
further the appropriate use of land and conservation of natural resources;
preserve and promote the beauty of the community; and implement the community's
comprehensive plan. It is further intended to provide for the administration
and enforcement of this title and to provide penalties for its violation.
(Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-1-4: AUTHORITY:
These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-1-5: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
It is not intended by this title to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or
issued pursuant to laws. However, wherever this title imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this title shall govern. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-1-6: INTERPRETATION:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be
held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of
the village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power
granted by the Illinois statutes. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION:
11-2-1: Districts Established
11-2-2: Zoning Map
11-2-3: Boundaries
11-2-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Districts: The village of Stockton is divided into the following
districts:
A    Agriculture district
R-1  Single-family residential district
R-2  Single-family residential district
R-M  Multi-family residential district
R-MH Mobile home residential district
B-C  Central business district
B-H  Highway business district
I-L  Limited industrial district
I-G  General industrial district
PUD  Planned unit development district
 
   B.   Vacation Of Streets: Vacation of public streets and alleys shall cause
the land vacated to be automatically placed in the same district as the
abutting side to which the vacated land reverts.
   C.   Annexations: Annexations to the village subsequent to the effective
date of this title shall be placed in the A agriculture district unless the
annexation ordinance temporarily places the land in another district. Within
one year of the date of annexation, the zoning board of appeals shall evaluate
and recommend a permanent district classification to the village board. (Ord.,
10-14-2008)
11-2-2: ZONING MAP:
   A.   A certified copy of the zoning map shall be adopted and approved with
the text as part of this title and shall bear upon its face the attestation of
the village president and shall be available to the public in the office of the
village clerk.
   B.   Changes thereafter to the districts shall not be effective until
entered and attested on this certified copy. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-2-3: BOUNDARIES:
Boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled
"zoning map, village of Stockton, Illinois", which accompanies and is part of
this title. Such boundaries shall be construed to follow: corporate limits;
U.S. public land survey lines, lot or property lines; centerlines of streets,
highways, alleys, easements, and railroad rights of way or such lines extended;
unless otherwise noted on the zoning map. Boundaries indicated as parallel to
or extensions of features indicated in the preceding sentence shall be so
construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map shall be
determined by the scale of the map. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 3
A AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-3-1: Purpose
11-3-2: Uses
11-3-3: Lot Size Regulations
11-3-4: Yard And Setback Regulations
11-3-5: Bulk Regulations
11-3-6: Signs
11-3-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
11-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this district is to preserve, in agricultural uses, lands suited
to future urban development pending proper timing and the economical provision
of public utilities and community facilities to ensure orderly development.
(Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-3-2: USES:
   A.   Permitted uses:
      Agricultural machinery and equipment sales, service and repair.
      Greenhouses and nurseries.
      Home occupation.
      Land and water preserves, including arboretums and sustained forestry
yield.
      Lawn and garden equipment sales, service and repair.
      Residential accessory uses (garages, etc.).
      Riding stables and riding schools.
      Sales of seasonal flower or vegetable plants, landscaping supply, or cut
trees for holiday decorations within or adjacent to a temporary structure, and
for a duration not to exceed sixty (60) days in a calendar year.
      Sales of seasonal vegetable, fruit, or other farm products, but not other
types of products or merchandise, within a permanent sales establishment.
      Single-family detached dwelling.
   B.   Special uses: The following special use(s) may be permitted in said
district in specific situations in accordance with the procedures outlined in
this title as may be appropriate:
      Adult-use cannabis craft grower organization.
      Adult-use cannabis cultivation organization.
      Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization.
      Adult-use cannabis infuser organization.
      Adult-use cannabis processing organization.
      Adult-use cannabis transporting organization.
      Agricultural supply stores, including distribution, mixing, blending and
storage of feeds, seeds and fertilizers.
      Bed and breakfast.
      Home daycare (1 to 3 persons not including family members).
      Kennels and boarding facilities for domestic animals.
      Municipal facilities and uses, including, recreational buildings,
administration/Village Hall facilities, and community centers, provided such
buildings shall be located not less than fifty feet (50') from any lot in a
residential district.
      Non-building mounted solar collectors for export of energy for use by an
electrical utility.
      Outdoor public educational facilities.
      Parks, trails and playgrounds.
      Plant laboratories for genetic and agricultural related experimentation.
      Processing and preserving of natural agricultural products, fruits and
vegetables.
      Sales and service of small scale methane generating equipment and alcohol
distilling equipment designed for use in farming operations.
      Sales and service of wind driven electrical generating equipment.
      Sales and storage of agricultural byproducts.
      Stockyards and livestock auction facilities.
      Trucking services limited to livestock and agricultural commodities.
      Vacation rentals.
      Wood burning exterior stoves/furnaces. (Ord., 10-14-2008; amd. Ord. 663,
11-13-2018; Ord. 679, 12-10-2019; Ord. 766, 3-12-2024)
11-3-3: LOT SIZE REGULATIONS:
Every lot hereafter created in this district shall conform to the following
minimum requirements:
   A.   Area: Not less than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.
   B.   Width: Not less than two hundred feet (200'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-3-4: YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall provide and
maintain a setback in accordance with the following:
   A.   Principal Structure:
      1.   Street yard: Not less than thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side yard: Not less than fifteen feet (15').
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25').
   B.   Accessory Structures:
      1.   Street yard: No accessory structure permitted closer to a public
street than the principal structure(s).
      2.   Side yard: Not less than five feet (5').
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than five feet (5'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-3-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall not exceed
the following height and bulk limits:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Not more than thirty five feet (35') in height.
   B.   Special Uses: Maximum height limitations shall be specified with the
granting of a special use permit. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-3-6: SIGNS:
Signs may be provided in accordance with chapter 13 of this title. (Ord., 10-
14-2008)
11-3-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be provided as required or as
permitted by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 4
R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-4-1: Purpose
11-4-2: Uses
11-4-3: Lot Size Regulations
11-4-4: Yard And Setback Regulations
11-4-5: Bulk Regulations
11-4-6: Signs
11-4-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
11-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this district is to protect residential areas now developed with
one-family detached dwellings. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-4-2: USES:
   A.   Permitted uses:
      Detached residential accessory uses (garages, utility shed, etc.).
         1.   Maximum of two (2) detached structures, including not more than
one detached garage.
      Home occupation.
      Single-family detached dwelling.
   B.   Special uses: (See section
11-18-7 of this title for special use procedures and standards.)
      Bed and breakfast.
      Churches.
      Duplex, two (2) attached dwellings on one parcel.
      Funeral homes and undertaking facilities.
      Municipal facilities and uses, including recreational buildings,
administration/village hall facilities, and community centers, provided such
buildings shall be located not less than fifty feet (50') from any other lot in
a residential district.
      Neighborhood food and grocery stores not exceeding two thousand (2,000)
square feet of retail space.
      Noncommercial athletic fields and play fields.
      Outdoor public educational facilities.
      Parking lots, parking garages, or parking structures, public.
      Parks, trails and playgrounds.
      Police, fire, and EMS stations (provided that they are not located less
than 50 feet from any lot in a residential district).
      Professional services that bring customers to the property and primarily
serve local residents, including, but not necessarily limited to: barbershops
and hairdressers; child or adult care; insurance agents, brokers, and services;
accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping; attorneys; computer services;
photography studios; real estate agents and brokers; physicians, dentists,
optometrists and chiropractors; reupholstery and furniture repair; and tailor
shops, dressmaker shops, and shoe repair shops.
      Schools.
      Vacation rentals. (Ord., 10-14-2008; amd. Ord. 755, 12-12-2023)
11-4-3: LOT SIZE REGULATIONS:
Every lot hereafter created in this district shall conform to the following
minimum requirements:
   A.   Area: Not less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
   B.   Width: Not less than fifty feet (50'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-4-4: YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall provide and
maintain a setback from the property line in accordance with the following:
   A.   Principal Structure:
      1.   Street yard: Not less than twenty feet (20').
      2.   Side yard: Not less than five feet (5').
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
   B.   Accessory Structures:
      1.   Street yard: No accessory structure permitted closer to a public
street than the principal structure, with the exception of an attached porch or
deck used for access to the principal structure and within applicable setbacks.
(Ord. 535, 11-9-2010)
      2.   Side yard: Not less than five feet (5').
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than five feet (5'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-4-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall not exceed
the following height and bulk limits:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Not more than thirty feet (30') in height.
   B.   Special Uses: Maximum height limitations shall be specified with the
granting of a special use permit. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-4-6: SIGNS:
Signs may be provided in accordance with chapter 13 of this title. (Ord., 10-
14-2008)
11-4-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be provided as required or as
permitted by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 5
R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-5-1: Purpose
11-5-2: Uses
11-5-3: Lot Size Regulations
11-5-4: Yard And Setback Regulations
11-5-5: Bulk Regulations
11-5-6: Signs
11-5-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
11-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this district is to provide an appropriate setting for single-
family homes. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-5-2: USES:
   A.   Permitted uses:
      Detached residential accessory uses (garages, utility shed, etc.).
         1.   Maximum of two (2) detached structures, including not more than
one detached garage.
      Home occupation.
      Single-family detached dwelling. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
   B.   Special uses: (See section
11-18-7 of this title for special use procedures and standards.)
      Bed and breakfast.
      Churches.
      Duplex, two (2) attached dwellings on one parcel.
      Model homes and real estate sales offices in model homes, subject to the
following limitations: only for sales within the same subdivision, and only for
a period of twenty four (24) months from final plat approval.
      Municipal facilities and uses, including recreational buildings,
administration/village hall facilities, and community centers, provided such
buildings shall be located not less than fifty feet (50') from any lot in a
residential district.
      Noncommercial athletic fields and play fields.
      Outdoor public educational facilities.
      Parks, trails and playgrounds.
      Police, fire, and EMS stations (provided that they are not located less
than 50 feet from any other lot in a residential district).
      Professional services that bring customers to the property and primarily
serve local residents, including, but not necessarily limited to: barbershops
and hairdressers; child or adult care; insurance agents, brokers, and services;
accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping; attorneys; computer services;
photography studios; real estate agents and brokers; physicians, dentists,
optometrists and chiropractors; reupholstery and furniture repair; and tailor
shops, dressmaker shops, and shoe repair shops.
      Schools.
      Single-family attached dwellings: maximum of two (2) attached units
sharing a party wall at the property line; where this special use is approved,
lot width may be reduced to sixty feet (60') and lot size to seven thousand
(7,000) square feet without requiring a variance.
      Vacation rentals. (Ord., 10-14-2008; amd. Ord. 529, 6-8-2010; Ord. 755,
12-12-2023)
11-5-3: LOT SIZE REGULATIONS:
Every lot hereafter created in this district shall conform to the following
minimum requirements:
   A.   Area: Not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
   B.   Width: Not less than eighty feet (80'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-5-4: YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall provide and
maintain a setback from the property line in accordance with the following:
   A.   Principal Structure:
      1.   Street yard: Not less than twenty feet (20').
      2.   Side yard: Not less than ten feet (10').
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
   B.   Accessory Structures:
      1.   Street yard: No accessory structure permitted closer to a public
street than the principal structure, with the exception of an attached porch or
deck used for access to the principal structure and within applicable setbacks.
(Ord. 536, 11-9-2010)
      2.   Side yard: Not less than five feet (5').
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than five feet (5'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-5-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall not exceed
the following height and bulk limits:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Not more than thirty feet (30') in height.
   B.   Special Uses: Maximum height limitations shall be specified with the
granting of a special use permit. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-5-6: SIGNS:
Signs may be provided in accordance with chapter 13 of this title. (Ord., 10-
14-2008)
11-5-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be provided as required or as
permitted by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 6
R-M MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-6-1: Purpose
11-6-2: Uses
11-6-3: Lot Size Regulations
11-6-4: Yard And Setback Regulations
11-6-5: Bulk Regulations
11-6-6: Signs
11-6-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
11-6-1: PURPOSE:
The R-M district is established to protect certain areas of land, both
developed and undeveloped, with peculiar characteristics, such as present high
density dwelling units, proximity to commercial developments, or proximity to
major streets, and because of a probable, continued demand for such dwelling
accommodations which are well designed, pleasant places in which to live.
(Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-6-2: USES:
   A.   Permitted uses:
      Detached residential accessory uses (garages, utility shed, etc.).
         1.   Maximum of two (2) detached structures, including not more than
one detached garage.
      Home occupations.
      Multi-family dwellings (3 or more units).
      Single-family and two-family dwellings.
   B.   Special uses:
      Bed and breakfast.
      Churches.
      Group daycare center (4 or more persons not including family members).
      Home daycare (1 to 3 persons not including family members).
      Long term nursing care facility.
      Municipal facilities and uses, including, recreational buildings,
administration/village hall facilities, and community centers, provided such
buildings shall be located not less than fifty feet (50') from any lot in a
residential district.
      Noncommercial athletic fields and play fields.
      Outdoor public educational facilities.
      Parks, trails and playgrounds.
      Police, fire, and EMS stations (provided that they are not located less
than 50 feet from any other lot in a residential district).
      Property management offices.
      Public parking lots, parking garages, or parking structures.
      Schools.
      Vacation rentals. (Ord., 10-14-2008; amd. Ord. 755, 12-12-2023)
11-6-3: LOT SIZE REGULATIONS:
Every lot hereafter created in this district shall conform to the following
minimum requirements:
   A.   Area: Not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
   B.   Width: Not less than one hundred feet (100'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-6-4: YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall provide and
maintain a setback in accordance with the following:
   A.   Principal Structure:
      1.   Street yard: Not less than twenty feet (20').
      2.   Side yard: Not less than ten feet (10').
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
   B.   Accessory Structures:
      1.   Street yard: No accessory structure permitted closer to a public
street than the principal structure, with the exception of an attached porch or
deck used for access to the principal structure and within applicable setbacks.
(Ord. 537, 11-9-2010)
      2.   Side yard: Not less than five feet (5').
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than five feet (5'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-6-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall not exceed
the following height and bulk limits:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Not more than thirty six feet (36') in height.
   B.   Special Uses: Maximum height limitations shall be specified with the
granting of a special use permit. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-6-6: SIGNS:
Signs may be provided in accordance with chapter 13 of this title. (Ord., 10-
14-2008)
11-6-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be provided as required or as
permitted by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 7
R-MH MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-7-1: Purpose
11-7-2: Uses
11-7-3: Park Size
11-7-4: Lot Size Regulations
11-7-5: Yard And Setback Regulations
11-7-6: Bulk Regulations
11-7-7: Compliance With Applicable Regulations
11-7-8: Recreation/Open Space Areas
11-7-9: Screening And Landscaping
11-7-10: Utilities
11-7-11: Storage Of Recreational Vehicles
11-7-12: Signs
11-7-13: Off Street Parking And Loading
11-7-1: PURPOSE:
These regulations are intended to provide for the development of mobile home
parks in a manner that is compatible with adjacent development and that
protects the health, safety, and welfare of residents of those parks. Each new
mobile home residence is to be located on a separate platted lot subject to the
regulations of this chapter. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-7-2: USES:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Accessory buildings (maximum 2), including private garages or carports shall be
permitted, provided they are located within a side or rear yard.
Community center.
Management office.
Mobile homes on individual lots, excluding trailers, housecars, and camp cars
as a residence.
   B.   Special Uses: None.
   C.   Other: The selling of new and/or used dwellings as a commercial
operation in connection with the operation of a mobile home park is prohibited.
Dwellings located on individual lots within the mobile home park, however, may
be sold by the owner of the dwelling or the owner/operator of the park. (Ord.,
10-14-2008)
11-7-3: PARK SIZE:
Mobile home parks shall not be less than ten (10) contiguous acres in area.
(Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-7-4: LOT SIZE REGULATIONS:
Every lot hereafter created in this district shall conform to the following
minimum requirements:
   A.   Area: Not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
   B.   Width: Not less than fifty feet (50'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-7-5: YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall provide and
maintain a setback in accordance with the following:
   A.   Principal Structure:
      1.   Street Yard: Not less than twenty feet (20').
      2.   Side Yard: Not less than ten feet (10').
      3.   Rear Yard: Not less than twenty feet (20').
      4.   Park Boundary: Not less than twenty five feet (25').
      5.   Other: No mobile home shall be located closer than forty feet (40')
to any community building, including any workroom, toilet or laundry facilities
provided in the mobile home park.
   B.   Accessory Structures:
      1.   Street yard: No accessory structure permitted closer to a public
street than the principal structure(s).
      2.   Side yard: Not less than five feet (5').
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than five feet (5'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-7-6: BULK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall not exceed
the following height and bulk limits:
   A.   Structure height: Not more than twenty four feet (24').
   B.   Floor area: Not less than seven hundred twenty (720) square feet,
exclusive of garage, basement or porch. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-7-7: COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Mobile Home Foundation: Mobile homes shall be sited on permanent
foundations in accordance with applicable state and county regulations.
   B.   Installation: Each mobile home site shall be installed pursuant to the
manufacturer's instructions and secured to the premises by an anchoring system
or other device consistent with applicable state and county regulations.
   C.   Skirting: Skirting shall be provided on all mobile homes and installed
in accordance with the applicable state and county regulations. (Ord., 10-14-
2008)
11-7-8: RECREATION/OPEN SPACE AREAS:
   A.   Required Land Area: Not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the mobile
home park shall consist of open space/recreation areas. Such areas may include:
      1.   Public or private play lots and parks.
      2.   Pedestrian and bicycle corridors.
      3.   Greenbelt open space networks.
      4.   Stormwater detention or retention facilities, provided such areas
are capable of being utilized for recreational purposes.
   B.   Ownership And Maintenance: All open space/recreational areas shall be
owned and maintained by the management of the mobile home park. (Ord., 10-14-
2008)
11-7-9: SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Screening:
      1.   Mobile home parks which abut an R-1, R-2 or PUD district shall be
adequately screened from such district by a natural or landscaped area.
      2.   Approved screens shall consist of a combination of evergreen,
deciduous, and ornamental trees, and may include fencing, walls, or berms, and
shall be subject to review and approval by the village board.
   B.   Street Tree Plantings: Trees may be required along residential streets
as described in the village's subdivision ordinance. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-7-10: UTILITIES:
Street lighting shall be provided along all interior residential streets, shall
utilize a full cutoff luminaire, and shall be shielded where necessary to avoid
casting direct light upon any dwelling. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-7-11: STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
   A.   The outdoor storage of recreational vehicles shall be permitted only in
storage areas designated by the owner of the mobile home park.
   B.   This storage area shall be completely screened around its entire
perimeter by an opaque six foot (6') high fence, landscaped with trees and
shrubs to soften its visual appearance from adjacent lots and public rights of
way. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-7-12: SIGNS:
Signs may be provided in accordance with chapter 13 of this title. (Ord., 10-
14-2008)
11-7-13: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be provided as required or as
permitted by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 8
B-C CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-8-1: Purpose
11-8-2: Uses
11-8-3: Lot Size Regulations
11-8-4: Yard And Setback Regulations
11-8-5: Bulk Regulations
11-8-6: Signs
11-8-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
11-8-1: PURPOSE:
The B-C district is established to provide for those retail trade and service
activities which serve the entire community. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-8-2: USES:
   A.   Permitted uses:
      Banks and other financial institutions.
      Barbershops, beauty shops, and hairdressers.
      Duplicating, blueprinting, photocopying, addressing, and mailing
services.
      Indoor recreation facilities, including billiards and pool
establishments, bowling alley, movie theater, fitness/exercise center, skating
rinks, and similar commercial facilities.
      Indoor retail sales, including, but not limited to, food, liquor, gifts,
furniture, paint, jewelry, home furnishings, and automobile accessories.
      Laundries and dry cleaning establishments, including coin operated
laundries.
      Newspaper, periodical or book publishing and printing establishments.
      Offices and meeting places for social, professional, fraternal,
political, religious, civic, or other nonprofit organizations.
      Offices for physician/surgeon, dentist/dental surgeon, osteopathic
physician, optometrist and chiropractor.
      Photographic studios and commercial photography establishments.
      Professional services, including, but not limited to, accounting,
auditing and bookkeeping firms or services; advertising agencies, consumer
credit reporting, news agencies, employment agencies; computer services;
engineering and architectural firms or consultants; insurance company, agent,
broker, and service representative offices; law offices; real estate agents,
brokers, managers and title companies.
      Public parking lots, parking garages, or parking structures.
      Radios, TV, high fidelity sound equipment, electronic amplifier,
stereophonic sound system, musical instrument or other such device sales,
service, repair, testing, demonstration facility.
      Residential units above the ground floor.
      Restaurants, including sit down interior service, sit down outdoor
service, and walk-up carryout service.
      Retail bakers, including those that produce some or all products on the
premises.
      Reupholstery and furniture repair and interior design studios.
      Scientific or educational firms or agencies, but not research
laboratories or manufacturing operations.
      Tailor shops, dressmaker shops, garment and shoe repair shops.
      Taverns, bars and other drinking places.
   B.   Special uses: The following special use(s) may be permitted in said
district in specific situations in accordance with the procedures outlined in
this title as may be appropriate:
      Accessory buildings for the purpose of storing equipment or inventory.
      Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization.
      Attached or detached garage, not to exceed two (2) spaces for each
residential unit and two (2) spaces for each business on the premises.
      Automobile washing establishments.
      Churches.
      Gasoline or similar fuel service station, provided all tanks are
underground.
      Hotels, motels, and similar lodging facilities such as vacation rentals.
      Municipal facilities and uses, including recreational buildings,
administration/village hall facilities and community centers.
      Parks, trails and playgrounds.
      Plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment dealers.
      Police, fire, and EMS stations (provided such buildings are not located
less than 50 feet from any lot in a residential district).
      Rental and leasing establishments providing floor sanding and waxing
machines, ladders, scaffolds, tools, chairs or other furniture, or other types
of equipment or similar items.
      Residential units on the ground floor for the owner/operator of the
premises as an accessory use.
      Restaurant drive-through window.
      Seasonal farm product and landscaping supply sales, including flowers,
fruits and vegetables, landscaping supplies, and cut trees, within or adjacent
to a permanent or temporary structure.
      Veterinarian offices and facilities. (Ord., 10-14-2008; amd. Ord. 679,
12-10-2019; Ord. 756, 12-12-2023)
11-8-3: LOT SIZE REGULATIONS:
Every lot hereafter created in this district shall conform to the following
minimum requirements:
   A.   Area: Not less than three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet.
   B.   Width: Not less than twenty five feet (25'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-8-4: YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall provide and
maintain a setback in accordance with the following:
   A.   Principal Structure:
      1.   Street yard: No minimum setback.
      2.   Side yard: No minimum setback.
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than five feet (5').
   B.   Accessory Structures:
      1.   Street yard: No accessory structure permitted closer to a public
street than the principal structure(s).
      2.   Side yard: Not less than five feet (5').
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than five feet (5'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-8-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall not exceed
the following height and bulk limits:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Not less than eighteen feet (18') nor more than forty
two feet (42') in height; not more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in
total floor area.
   B.   Special Uses: Maximum height and area limitations shall be specified
with the granting of a special use permit. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-8-6: SIGNS:
Signs may be provided in accordance with chapter 13 of this title. (Ord., 10-
14-2008)
11-8-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be provided as required or as
permitted by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 9
B-H HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-9-1: Purpose
11-9-2: Uses
11-9-3: Lot Size Regulations
11-9-4: Yard And Setback Regulations
11-9-5: Bulk Regulations
11-9-6: Signs
11-9-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
11-9-1: PURPOSE:
The B-H highway business district is intended to provide for the orderly and
attractive grouping at appropriate locations along principal highway routes of
those businesses and customer services which are logically related to and
dependent upon highway traffic or which are specifically designed to serve the
needs of such traffic. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-9-2: USES:
   A.   Permitted uses:
      Accessory buildings for the purpose of storing equipment or inventory.
      Attached or detached garage, not to exceed two (2) spaces for each
business on the premises.
      Automobile washing establishments.
      Banks and other financial institutions.
      Barbershops, beauty shops, and hairdressers.
      Duplicating, blueprinting, photocopying, addressing, and mailing
services.
      Funeral homes and undertaking facilities.
      Gasoline or similar fuel service station, provided all tanks are
underground.
      Hospital or medical center.
      Hotels, motels, and similar lodging facilities.
      Indoor recreation facilities, including billiards and pool
establishments, bowling alley, movie theater, fitness/exercise center, skating
rinks, and similar commercial facilities.
      Laundries and dry cleaning establishments, including coin operated
laundries.
      Lawn and garden equipment sales, service, and repair.
      Newspaper, periodical or book publishing and printing establishments.
      Offices and meeting places for social, professional, fraternal,
political, religious, civic, or other nonprofit organizations.
      Offices for physician/surgeon, dentist/dental surgeon, osteopathic
physician, optometrist and chiropractor.
      Outdoor recreation facilities, including amusement parks, drive-in
theaters, golf courses open to the public, golf driving range, archery range,
baseball batting cages, miniature golf courses, and similar commercial
recreational facilities.
      Parcel delivery and pick up services and facilities.
      Photographic studios and commercial photography establishments.
      Plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment dealers.
      Professional services, including, but not limited to, accounting,
auditing and bookkeeping firms or services; advertising agencies, consumer
credit reporting, news agencies, employment agencies; computer services;
engineering and architectural firms or consultants; insurance company, agent,
broker, and service representative offices; law offices; real estate agents,
brokers, managers and title companies.
      Public parking lots, parking garages, or parking structures.
      Radios, TV, high fidelity sound equipment, electronic amplifier,
stereophonic sound system, musical instrument or other such device sales,
service, repair, testing, demonstration facility.
      Rental and leasing establishments providing floor sanding and waxing
machines, ladders, scaffolds, tools, chairs or other furniture, or other types
of equipment or similar items.
      Restaurants, including sit down interior service, sit down outdoor
service, walk-up carryout service, and drive-through service.
      Retail bakers, including those that produce some or all products on the
premises.
      Retail sales, including, but not limited to, food, liquor, gifts,
furniture, paint, jewelry, home furnishings, and automobile accessories.
      Reupholstery and furniture repair and interior design studios.
      Sales, service, rental, and repair of motorized and recreational
vehicles, except farm equipment.
      Scientific or educational firms or agencies, but not research
laboratories or manufacturing operations.
      Seasonal farm product and landscaping supply sales, including flowers,
fruits and vegetables, landscaping supplies, and cut trees, within or adjacent
to a permanent or temporary structure.
      Tailor shops, dressmaker shops, garment and shoe repair shops and
shoeshine parlors.
      Taverns, bars and other drinking places.
      Telephone offices.
      Truck parking when used in the conduct of a permitted business, limited
to vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when located
within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential district.
      Veterinarian offices and facilities.
   B.   Special uses: The following special use(s) may be permitted in said
district in specific situations in accordance with the procedures outlined in
this title as may be appropriate:
      Adult-use cannabis craft grower organization.
      Adult-use cannabis cultivation organization.
      Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization.
      Adult-use cannabis infuser organization.
      Adult-use cannabis processing organization.
      Adult-use cannabis transporting organization.
      Agricultural byproducts sales and storage.
      Agricultural machinery sales, service, and repair.
      Agricultural supply stores, including distribution, mixing, blending and
storage of feeds, seeds, and fertilizer.
      Churches.
      Group daycare center (4 or more persons not including family members).
      Kennels and boarding facilities for domestic animals.
      Miniwarehouses.
      Mobile home or garage dealers with displays.
      Municipal facilities and uses, including recreational buildings,
administration/village hall facilities and community centers.
      Municipal utility facilities, including pumping stations, water towers,
waterworks, or wells.
      Noncommercial athletic fields and play fields.
      Outdoor public educational facilities.
      Parks, trails and playgrounds.
      Police, fire, and EMS stations (provided such buildings are not located
less than 50 feet from any lot in a residential district).
      Schools.
      Semitractor truck/trailer sales, rentals and service.
      Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment, buildings and service yards.
      Wholesale merchandise establishments.
      Wood burning exterior stoves/furnaces. (Ord., 10-14-2008; amd. Ord. 679,
12-10-2019)
11-9-3: LOT SIZE REGULATIONS:
Every lot hereafter created in this district shall conform to the following
minimum requirements:
   A.   Area: Not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
   B.   Width: Not less than one hundred feet (100'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-9-4: YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall provide and
maintain a setback in accordance with the following:
   A.   Principal Structure:
      1.   Street yard: Not less than thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side yard: Not less than ten feet (10').
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than twenty feet (20').
   B.   Accessory Structures:
      1.   Street yard: No accessory structure permitted closer to a public
street than the principal structure(s).
      2.   Side yard: Not less than five feet (5').
      3.   Rear yard: Not less than five feet (5'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-9-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall not exceed
the following height and bulk limits:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Not more than forty two feet (42') in height.
   B.   Special Uses: Maximum height limitations shall be specified with the
granting of a special use permit. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-9-6: SIGNS:
Signs may be provided in accordance with chapter 13 of this title. (Ord., 10-
14-2008)
11-9-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be provided as required or as
permitted by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 10
I-L LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-10-1: Purpose
11-10-2: Uses
11-10-3: Lot Size Regulations
11-10-4: Yard And Setback Regulations
11-10-5: Bulk Regulations
11-10-6: Signs
11-10-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
11-10-1: PURPOSE:
The I-L limited industrial district is intended to provide an appropriate
location for commercial uses that generally do not require exposure on a major
highway for the purpose of generating retail sales and which should be
separated from residential uses due to the noise, odor, or traffic they may
produce. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-10-2: USES:
   A.   Permitted uses:
      Accessory buildings for the purpose of storing equipment or inventory.
      Automobile driving schools.
      Automobile/truck storage facilities.
      Duplicating, blueprinting, photocopying, addressing, and mailing
services.
      Greenhouses and nurseries.
      Miniwarehouses.
      Municipal utility facilities, including pumping stations, water towers,
waterworks, or wells.
      Newspaper, periodical or book publishing and printing establishments.
      Parcel delivery and pick up services and facilities.
      Postal services.
      Processing and preserving of natural agricultural products, fruits and
vegetables.
      Production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of
materials, goods or products, limited to or substantially similar to the
following products:
      1.   Electronic and electrical products and instruments, such as
transistors, semiconductors, small computers, scanners, monitors and compact
communication devices;
      2.   High technology products related to the fields of physics,
oceanography, astrophysics, metallurgy, chemistry and biology;
      3.   Laser technology, radiology, X-ray and ultrasound products,
manufacturing and assembly;
      4.   Medical and dental supplies;
      5.   Optical, fiber optical and photographic products and equipment;
      6.   Orthopedic and medical appliances, such as artificial limbs, brace
supports and stretchers;
      7.   Scientific and precision instruments and components, including
robotics;
      8.   Products related to process design, process simulation, software
development, and safety engineering.
      Public parking lots, parking garages, or parking structures.
      Recreational vehicle sales and service including campers, snowmobiles,
trailers and boats.
      Rental and leasing establishments providing floor sanding and waxing
machines, ladders, scaffolds, tools, chairs or other furniture, or other types
of equipment or similar items.
      Taxicab garages.
      Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment, buildings and service yards.
      Towing services with limited outdoor storage (up to 10 vehicles).
      Truck parking when used in the conduct of a permitted business, limited
to vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when located
within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential district.
      Utility operation offices, shops, storage areas, display rooms, service
yards or garages.
      Veterinarian offices and facilities.
      Wholesale merchandise establishments.
      Wholesale, warehouse or distribution centers without outdoor storage.
(Does not include storage or distribution centers for bottled gas, butane, fuel
oil or solid fuels.)
   B.   Special uses: The following special use(s) may be permitted in said
district in specific situations in accordance with the procedures outlined in
this title as may be appropriate:
      Adult entertainment establishments, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Location of an adult entertainment establishment shall not be less
than one thousand feet (1,000') from any church, synagogue, temple, mosque or
any other place of worship, any residentially zoned district, park, school,
playground, daycare center, public library or other adult entertainment
establishment.
      2.   There shall be no display windows on the premises or entrances/
windows which permit view of interior from exterior.
      3.   The adult entertainment establishment may have one nonflashing sign
no larger than sixteen (16) square feet. Said sign must identify the business
as an adult entertainment establishment. One additional sign maximum of two (2)
square feet shall be located at the entrance to the establishment which states,
"Admittance to adults only". Building address and hours shall be provided in
addition to the aforementioned signs.
      4.   The owner and operator of an adult entertainment establishment shall
agree to comply with all federal, state and local laws and ordinances,
including those regulating obscenity and alcoholic beverages, and shall further
ensure that minors are not allowed on the premises.
      5.   There shall be no areas in the adult entertainment establishment in
which entertainment is provided which are not fully visible from the main area
of the establishment. No entertainment may occur in areas of the establishment
which are set off by doors, curtains, screens, barriers, or other obstructions.
      Adult-use cannabis craft grower organization.
      Adult-use cannabis cultivation organization.
      Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization.
      Adult-use cannabis infuser organization.
      Adult-use cannabis processing organization.
      Adult-use cannabis transporting organization.
      Agricultural byproducts sales and storage.
      Agricultural machinery sales, service, and repair.
      Agricultural supply stores, including distribution, mixing, blending and
storage of feeds, seeds, and fertilizer.
      Automobile painting and undercoating services.
      Automobile washing establishments.
      Bus sales and maintenance shops.
      Commercial communications towers and antennas, including microwave relay,
radio and television and radar related facilities.
      Computer services.
      Electric power production and substations.
      Engineering and architectural firms or consultants.
      Funeral homes and undertaking facilities.
      Kennels and boarding facilities for domestic animals.
      Laboratories, plant genetic and agricultural related experimentation.
      Laboratories; research, development and testing, including testing
facilities and equipment, and manufacturing and fabrication of products in
conjunction with such research or development.
      Laundries and dry cleaning establishments, industrial and retail (with a
central plant serving more than 1 retail outlet) including supply services such
as linens, uniforms and diapers.
      Lawn and garden equipment sales, service, and repair.
      Motor freight operations, including truck terminals, transfer facilities,
vehicle maintenance, cleaning and repair as a component of trucking operations
(provided they are not within 100 feet of a residential parcel).
      Motorized vehicle sales, service, rental or repair shops.
      Municipal facilities and uses, including, recreational buildings,
administration/village hall facilities, and community centers, provided such
buildings shall be located not less than fifty feet (50') from any lot in a
residential district.
      Natural gas transmission and distribution facilities.
      Noncommercial athletic fields and play fields.
      Outdoor public educational facilities.
      Parks, trails and playgrounds.
      Pilot plants or other facilities for the testing of manufacturing,
processing or fabrication methods, or for the testing of products or materials.
      Police, fire, and EMS stations (provided that they are not located less
than 50 feet from any lot in a residential district).
      Production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of
materials, goods or products, involving the following uses, products,
components, or circumstances:
      1.   Cameras and other photographic equipment;
      2.   Ceramic products, such as pottery, figurines and small glazed tiles;
      3.   Cosmetics and toiletries, pharmaceutical products, perfumes, and
perfumed soaps;
      4.   Small electrical household appliances, such as lighting fixtures,
irons, fans and toasters;
      5.   Electrical equipment assembly, such as home radio and television
receivers and home movie equipment, but not including electrical machinery;
      6.   Electrical supplies, manufacturing and assembly, such as cable
assembly, switches, lamps, insulation and dry cell batteries.
      Products related to material research and development in such areas as
prepared glass, ceramics, carbon fiber, metals, textiles, polymers, plastics,
chemical foams and inorganics such as liquid crystals, and synthetic fuels.
      Sales, retail or wholesale, and servicing of construction equipment and
farm equipment.
      Semitractor truck/trailer sales, rentals and service.
      Wood burning exterior stoves/furnaces. (Ord., 10-14-2008; amd. Ord. 679,
12-10-2019)
11-10-3: LOT SIZE REGULATIONS:
Every lot hereafter created in this district shall conform to the following
minimum requirements:
   A.   Area: Not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   B.   Width: Not less than one hundred feet (100'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-10-4: YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall provide and
maintain a setback in accordance with the following:
   A.   Street yard: Not less than thirty feet (30').
   B.   Side yard: Not less than fifteen feet (15').
   C.   Rear yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-10-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall not exceed
the following height and bulk limits:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Not more than forty two feet (42') in height.
   B.   Special Uses: Maximum height limitations shall be specified with the
granting of a special use permit. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-10-6: SIGNS:
Signs may be provided in accordance with chapter 13 of this title. (Ord., 10-
14-2008)
11-10-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be provided as required or as
permitted by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 11
I-G GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-11-1: Purpose
11-11-2: Uses
11-11-3: Lot Size Regulations
11-11-4: Yard And Setback Regulations
11-11-5: Bulk Regulations
11-11-6: Signs
11-11-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
11-11-1: PURPOSE:
The I-G general industrial district is intended to provide an appropriate
location for the most intensive nonretail commercial uses that generally should
be separated from residential uses due to the noise, odor, or traffic they may
produce. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-11-2: USES:
   A.   Permitted uses:
      Accessory buildings for the purpose of storing equipment or inventory.
      Automobile driving schools.
      Automobile painting and undercoating services.
      Automobile/truck storage facilities.
      Bus and railroad passenger stations, terminals, turnarounds, and lots.
      Bus sales and maintenance shops.
      Crematories.
      Electric power production and substations.
      Electrical supplies, manufacturing and assembly, such as cable assembly,
switches, lamps, insulation and dry cell batteries.
      Foundries.
      Highway maintenance shops and yards, with limited storage of asphalt,
salt and other bulk materials.
      Laboratories; research, development and testing, including testing
facilities and equipment, and manufacturing and fabrication of products in
conjunction with such research or development.
      Laundries and dry cleaning establishments, industrial and retail (with a
central plant serving more than 1 retail outlet) including supply services such
as linens, uniforms and diapers.
      Miniwarehouses.
      Mobile home or garage dealers with displays.
      Motor freight operations, including truck terminals, transfer facilities,
vehicle maintenance, cleaning and repair as a component of trucking operations
(provided they are not within 100 feet of a residential parcel).
      Municipal utility facilities, including pumping stations, water towers,
waterworks, or wells.
      Natural gas transmission and distribution facilities.
      Parcel delivery and pick up services and facilities.
      Parking lots, public; park and ride lots.
      Pilot plants or other facilities for the testing of manufacturing,
processing or fabrication methods, or for the testing of products or materials.
      Postal services.
      Power plants.
      Production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of
materials, goods or products, involving the following uses, products,
components, or circumstances:
      1.   Cameras and other photographic equipment;
      2.   Ceramic products, such as pottery, figurines and small glazed tiles;
      3.   Cosmetics and toiletries, pharmaceutical products, perfumes, and
perfumed soaps;
      4.   Small electrical household appliances, such as lighting fixtures,
irons, fans and toasters;
      5.   Electrical equipment assembly, such as home radio and television
receivers and home movie equipment, but not including electrical machinery.
      Production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of
materials, goods or products, limited to or substantially similar to the
following products:
      1.   Electronic and electrical products and instruments, such as
transistors, semiconductors, small computers, scanners, monitors and compact
communication devices;
      2.   High technology products related to the fields of physics,
oceanography, astrophysics, metallurgy, chemistry and biology;
      3.   Laser technology, radiology, X-ray and ultrasound products,
manufacturing and assembly;
      4.   Medical and dental supplies;
      5.   Optical, fiber optical and photographic products and equipment;
      6.   Orthopedic and medical appliances, such as artificial limbs, brace
supports and stretchers;
      7.   Scientific and precision instruments and components, including
robotics;
      8.   Products related to process design, process simulation, software
development, and safety engineering.
      Products related to material research and development in such areas as
prepared glass, ceramics, carbon fiber, metals, textiles, polymers, plastics,
chemical foams and inorganics such as liquid crystals, and synthetic fuels.
      Public parking lots, parking garages, or parking structures.
      Pumping stations, water towers, waterworks, or wells; public.
      Rail freight terminals, switching yards, shops and roundhouses.
      Recreational vehicle sales and service including campers, snowmobiles,
trailers and boats.
      Sales, retail or wholesale, and servicing of construction equipment and
farm equipment.
      Semitractor truck/trailer sales, rentals and service.
      Taxicab garages.
      Telephone exchanges, transmission equipment, buildings and service yards.
      Towers associated with microwave relay, communications, radio and
television and radar related facilities.
      Towing services with limited outdoor storage (up to 10 vehicles).
      Truck parking when used in the conduct of a permitted business, limited
to vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when located
within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential district.
      Utility operation offices, shops, storage areas, display rooms, service
yards or garages.
      Wholesale, warehouse, or distribution centers with outdoor storage.
Includes facilities which handle bottled gas, butane, fuel oil or solid fuels
and facilities with outdoor storage.
      Wholesale, warehouse or distribution centers without outdoor storage.
(Does not include storage or distribution centers for bottled gas, butane, fuel
oil or solid fuels.)
   B.   Special uses: The following special use(s) may be permitted in said
district in specific situations in accordance with the procedures outlined in
this title as may be appropriate:
      Adult-use cannabis craft grower organization.
      Adult-use cannabis cultivation organization.
      Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization.
      Adult-use cannabis infuser organization.
      Adult-use cannabis processing organization.
      Adult-use cannabis transporting organization.
      Agricultural byproducts sales and storage.
      Agricultural machinery sales, service, and repair.
      Agricultural supply stores, including distribution, mixing, blending and
storage of feeds, seeds, and fertilizer.
      Chimneys, cooling towers, and other structures accessory to a permitted
use.
      Commercial communications towers and antennas, including microwave relay,
radio and television and radar related facilities.
      Duplicating, blueprinting, photocopying, addressing, and mailing
services.
      Greenhouses and nurseries.
      Kennels and boarding facilities for domestic animals.
      Laboratories, plant genetic and agricultural related experimentation.
      Motor freight operations, including truck terminals, transfer facilities,
vehicle maintenance, cleaning and repair as a component of trucking operations
(provided they are not within 100 feet of a residential parcel).
      Municipal facilities and uses, including, recreational buildings,
administration/village hall facilities, and community centers, provided such
buildings shall be located not less than fifty feet (50') from any lot in a
residential district.
      Noncommercial athletic fields and play fields.
      Outdoor public educational facilities.
      Parks, trails and playgrounds.
      Police, fire, and EMS stations (provided that they are not located less
than 50 feet from any lot in a residential district).
      Processing and preserving of natural agricultural products, fruits and
vegetables.
      Recreational vehicle sales and service including campers, snowmobiles,
trailers and boats.
      Sales, retail or wholesale, and servicing of construction equipment and
farm equipment.
      Semitractor truck/trailer sales, rentals and service.
      Waste material storage, processing, treatment or disposal, as a principal
use.
      Wholesale merchandise establishments.
      Wood burning exterior stoves/furnace. (Ord., 10-14-2008; amd. Ord. 679,
12-10-2019)
11-11-3: LOT SIZE REGULATIONS:
Every lot hereafter created in this district shall conform to the following
minimum requirements:
   A.   Area: Not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
   B.   Width: Not less than one hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-11-4: YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall provide and
maintain a setback in accordance with the following:
   A.   Street yard: Not less than forty feet (40').
   B.   Side yard: Not less than twenty feet (20').
   C.   Rear yard: Not less than thirty feet (30'). (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-11-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
Every building hereafter erected or enlarged in this district shall not exceed
the following height and bulk limits:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Not more than forty two feet (42') in height. Chimneys
and other accessory structures that would exceed this limit require a special
use permit.
   B.   Special Uses: Maximum height limitations shall be specified with the
granting of a special use permit. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-11-6: SIGNS:
Signs may be provided in accordance with chapter 13 of this title. (Ord., 10-
14-2008)
11-11-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be provided as required or as
permitted by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 12
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-12-1: Purpose
11-12-2: Uses
11-12-3: Lot Size, Yard, And Bulk Regulations
11-12-4: Signs
11-12-5: Off Street Parking And Loading
11-12-6: Criteria For Approval
11-12-7: Procedure
11-12-1: PURPOSE:
The planned unit development district is established to provide a regulatory
framework designed to promote improved environmental design in the village of
Stockton by allowing for greater freedom, imagination and flexibility in the
development of land, while ensuring substantial compliance to the basic intent
of the zoning ordinance and the general plan for community development. It
allows diversification and variation in the relationship of uses, structures,
and open spaces in developments conceived and implemented as comprehensive and
cohesive unified projects. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-12-2: USES:
Any use permitted by right or as a conditional grant in any of the other
districts of this title may be permitted in the planned unit development
district, provided however, that no use shall be permitted except in conformity
with a specific and precise development plan pursuant to the procedural and
regulatory provisions established by this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-12-3: LOT SIZE, YARD, AND BULK REGULATIONS:
In the planned unit development district, there shall be no predetermined
specific lot area, lot width, height, yard and usable open space requirements,
but such requirements as are made a part of an approved recorded precise
development plan shall be, along with the recorded plan itself, construed to be
and enforced as a part of this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-12-4: SIGNS:
Signs may be provided in accordance with chapter 13 of this title and such
requirements as are made a part of an approved recorded precise development
plan. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-12-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
In the planned unit development district, off street parking facilities shall
be provided in accordance with chapter 15 of this title and such requirements
as are made a part of an approved recorded precise development plan. (Ord., 10-
14-2008)
11-12-6: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL:
As a basis for determining the acceptability of a planned unit development
district application, the following criteria shall be applied to the precise
development plan for such district with specific consideration as to whether or
not it is consistent with the spirit and intent of this title, has been
prepared with competent professional advice and guidance, and produces
significant benefits in terms of environmental design:
   A.   Character And Intensity Of Land Use: In a planned unit development
district, the uses proposed and their intensity and arrangement on the site
shall be a visual and operational character which:
      1.   Are compatible to the physical nature of the site.
      2.   Would produce an attractive environment of sustained aesthetic and
ecological desirability, economic stability and functional practicality.
      3.   Would not adversely affect the anticipated provision for school or
other municipal services.
      4.   Would not create a traffic or parking demand incompatible with the
existing or proposed facilities to serve it.
   B.   Economic Feasibility And Impact: The proponents of a planned unit
development district application shall provide evidence satisfactory to the
village board of its economic feasibility, of available adequate financing, and
that it would not adversely affect the economic prosperity of the village or
the values of surrounding properties.
   C.   Engineering Design Standards: The width of street right of way, width
and location of street or other paving, outdoor lighting, location of sewer and
water lines, provision for stormwater drainage or other similar environmental
engineering consideration shall be based upon determination as to the
appropriate standards necessary to implement the specific function in the
specific situation, provided, however, that in no case shall standards be less
than those necessary to ensure the public safety and welfare as determined by
the village.
   D.   Preservation And Maintenance Of Open Space: In a planned unit
development district, adequate provision shall be made for the permanent
preservation and maintenance of common open space either by private reservation
or dedication to the public.
      1.   In the case of private reservation, the open area to be reserved
shall be protected against building development by conveying to the village, as
part of the conditions for project approval, an open space easement over such
open areas.
      2.   The care and maintenance of such open space reservation shall be
assured by establishment of appropriate management organization for the
project. The manner of assuring maintenance and assessing such cost to
individual properties shall be included in any contractual agreement with the
village and shall be included in the title to each property.
      3.   Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservation shall
be established in a manner acceptable to the village and made a part of the
conditions of plan approval.
   E.   Implementation Schedule: The proponents of a planned unit development
district shall submit a reasonable schedule for the implementation of the
development to the satisfaction of the village board, including suitable
provisions for assurance that each phase could be brought to completion in a
manner which would not result in adverse effect upon the community as a result
of termination at that point. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-12-7: PROCEDURE:
The procedure for rezoning to a planned unit development district shall be as
required for any other zoning map amendment under this title, except that in
addition thereto the rezoning may only be considered in conjunction with a
general development plan and shall be subject to the following additional
requirements:
   A.   General Development Plan: A general development plan application shall
be submitted with the rezoning petition and shall include the following:
      1.   A statement describing the general character of the intended
development.
      2.   An accurate map of the project area including its relationship to
surrounding properties and existing topography and key features.
      3.   A plan of the proposed project showing at least the following
information in sufficient detail to make possible the evaluation of the
criteria for approval as set forth in section
11-12-6 of this chapter:
         a.   The pattern of proposed land use, including shape, size and
arrangement of proposed land areas, density and environmental character.
         b.   The pattern of public and private streets.
         c.   The location, size and character of recreational and open space
areas reserved or dedicated for public uses such as school, park, greenway,
etc.
         d.   A utility feasibility study.
      4.   Appropriate statistical data on the size of the development ratio of
various land uses, percentages of multi-family units by number of bedrooms,
economic analysis of the development, expected staging and any other plans or
data pertinent to evaluation by the village under the criteria of subsection A3
of this section.
      5.   General outline of intended organizational structure related to
property owners' association, deed restrictions and private provision of common
services.
   B.   Referral And Hearing:
      1.   Application Filing: The general development plan application shall
be filed with the zoning administrator, who after ascertaining it contains the
information required by this title shall forward the application to the zoning
board.
      2.   Hearing Requirement: As with any zoning map amendment, no such
amendments shall be made without a hearing before the zoning board. At least
fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation published in the village.
      3.   Zoning Board Recommendation: Following public hearing the zoning
board shall forward the general development plan petition to the village board,
with a recommendation that the plan be approved as submitted, approved with
modifications, or disapproved.
      4.   Approval; Implementation Plan: Approval of the rezoning and related
general development plan shall establish the basic right of use for the area in
conformity with the plan as approved, which shall be recorded as an integral
component of the district regulations, but such plan shall be conditioned upon
approval of a specific implementation plan, and shall not make permissible any
of the uses as proposed until a specific implementation plan is submitted and
approved for all or a portion of the general development plan.
   C.   Specific Implementation Plan: A specific and detailed plan for
implementation of all or a part of a proposed planned unit development district
must be submitted within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the
village board. If a specific implementation plan has not been submitted within
said time, which the village board determines to be a reasonable phase of the
total plan, a petition to rezone the property back to the previous zoning from
the planned unit development district shall be filed by the appropriate village
official with the zoning administrator for processing. The specific
implementation plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and shall
include the following detailed construction and engineering plans and related
detailed documents and schedules:
      1.   An accurate map of the area covered by the plan, including the
relationship to the total general development plan.
      2.   The pattern of public and private roads, driveways, walkways and
parking facilities.
      3.   Detailed lot layout and subdivision plan where required.
      4.   The arrangement of building groups other than single-family
residences, and their architectural character.
      5.   Sanitary sewer and water mains.
      6.   Grading plan and storm drainage system.
      7.   The location and treatment of open space areas and recreational or
other special amenities.
      8.   General location and description of any areas to be dedicated to the
public.
      9.   General landscape treatment.
      10.   Proof of financing capability.
      11.   Analysis of economic impact upon the community.
      12.   A development schedule indicating:
         a.   The approximate date when construction of the project can be
expected to begin;
         b.   The stages in which the project will be built and the approximate
date when construction of each stage can be expected to begin;
         c.   The anticipated rate of development;
         d.   The approximate date when the development of each of the stages
will be completed.
      13.   Agreements, bylaws, provisions or covenants which govern the
organizational structure, use, maintenance, and continued protection of the
planned unit development and any of its common services, common open areas or
other facilities.
      14.   A final plat of the lands to be subdivided as part of the specific
implementation plan, suitable for recording.
      15.   Any other plans, documents or schedules requested by the village.
   D.   Approval Of The Specific Implementation Plan:
      1.   Following a review of the specific implementation plan, the zoning
board shall recommend to the village board that it be approved as submitted,
approved with modifications or disapproved.
      2.   Upon receipt of the zoning board recommendations, the village board
may approve the plan and authorize development to proceed accordingly or
disapprove the plan and send it back to the zoning board for further
negotiation with the developer.
      3.   In the event of approval of the specific implementation plan, the
building, site and operational plans for the development, as approved, as well
as all other commitments and contractual agreements with the village offered or
required with regard to project value, character and other factors pertinent to
an assurance that the proposed development will be carried out basically as
presented in the official submittal plans, shall be recorded by the developer
within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the village board, in the
Jo Daviess County register of deeds office. This shall be accomplished prior to
the issuance of any zoning permit.
      4.   Any subsequent change or addition to the plans or use shall first be
submitted for approval to the zoning board and, if in the opinion of the zoning
board such change or addition constitutes a substantial alteration of the
original plan, the procedure for a general development plan and PUD rezoning
described in this section shall be required. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 13
SIGNS
SECTION:
11-13-1: Purpose
11-13-2: Definitions
11-13-3: Sign Permits Required
11-13-4: General Restrictions
11-13-5: Residential Sign Standards
11-13-6: Business And Industrial Sign Standards
11-13-7: Prohibited Signs
11-13-8: Removal Of Dangerous Signs; Violations
11-13-9: Variances Or Exceptions
11-13-10: Nonconforming Signs
11-13-11: Signs Requiring A Special Use Permit
11-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards to safeguard life
and property and promote public welfare and community aesthetics by regulating
the appearance, construction, location and maintenance of all signs. (Ord., 10-
14-2008)
11-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are used in this chapter:
ANIMATED SIGN: Signs having moving components, which may be mistaken for
traffic signal devices or which may diminish the effectiveness of traffic
signal devices.
AWNING: A hood or cover which projects from the wall of the building, which can
be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of a supporting structure.
BILLBOARD: An advertising device, either freestanding or attached to a
building, which is used to display information not related to the use or
ownership of the establishment upon which it is located.
BLANKETING: The unreasonable obstruction of view of a sign caused by the
placement of another sign.
CANOPY: Permanent hood or cover, which projects from a wall or building more
than eighteen inches (18").
CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN: A sign whose informational content can be changed or
altered by manual or automated means. Changeable message signs include the
following types:
   A.   Manually Activated: Any sign whose alphabetic, pictographic or symbolic
informational content can only be changed or altered by manual means.
   B.   Automated Signs: Any sign whose content may be changed by electronic
process, including such messages as copy, art, graphics, time, date,
temperature, weather or information concerning civic, charitable or the
advertising of products or services for sale on the premises. This also
includes traveling or segmented message displays.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: Any sign, which contains directional information to users of
the property (i.e., entrance, exit, parking, etc.).
DIRECTORY SIGN: Any sign on which the names and locations of occupants or the
use of building is given. This shall include office and church directories.
FLASHING SIGN: Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign on which artificial
light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all
times when in use.
GROUND AND/OR POLE SIGN (Also Referred To As FREESTANDING SIGN): Any sign which
is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of
support from any building.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: Any sign that carries only the name of the firm, major
enterprise, institution or principal products offered for sale on the premises
or combination of these.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign with an artificial light source incorporated
internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign.
MEMORIAL SIGNS: Signs, tablets, names of buildings, and date of erection when
cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of metal and affixed flat
against a structure.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign which was erected legally, but which does not
conform to the regulations of this chapter.
OFFICIAL SIGNS: Any sign erected and maintained by a unit of government, such
as traffic control, parking restrictions, information, and notices.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a
structure which is designed to be easily moved from one location to another.
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign extending more than eighteen inches (18") from the
face of a wall or building.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: Any sign which is used to offer for sale, lease or rent the
property upon which the sign is placed.
SIGN: Shall include anything that promotes, calls attention or invites
patronage (or anything similar to the aforementioned) to a business, location,
or product.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign intended to be displayed for sixty (60) days or less,
including real estate, political or construction site signs, and banners,
decorative type displays or anything similar to the aforementioned. (Ord., 10-
14-2008)
11-13-3: SIGN PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Permits Required: No person shall erect, relocate, reconstruct or alter
any sign, awning and/or canopy without first having obtained and having in
force and effect a permit therefor from the zoning administrator unless
otherwise provided by this title. Applications for a sign permit shall be made
in writing upon forms furnished by the zoning administrator. The applicant
shall file with the application plans and specifications, and provide
information about the sign, including dimensions, materials, illumination,
wiring, height above grade, distance from lot line and by whom it shall be
erected. Permits are not required for a copy change when no change in business
name is involved. (Ord. 609, 6-9-2015)
   B.   Permit Fees: A permit fee shall be paid to the village clerk for each
sign permit issued under this chapter, provided, however, that a fee shall not
be charged for putting an existing sign in conformity with this chapter, or for
a copy change when no change in business name is involved. The permit fee shall
be in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the village
board.
   C.   Inspection: The applicant shall, upon completion of the installation,
relocation or alteration of the sign, notify the zoning administrator who will
assure that the sign conforms to the regulations of this chapter.
   D.   Revocation Of Permit: The zoning administrator may, at any time of a
violation of this chapter, revoke a permit or require changes so that the sign
conforms to this chapter. Applicants with a revoked permit shall be entitled to
an appeal before the zoning board of appeals. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-13-4: GENERAL RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Signs Prohibited In Public Ways: Except as provided for in subsection E
of this section, no sign shall be placed on any public way, provided that this
subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the erection or placing of any
authorized traffic sign, traffic signal, or other traffic device, or any other
sign authorized by law or specifically permitted to project into the public way
by this chapter.
   B.   Signs Not To Constitute A Public Hazard: No sign shall be erected at
any location where it may, by reason of its position, shape, color, or other
characteristics, interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, traffic signal or other traffic device, nor shall any
sign make use of the words "stop", "look", "drive-in", "danger", or any other
word which could be mistaken for an official sign.
   C.   Illuminated Sign: No sign shall be illuminated by intermittent,
rotating or flashing lights. No illuminated sign shall be installed that
interferes with visibility or illuminates adjacent residentially zoned
properties more than 1.0 foot-candle as measured at the property line.
   D.   Changeable Message Signs: Subject to the following:
      1.   Area And Number: There shall be not more than one sign per lot,
except that on a corner lot, two (2) signs (1 facing each street) shall be
permitted. No sign shall exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area, total area of
all signs shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet.
      2.   Location: Sign(s) may only be used to advertise goods and/or
services conducted on the premises. All sign(s) locations shall be as approved
by the board of appeals. No sign(s) shall be located closer than seventy five
feet (75') to a residentially zoned lot, unless said sign(s) is screened from
view by the resident property. Sign(s) may be illuminated, however no flashing
or intermittent lights may be used and provided such sign(s) shall emit a
maximum of 1.0 foot-candle along property line abutting residentially zoned
properties. No sign or advertising device shall be erected or maintained at the
intersection of streets in such a manner as to obstruct clear vision of the
intersection pursuant to section
11-15-2 of this title.
      3.   Height: No sign shall project higher than one story or fifteen feet
(15') above the curb level or established street grade in the absence of a curb
level, whichever is lower. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
   E.   Projection: Signs including supports shall not interfere with traffic.
No sign shall extend nearer than three feet (3') to face of a curb or project a
maximum of four feet (4') beyond the front of the building, whichever is less.
All projecting signs shall maintain a minimum ground clearance of eight feet
(8') to the bottom of the sign and a maximum height of twenty feet (20') to the
top of sign. (Ord. 609, 6-9-2015)
   F.   Blanketing: Blanketing of signs as interpreted by the zoning
administrator shall not be allowed.
   G.   Installation: All signs shall be properly secured, supported and braced
and shall be kept in reasonable structural condition and shall be kept clean
and well painted at all times. Bolts or screws shall not be fastened to window
frames. Every sign and its framework, braces, anchors and other supports shall
be constructed of such material and with such workmanship as to be safe and
satisfactory to the zoning administrator.
   H.   Wind Pressure And Dead Load Requirements: All signs and other
advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind
pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot and shall be
constructed to support dead loads as required by the building code or other
ordinances of the village. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-13-5: RESIDENTIAL SIGN STANDARDS:
In all residential districts established by this title, the following
nonflashing, nonilluminated signs are permitted, upon receipt of approved
zoning permit, under the conditions specified:
   A.   Identification Signs: Subject to the following:
      1.   Area And Content; Residential: There shall be not more than one
identification sign, not exceeding one square foot in area, for each dwelling
unit, indicating the name or address of the occupant or a permitted occupation.
On a corner lot, two (2) such identification signs for each dwelling unit (1
facing each street) shall be permitted.
      2.   Area And Content; Nonresidential: For nonresidential buildings, a
single identification sign, not exceeding nine (9) square feet in area may be
displayed. On a corner lot, two (2) such signs (1 facing each street) shall be
permitted.
      3.   Location: Such signs shall be affixed flat against the wall of the
building.
      4.   Height: No sign shall be installed higher than one story or fifteen
feet (15') above curb level, whichever is lower.
   B.   Signs Accessory To Parking Area: Subject to the following:
      1.   Area And Number: Directional signs for parking area shall be
permitted pursuant to subsection
11-13-6F5 of this chapter.
      2.   Location: Sign(s) location(s) shall be as approved by the board of
appeals. No sign shall create a traffic visibility hazard as defined by section
11-15-2 of this title or project beyond the property line into the public way.
      3.   Height: No sign shall project higher than seven feet (7') above curb
level or established street grade in the absence of a curb level.
      4.   Handicap Parking: All handicap parking signs shall comply with the
Illinois vehicle code or other applicable regulations.
   C.   Temporary Signs Accessory To Subdivision Developments Or Other
Permitted Improvements In Residential Districts:
      1.   Content: The signs shall be only for the purpose of identification
of homes for sale or rent in the subdivision under construction, or for the
identification of other nonresidential uses under construction.
      2.   Number, Area And Setback: No more than two (2) signs shall be
permitted for a maximum area of thirty (30) square feet for one sign or fifty
(50) square feet for both signs. Signs shall be placed at least thirty five
feet (35') from all boundaries of the site.
      3.   Location: No sign shall create a traffic visibility hazard as
defined by section
11-15-2 of this title or project beyond the property line into the public way.
      4.   Height: No sign may project higher than seven feet (7') above curb
level or established street grade in the absence of a curb level.
      5.   Time Limitations: The sign or signs shall be removed by the
applicant or property owner within two (2) years of the date of the approval of
the final plat.
   D.   Subdivision Identification Signs: Subject to the following:
      1.   Content: The signs shall bear only the name of the subdivision or
development.
      2.   Area And Number: There shall be not more than one sign located at
each entrance to a subdivision for a maximum number of two (2) signs. No sign
shall exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area except as authorized by the
board of appeals upon a finding that a specific proposal for a larger sign is
compatible with the character of nearby development.
      3.   Location: No sign shall create a traffic visibility hazard as
defined by section
11-15-2 of this title or project beyond the property line into the public way.
      4.   Height: No sign shall project higher than seven feet (7') above curb
level or established street grade in the absence of a curb level.
   E.   Permitted Signs; No Permit Required: The following nonilluminated signs
are permitted on private property in residential zoning districts without a
permit:
      1.   Addresses: Numerals or letters bearing the building address, post
box numbers or name(s) of occupants of residential premises.
      2.   Banners: Not to exceed twenty four (24) square feet in size,
displayed for a maximum of thirty (30) days.
      3.   Construction Site Signs: Not to exceed twenty four (24) square feet
in size.
      4.   Flags: Nonilluminated flags, symbols and insignia of any branch of
government, except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion. All
poles shall not exceed twenty feet (20') above the highest roofline or fifty
feet (50') above the natural grade, whichever is lower.
      5.   Garage Sale Signs: Garage sale signs.
      6.   Memorial Signs: Memorial signs.
      7.   Official Signs: Official signs.
      8.   Political Signs: Not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in size and
to be removed no more than seven (7) days after the pertinent election.
      9.   Real Estate Signs: Not to exceed eight (8) square feet in area which
advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which said signs are
temporarily located. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-13-6: BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL SIGN STANDARDS:
Signs are permitted in all business and industrial districts, subject to the
following:
   A.   Number Of Signs Permitted: No more than two (2) business or industrial
signs shall be permitted on the front facade of any business or industrial
building, including any advertisement permanently fastened to show windows or
display cases. Only one business or industrial sign shall be permitted on each
side or rear wall of business or industrial building. In no case shall more
than two (2) signs be permitted per business or industry.
   B.   Lighting: Business and industrial signs may be internally lighted or
illuminated by a hooded reflector, provided, however, that such lighting shall
be arranged to prevent glare and no sign shall be lighted by a light of
intermittent or varying intensity.
   C.   Signs Causing Obstruction Prohibited: Any sign so erected, constructed
or maintained as to obstruct or to be attached to any fire escape, window, door
or opening used as means of ingress or egress, or for firefighting purposes, or
placed so as to interfere with any opening required for ventilation is
prohibited.
   D.   Signs At Intersections Prohibited: No sign or advertising device shall
be erected or maintained at the intersection of streets in such a manner as to
obstruct clear vision of the intersection pursuant to section
11-15-2 of this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
   E.   Canopy/Awning Signs Restricted: Printing, symbols and emblems shall be
permitted on canopies, awnings or covered walks in business or industrial
districts, subject to the approval of the zoning administrator provided that
there shall be only one sign, not to exceed five (5) square feet, for each
business and that the canopy or awning shall be at least eight feet (8') above
ground level. (Ord. 609, 6-9-2015)
   F.   Permitted Signs, Permit Required:
      1.   Building Signs:
         a.   The total surface display area of business or industrial signs on
the front facade of a building shall not exceed in square feet two (2) times
the number of linear feet of width of the building frontage to a maximum of one
hundred (100) square feet.
         b.   In the case of a building located on a corner lot, a second sign
may be permitted on the side which faces a parking lot or secondary street.
Such sign shall not exceed, in square feet, 0.5 times the number of linear feet
of length of the building frontage along the parking lot or secondary street
with a maximum surface display area not to exceed seventy five (75) square feet
per sign or one hundred fifty (150) square feet for both front and secondary
signs. Said increased permitted display area shall be used only for the
erection of a second, permitted sign on the length of the building, which faces
the secondary street or parking lot. No more than two (2) signs shall be
permitted under the provisions of this subsection F1b.
      2.   Ground Signs: Ground signs shall be placed no closer than one foot
(1') to the street right of way, shall not create a traffic visibility hazard
as defined by section
11-15-2 of this title and shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area.
Ground signs shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height above the mean
centerline street grade.
      3.   Projecting Signs: Shall comply with subsection
11-13-4E of this chapter.
      4.   Directory Signs: In cases of multiuse/multiple tenant buildings,
shopping centers or industrial parks, one freestanding directory sign may be
permitted on the principal front of the property identifying the name of said
building or park and represented businesses, industries or tenants located
therein. The area of said sign shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet. Said
sign shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height to the top of the sign or be
permitted within ten feet (10') of the right of way line of the street.
      5.   Directional Signs: Necessary directional ground signs, which shall
not exceed four (4) square feet in area per sign, shall be permitted.
Permission to erect such signs must be obtained from the board of appeals. The
area and number of directional signs shall be excluded from the total allowable
surface area and maximum number of signs permitted.
      6.   Signs Accessory To Roadside Stands: Subject to the following:
         a.   Content: The signs shall be only for the purpose of
identification of the roadside stand and advertising the agricultural products
for sale therein.
         b.   Area And Number: The signs shall be on the same zoning lot as the
roadside stand, and shall be not more than four (4) square feet in area nor be
closer than twenty five feet (25') to any other zoning lot.
         c.   Location: No sign shall create a traffic visibility hazard as
defined by section
11-15-2 of this title or project beyond the property line into the public way.
         d.   Height: No sign shall project higher than nine feet (9') above
curb level or established street grade in the absence of a curb level.
         e.   Other Permit(s): All roadside stands are subject to obtaining a
direct sellers permit and/or comply with other regulations as required by this
code. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
      7.   Changeable Message Signs: Subject to the following:
         a.   Area And Number: There shall be not more than one sign per lot.
No sign shall exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area nor be closer than eight
feet (8') to any other zoning lot.
         b.   Location: Sign(s) location(s) shall be as approved by the zoning
administrator. Sign(s) shall be nonilluminated and shall not create a traffic
visibility hazard as defined by section
11-15-2 of this title or project beyond the property line into the public way.
         c.   Height: No sign shall project higher than one story or fifteen
feet (15') above the curb level or established street grade in the absence of a
curb level, whichever is lower.
         d.   Display And Content: Such signs may be used only to advertise
activities conducted on the premises or present public service information.
Segmented messages must be displayed for not less than one-half (1/2) second
and not more than ten (10) seconds. Traveling messages may travel no slower
than sixteen (16) light columns per second and no faster than thirty two (32)
columns per second. (Ord. 530, 6-8-2010)
   G.   Permitted Signs; No Permit Required: The following nonilluminated signs
are permitted in business and industrial zoning districts without a permit:
      1.   Addresses: Numerals or letters bearing the building address, post
box numbers or name(s) of occupants of residential premises.
      2.   Banners: Not to exceed twenty four (24) square feet in size,
displayed for a maximum of thirty (30) days.
      3.   Construction Site Signs: Not to exceed twenty four (24) square feet
in size.
      4.   Flags: Nonilluminated flags, symbols and insignia of any branch of
government, except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion. All
poles shall not exceed twenty feet (20') above the highest roofline or fifty
feet (50') above the natural grade, whichever is lower.
      5.   Memorial Signs: Memorial signs.
      6.   Official Signs: Official signs.
      7.   Political Signs: Not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in size and
to be removed no more than seven (7) days after the pertinent election.
      8.   Real Estate Signs: Not to exceed eight (8) square feet in area which
advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which said signs are
temporarily located.
      9.   Portable Signs: Not to exceed six (6) square feet in area per side
or three feet (3') in height. No portable sign shall obstruct or impair access
to a public sidewalk, public or private street or driveway, traffic control
sign, bus stop, fire hydrant, or any other type of street furniture, or
otherwise create a hazard, including a tripping hazard. Signs shall be designed
to be stable under all weather conditions, including high winds. (Ord., 10-14-
2008)
11-13-7: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are not permitted anywhere in the village:
   A.   No sign will be permitted that resembles that size, shape, form or
color of official traffic control signs, signals or devices.
   B.   Except as may be provided elsewhere in this chapter, no person shall
park any vehicle or trailer on a public right of way or public property or on
private property so as to be seen from a public right of way, which has
attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device for the
basic purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a
business activity located on the same or nearby property or any other premises.
   C.   This section shall not prohibit "for sale" signs on vehicles for sale
provided the vehicle is not parked on a public right of way.
   D.   No billboards may be erected in the village.
   E.   Roof signs.
   F.   Animated or flashing signs.
   G.   Attention getting devices including searchlights, propellers, pennants,
streamers, ribbons, strings of light bulbs, spinners, balloons and similar
devices, except for special occasions such as grand openings, and then only
after having obtained a permit from the zoning administrator; and such permit
shall be limited to fourteen (14) days.
   H.   Signs that contain statements, words or pictures of an obscene,
indecent or immoral character, such as those that will offend public morals or
decency; and signs that advertise illegal activities or items.
   I.   Any sign or sign structure that constitutes a hazard to public health
or safety and signs that are structurally unsafe or in disrepair.
   J.   Signs that by reason of size, location, content, coloring or manner of
illumination obstruct the vision of drivers, or obstruct or detract from the
visibility or effectiveness or any traffic sign or other traffic control device
on public streets and roads.
   K.   Any sign otherwise installed or maintained in violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 542, 2-8-2011)
11-13-8: REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS SIGNS; VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Removal: All signs shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the
premises upon which the sign is located when a business which it advertises has
not been conducted for a period of three (3) months or when, in the judgment of
the zoning administrator, such sign is so old, dilapidated or has become so out
of repair as to be dangerous or unsafe, whichever occurs first. If the owner or
lessee fails to remove it, the zoning administrator may require the removal of
the sign at cost of the owner, following adequate written notice.
   B.   Alterations: Any sign, which was erected before the adoption of this
sign chapter, shall not be rebuilt or relocated without conforming to all of
the requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Violations: All signs, including dangerous and abandoned signs,
constructed or subsequently maintained in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter are hereby declared public nuisances within the meaning of this
code. The village board or zoning administrator may bring an action to abate
the nuisance or cause its removal, in the manner set forth in Illinois
statutes. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-13-9: VARIANCES OR EXCEPTIONS:
Variances or exceptions to these sign regulations may be granted by the board
of appeals. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-13-10: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Signs Eligible For Characterization As Legal Nonconforming: Any sign
located within the village of Stockton limits as of the date of adoption of
this chapter or located in an area annexed to the village of Stockton hereafter
which does not conform with the provision of this chapter is eligible for
characterization as a legal nonconforming sign and is permitted, provided it
also meets the following requirements:
      1.   The sign was covered by a proper sign or zoning permit prior to the
date of adoption of this chapter.
      2.   If no permit was required under the applicable law for the sign in
question and the sign was in all respects in compliance with applicable law on
the date of adoption of this chapter.
   B.   Loss Of Legal Nonconforming Status: A sign loses its legal,
nonconforming status if one or more of the following occurs:
      1.   The sign is structurally altered in any way, except for normal
maintenance or repair;
      2.   The sign is relocated;
      3.   The sign fails to conform to the village requirements regarding
maintenance and repair, abandonment or dangerous or defective signs;
      4.   On the date of occurrence of any of the above, the sign shall be
immediately brought in compliance with this chapter or shall be removed.
   C.   Legal Nonconforming Sign Maintenance And Repair: Nothing in this
chapter shall relieve the owner or user of a legal nonconforming sign or the
owner of the property in which the sign is located from the provisions of this
chapter regarding safety, maintenance and repair of signs. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-13-11: SIGNS REQUIRING A SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Off Premises Business Signs:
      1.   Off premises business signs shall be a permitted special use;
however, they can only be erected when the special need for the off premises
business sign can be duly demonstrated to the zoning board of appeals pursuant
to a petition and are subject to the guidelines of this section.
      2.   The size of all off premises business signs shall be subject to the
provisions found elsewhere in this chapter.
      3.   No owner or user of an off premises business sign shall be permitted
to increase the total gross surface area of any such sign without approval from
the zoning board of appeals.
      4.   A special use permit for off premises business signs shall be
granted for a ten (10) year period. (Ord. 543, 2-8-2011)
CHAPTER 14
FENCES AND HEDGES
SECTION:
11-14-1: Purpose
11-14-2: Definitions
11-14-3: Fence Standards
11-14-4: Fences Around Swimming Pools
11-14-5: Hedges
11-14-6: Temporary Fences
11-14-7: Nonconforming Fences And Hedges
11-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards to safeguard life
and property and promote public welfare and community aesthetics by regulating
the appearance, construction, location and maintenance of all fences and
hedges. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
DECORATIVE FENCE: A fence not exceeding a height of thirty six inches (36")
from ground level, made of material other than wire, metal, chain or poured
concrete, and constructed in a substantially open pattern (such as a weave or
board and space pattern) and not solid pattern (such as a block, concrete, or
privacy pattern).
FENCE: Any enclosure or barrier, solid or otherwise, made of wood, iron, stone
or other material, as around or along a yard, walkway, field, or other area,
and shall include "decorative fence".
HEDGE: A row of bushes or small trees planted close together which may form a
barrier, enclosure or boundary.
RETAINING WALL: A solid barrier of any material constructed to hold back a mass
of earth. A retaining wall greater than thirty six inches (36") in height shall
be considered a fence for purposes of this section. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-14-3: FENCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Residential Fences: Residential fences are permitted in residential
districts but shall not in any case exceed a height of six feet (6'). No fence
or portion of a fence shall be constructed within the front setback area of a
building; provided, however, that a decorative fence may be constructed in the
front setback area. Fences may be constructed alongside lot lines but shall not
extend into the front setback area as extended to the side lot lines nor placed
closer than two feet (2') from the property line(s) unless a variance is
granted by the zoning board of appeals.
   B.   Security Fences: Security fences are permitted just inside property
lines in all districts except residential districts but shall not exceed ten
feet (10') in height and shall be of an open type similar to woven wire or
wrought iron fencing. The zoning board of appeals may approve security fencing
in residential districts for permitted civic, cultural and institutional uses
if it finds that such fencing is reasonable and necessary for security or
safety reasons. (Ord. 632, 11-8-2016)
   C.   Prohibited Fences: No fence shall be constructed which creates a
dangerous condition, or which conducts electricity or is designed to
electrically shock or which uses barbed wire; provided, however, that barbed
wire may be used in industrially zoned areas if the devices securing the barbed
wire to the fence are ten feet (10') above the ground or higher and project
toward the fenced property and away from any public area.
   D.   Fence Maintenance: All fences shall be maintained and kept safe and in
a state of good repair, and the finished side or decorative side of a fence
shall face adjoining property. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-14-4: FENCES AROUND SWIMMING POOLS:
Inground swimming pools, and swimming pools having an aboveground side wall
height of eighteen inches (18") or more either permanently installed or filled
for periods of thirty (30) days or more, shall be fenced as follows:
   A.   Fence Height: For inground pools and aboveground pools that have side
walls less than four feet (4') in height from natural grade, the fence shall
have a minimum height of four feet (4') and be located a minimum of four feet
(4') from the side wall. Aboveground pools with side walls four feet (4') or
greater in height do not require fences, however pool access(es) must be gated
and locked or removed and secured when pool is not in use so as to prevent
unauthorized use.
   B.   Locked Gates: All fence gates shall be locked or secured to prevent
entry when the pool is not in use so as to prevent uncontrolled access to the
pool area.
   C.   Full Enclosure: The fence and/or surrounding structures shall enclose
the entire pool area, comply with zoning setback requirements and shall be
installed prior to use of the pool. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-14-5: HEDGES:
The height and setback for hedges shall be the same as outlined for fences in
subsections
11-14-3A and B of this chapter; provided, however, hedges three feet (3') in
height or less, from sidewalk level, may be kept in the front setback area, and
provided further that no hedge shall be permitted in the terrace area or, where
no terrace exists, within four feet (4') of any street or alley. Hedges shall
be trimmed and maintained. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-14-6: TEMPORARY FENCES:
Fences erected for the protection of planting, or to warn of construction
hazards, or for similar purposes, shall be clearly visible or marked with
colored streamers or other such warning devices at four foot (4') intervals.
Such fences shall comply with the setback requirements set forth in subsections
11-14-3A and B of this chapter. The issuance of a permit shall not be necessary
for temporary fences as described herein, but said fences shall not be erected
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-14-7: NONCONFORMING FENCES AND HEDGES:
Any fence or hedge existing on the effective date of this code and not in
conformance with this chapter may be maintained, but no alteration,
modification or improvement of same shall be permitted unless as a result of
such alteration, modification or improvement said fence shall comply with this
chapter. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 15
TRAFFIC, PARKING, AND ACCESS
SECTION:
11-15-1: Purpose
11-15-2: Traffic Visibility
11-15-3: Loading Requirements
11-15-4: Parking Requirements
11-15-5: Driveways
11-15-6: Highway Access
11-15-7: Off Street Parking Restrictions In Residential Districts
11-15-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards to safeguard life
and property and promote public welfare and community aesthetics by regulating
the provision of loading areas and off street parking areas and by controlling
access to public streets and highways. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-15-2: TRAFFIC VISIBILITY:
No obstructions, such as structures, parking, fencing or vegetation, shall be
permitted in any district between the heights of three and one-half feet (31/
2') and ten feet (10') above the mean top of curb height within intersection
vision triangles along all existing and proposed streets and alleys. Vision
triangles are defined by three (3) points: The point where two (2) right of way
lines intersect, and the points thirty five feet (35') from that intersection
along each right of way line. Vision triangles on North Avenue and Main Street
shall be larger due to the greater speed and volume of traffic; these triangles
shall be defined by the corner intersection and points fifty feet (50') from
that intersection. This greater restriction shall not apply within the B-
C business district. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-15-3: LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Requirement: In all districts adequate loading areas shall be provided
so that all vehicles loading, maneuvering, or unloading are completely off the
public ways and so that all vehicles need not back onto any public way.
   B.   Site And Location: Each loading space shall be not less than twelve
feet (12') in width, thirty five feet (35') in length, and have a minimum
vertical clearance of fourteen feet (14'), and may occupy all or any part of
any required yard.
   C.   Required Number Of Off Street Loading Spaces:
Uses Square Feet Of Gross Floor Area Required Off Street Loading Spaces
Uses                      Square Feet Of Gross Floor Required Off Street
                          Area                       Loading Spaces
Funeral home                 –                  1
                          Under 10,000               None
Hospital                  From 10,000 – 30,000     1
                          For each additional 30,000 1 additional
                          or major fraction thereof
                          Under 10,000               None
Office, hotel, retail     From 10,000 – 25,000     1
service, wholesale,       From 25,000 – 40,000     2
warehouse, manufacturing, From 40,000 – 60,000     3
processing or repairing   From 60,000 – 100,000    4
                          50,000 or major fraction   1 additional
                          thereof
School                       –                  1
 
(Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-15-4: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
In all districts and in connection with every use, there shall be provided at
the time any use or building is erected, enlarged, extended, or increased off
street parking stalls for all vehicles in accordance with the following:
   A.   Access: Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each
parking space, and driveway openings shall be at least ten feet (10') wide for
one- and two-family dwellings and a minimum of twenty four feet (24') for all
other uses.
   B.   Size: Size of each parking space shall be not less than one hundred
eighty (180) square feet exclusive of the space required for ingress and
egress.
   C.   Location: Location to be on the same lot as the principal use or not
over four hundred feet (400') from the principal use. No commercial or
industrial parking stall or driveway shall be closer than twenty five feet
(25') to a residential district lot line or a street line opposite a
residential district.
   D.   Surfacing: All off street parking areas shall be graded and surfaced so
as to minimize dust and be properly drained, except that parking areas in the
R-M, B-C, B-H, I-L, and I-G districts shall be paved. Any parking area for more
than five (5) vehicles shall have the aisles and spaces clearly marked.
   E.   Curbs: Curbs or barriers shall be installed so as to prevent the parked
vehicles from extending over any lot lines.
   F.   Number Of Stalls: Number of parking stalls required are shown in the
following table:
Use    Minimum Parking Required
Use                                        Minimum Parking Required
Bowling alleys                          5 stalls for each alley
Churches, theaters, auditoriums,
community centers, vocational and       1 stall for each 5 seats
night schools, and other places of
public assembly
Colleges, secondary and elementary       1 stall for each 2 employees plus 1
schools                                 stall for each 15 students of 16 years
                                         of age or more
Financial institutions, business,       1 stall for each 300 square feet of
government and professional offices      floor area
                                         1 stall for each 4 seats plus 1 stall
Funeral homes                           for each vehicle used with the
                                         business
Hospitals, clubs, lodges, sororities,    1 stall for each 2 beds plus 1 stall
dormitories, lodging and boarding       for each 3 employees
houses
Hotels, motels                          1 stall for each guestroom plus 1
                                         stall for each 3 employees
                                         1 stall for every 3 employees; number
Manufacturing and processing plants,    of employees shall be construed to
laboratories, and warehouses             mean the maximum number on the
                                         premises at one time
Medical and dental clinics              3 stalls for each doctor
Multi-family dwellings                  2 stalls for each dwelling unit
Restaurants, bars, clubs and lodges,     1 stall for each 150 square feet of
places of entertainment, repair shops,  floor area
retail and service stores
Sanitariums, institutions, rest and     1 stall for each 5 beds plus 1 stall
nursing homes                            for each 3 employees
Single-family dwellings and mobile      2 stalls for each dwelling unit
homes
 
   G.   Uses Not Listed: In the case of structures or uses not mentioned, the
provision for a use that is similar shall apply.
   H.   Combined Uses: Combinations of any of the above uses shall provide the
total of the number of stalls required for each individual use.
   I.   Handicapped Parking Requirements: In addition to any other requirements
relating to parking spaces contained in this code, the provisions contained in
the Illinois vehicle code pertaining to handicapped parking are hereby adopted
by reference and made applicable to all parking facilities whenever
constructed. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-15-5: DRIVEWAYS:
All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced, or extended after the
effective date of this chapter shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   Islands: Islands between driveway openings shall be provided with a
minimum of twelve feet (12') between all driveways and six feet (6') at all lot
lines.
   B.   Openings: Openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall be at least
ten feet (10') wide at the property line for residential properties, and a
minimum of sixteen feet (16') wide at the property line for all other uses, but
shall not exceed twenty four feet (24') at the property line and thirty feet
(30') at the curb opening. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-15-6: HIGHWAY ACCESS:
No direct private access shall be permitted to the existing or proposed rights
of way of expressways, nor to any controlled access arterial street without
permission of the highway agency that has access control jurisdiction.
   A.   Restricted Access: No direct public or private access shall be
permitted to the existing or proposed rights of way of the following:
      1.   Freeways, interstate highways, and their interchanges or turning
lanes nor to intersecting or interchanging streets within one thousand five
hundred feet (1,500') of the most remote end of the taper of the turning lanes.
      2.   Arterial streets intersecting another arterial street within one
hundred feet (100') of the intersection of the right of way lines.
      3.   Streets intersecting an arterial street within fifty feet (50') of
the intersection of the right of way lines.
   B.   Access Barriers: Access barriers, such as curbing, fencing, ditching,
landscaping, or other topographic barriers, shall be erected to prevent
unauthorized vehicular ingress or egress to the above specified streets or
highways.
   C.   Temporary Access: Temporary access to the above rights of way may be
granted by the board of appeals after review and recommendation by the highway
agencies having jurisdiction. Such access permit shall be temporary, revocable,
and subject to any conditions required and shall be issued for a period not to
exceed twelve (12) months. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-15-7: OFF STREET PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Where Permitted: Unless the district regulations provide otherwise, off
street vehicle parking is permitted in the following yards of property in a
residentially zoned district:
      1.   A rear yard.
      2.   A side yard not adjoining a street.
      3.   A front yard, but only on one paved or graveled driveway not
exceeding twenty feet (20') in width and for not more than two (2) vehicles
parked not nearer than five feet (5') to a front property line or six feet (6')
to a side lot line.
   B.   Exceptions Granted: Regardless of the provisions of subsection A of
this section, the board of appeals may permit off street vehicle parking in any
yard of a residential development where the overall housing plan and design for
such development, in the judgment of the board of appeals, is substantially
improved thereby, as compared to where off street parking is limited by
subsection A of this section, and where sole access from such development is to
local and collector streets. In this subsection, "substantially improved" means
a substantial increase in the value of the property. No such permission shall
be granted for any residential development which is adjacent to either a public
right of way or other residences unless sufficient and suitable screening is
provided so as to prevent, to as great a degree as practicable, direct view of
such off street parking areas from such adjacent areas.
   C.   Vehicle Limitations:
      1.   In a residential district, accessory off street parking facilities
provided for uses listed herein shall be solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles and not more than two (2) trucks limited to one ton capacity.
      2.   All vehicles parked on a residential lot shall be in condition for
safe and effective performance of the function for which they are designed.
      3.   All motor vehicles parked on a residential lot shall display current
license plates.
      4.   Recreational vehicles may not be parked in front yards or between
the house and the street, with an exception granted for the limited parking of
such vehicles for loading, unloading, cleaning, and servicing. Such temporary
parking is limited to five (5) days per calendar month. Side yard or rear yard
parking of such vehicles is permitted, but no less than six feet (6') from an
adjoining residence.
      5.   Farm/industrial equipment will not be allowed. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 16
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS
SECTION:
11-16-1: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
11-16-2: Nonconforming Buildings Or Structures
11-16-3: Nonconforming Uses
11-16-4: Existing Special Uses
11-16-1: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
Any lot lawfully platted and recorded prior to January 1, 2008, which does not
comply with the lot size requirements of the district in which it is located as
to lot area and lot width, may be used for the erection of a building intended
for a use permitted in the district in which the lot is located provided that
such building complies with all setback and other applicable requirements of
this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-16-2: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
A lawfully existing, nonconforming building or structure which does not contain
any nonconforming use, but which does not comply with the applicable setback
requirements or building bulk regulations in the district in which it is
located, may be continued except as otherwise described by this chapter.
Nonconforming buildings and structures shall be subject to the following
regulations:
   A.   Enlargement, Repair Or Alteration:
      1.   A nonconforming building or structure may be enlarged, maintained,
repaired or structurally altered. No such enlargement, maintenance or repair,
or structural alteration shall create either an additional nonconformity or
increase the degree of the existing nonconformity of all or any part of the
building or structure. Damaged or destroyed buildings or structures shall be
subject to the restrictions contained in subsection B of this section.
      2.   Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of a building or other structure (other than a
damaged or destroyed building or other structure subject to the provisions of
subsection B of this section) in accordance with the order of a public official
who is charged with protecting the public safety and who declares such building
or other structure to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition.
   B.   Damage Or Destruction: In the event that a nonconforming building or
structure is damaged or destroyed by any means, such building or structure may
be restored or reconstructed, providing such restoration is on the existing
footing of such buildings or structures. If such restoration or reconstruction
is not on the existing footing, then such building shall not be restored unless
it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located.
   C.   Moving: No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole
or in part for any distance to any location on the same or any other lot unless
the entire building or structure shall then conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is located after being moved. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-16-3: NONCONFORMING USES:
When the applicable district regulations do not allow as a permitted use either
an existing use of part or all of a building or other structure, or an existing
use of land not involving a building or structure, such existing use may be
continued except as otherwise described by this chapter.
   A.   Change:
      1.   A nonconforming use of a building or other structure, all or
substantially all of which was designed or intended for a use which is not
permitted in the district of which it is located, shall not be changed to any
use other than a use permitted in the district in which the land is located.
When a nonconforming use has been changed to a permitted use, it shall not
thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
      2.   The nonconforming use of land, not involving a building or
structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is
incidental or accessory to the principal use of land, shall not be changed to
any other use, except to a use permitted in the district in which the land is
located.
      3.   A nonconforming use in effect at the time an amendatory ordinance
becomes effective shall be discontinued and not reestablished, except when the
provisions of the amendatory ordinance find the use to be conforming to the
district in which it is located.
   B.   Discontinuance: In the event that operation of a nonconforming use of
land, building or structure is discontinued for twelve (12) months, such
nonconforming use shall not thereafter be reestablished, and any subsequent use
or occupancy of such land shall conform to the regulations of the district of
which it is located. Intent to resume active operation shall not affect the
foregoing restriction.
   C.   Nonconforming Accessory Use: No nonconforming accessory use shall
continue after the principal use to which it is necessary has been abolished.
(Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-16-4: EXISTING SPECIAL USES:
Where a use exists on the effective date hereof and is permitted by this title
only as a special use in the district in which it is located, such use shall
not be deemed a nonconforming use, but, shall, without any further action, be
deemed a lawful special use in such district. However, no such lawful special
use shall be substantially expanded unless a supplemental special use permit is
secured in accordance with the provisions of section
11-18-7 of this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 17
ADULT-USE CANNABIS
SECTION:
11-17-1: Purpose And Applicability
11-17-2: Special Use
11-17-3: Adult-Use Cannabis Facility Components
11-17-4: Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower
11-17-5: Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center
11-17-6: Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization Or Dispensary
11-17-7: Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization Or Infuser
11-17-8: Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization Or Processor
11-17-9: Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization
11-17-10: Additional Requirements
11-17-11: Co-Location Of Cannabis Business Establishments
11-17-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide regulations regarding
the cultivation, processing, dispensing, infusing and transporting of adult-use
cannabis occurring within the corporate limits of the Village of Stockton. Such
facilities shall comply with all regulations provided in the Act, as it may be
amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder, as well as
the regulations provided below. In the event that the Act is amended, the more
restrictive of the State or local regulations shall apply. (Ord. 679, 12-10-
2019)
11-17-2: SPECIAL USE:
Adult-use cannabis business establishment facilities, as defined herein,
requiring approval of a special use in the respective districts in which they
are requested shall be processed in accordance with section
11-18-7 of this title and section
11-17-3 of this chapter, as provided herein. (Ord. 679, 12-10-2019)
11-17-3: ADULT-USE CANNABIS FACILITY COMPONENTS:
In determining compliance with section
11-18-7 the following components of the adult-use cannabis facility shall be
evaluated based on the entirety of the circumstances affecting the particular
property in the context of the existing and intended future use of the
properties:
   A.   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses located
within the vicinity of the subject property.
   B.   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located, including co-
tenancy (if in a multi-tenant building), total square footage, security
installations/security plan and building code compliance.
   C.   Hours of operation and anticipated number of customers/employees.
   D.   Anticipated parking demand based on chapter 11-15 and available private
parking supply.
   E.   Anticipated traffic generation in the context of adjacent roadway
capacity and access to such roadways.
   F.   Site design, including access points and internal site circulation.
   G.   Proposed signage plan.
   H.   Compliance with all requirements provided in section
11-17-4 (Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower); section
11-17-5 (Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center); section
11-17-6 (Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization); section
11-17-7 (Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization); section
11-17-8 (Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization); or section
11-17-9 (Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization), as applicable.
   I.   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance with the
provisions of 11-18-7 (Special uses). (Ord. 679, 12-10-2019)
11-17-4: ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:
In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis craft grower may be
located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   A.   Facility may not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool,
primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home or residential
care/nursing home or long-term care facility. Learning centers and vocational/
trade centers shall not be classified as a public or private school for
purposes of this section.
   B.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
   C.   For purposes of determining required parking, adult-use cannabis craft
grower shall be classified as "manufacturing and processing plants,
laboratories and warehouses" per
11-15-4F, provided however, that the Village may require that more or less
parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed hereunder.
   D.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with all requirements as provided herein and all other provisions
and requirements of the Act. (Ord. 679, 12-10-2019)
11-17-5: ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:
In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis cultivation center may
be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   A.   Facility may not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool,
primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home or residential
care/nursing home or long-term care facility. Learning centers and vocational/
trade centers shall not be classified as a public or private school for
purposes of this section.
   B.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
   C.   For purposes of determining required parking, adult-use cannabis
cultivation centers shall be classified as "manufacturing and processing
plants, laboratories and warehouses" per
11-15-4F, provided however, that the Village may require that more or less
parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed hereunder.
   D.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with all requirements as provided herein and all other provisions
and requirements of the Act. (Ord. 679, 12-10-2019)
11-17-6: ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION OR DISPENSARY:
In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis dispensing
organization or dispensary may be located, the proposed facility must comply
with the following:
   A.   Facility may not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool,
primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home or residential
care/nursing home or long-term care facility. Learning centers and vocational/
trade centers shall not be classified as a public or private school for
purposes of this section.
   B.   At least seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area of any space
occupied by a dispensing organization shall be devoted to the activities of the
dispensing organization as authorized by the Act, and no dispensing
organization shall also sell food for consumption on the premises other than as
authorized in section
11-17-11 below in the same space.
   C.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
   D.   For purposes of determining required parking, adult-use cannabis
dispensing organizations or dispensary, shall be classified as "restaurants,
bars, clubs and lodges, places of entertainment, repair shops, retail and
service stores" per
11-15-4F, provided however, that the Village may require that more or less
parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed hereunder.
   E.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with all requirements as provided herein and all other provisions
and requirements of the Act. (Ord. 679, 12-10-2019)
11-17-7: ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER:
In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis infuser organization
or infuser may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:
   A.   Facility may not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool,
primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home or residential
care/nursing home or long-term care facility. Learning centers and vocational/
trade centers shall not be classified as a public or private school for
purposes of this section.
   B.   At least seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area of any space
occupied by an infusing organization shall be devoted to the activities of the
infusing organization as authorized by the Act. Facility may not conduct any
sales or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
   C.   For purposes of determining required parking, adult-use cannabis
infuser organization or infuser shall be classified as "manufacturing and
processing plants, laboratories and warehouses" per
11-15-4F, provided however, that the Village may require that more or less
parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed hereunder.
   D.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with all requirements as provided herein and all other provisions
and requirements of the Act. (Ord. 679, 12-10-2019)
11-17-8: ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:
In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis processing
organization or processor may be located, the proposed facility must comply
with the following:
   A.   Facility may not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool,
primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home or residential
care/nursing home or long-term care facility. Learning centers and vocational/
trade centers shall not be classified as a public or private school for
purposes of this section.
   B.   At least seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area of any space
occupied by a processor shall be devoted to the activities of the processing
organization as authorized by the Act. The facility may not conduct any sales
or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
   C.   For purposes of determining required parking, adult-use cannabis
processing organizations or processors shall be classified as "manufacturing
and processing plants, laboratories and warehouses" per
11-15-4F, provided however, that the Village may require that more or less
parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed hereunder.
   D.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with all requirements as provided herein and all other provisions
and requirements of the Act. (Ord. 679, 12-10-2019)
11-17-9: ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning districts in which an adult-use transporting organization may
be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   A.   Facility may not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool,
primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home or residential
care/nursing home or long-term care facility. Learning centers and vocational/
trade centers shall not be classified as a public or private school for
purposes of this section.
   B.   The transporting organization shall be the sole use of the space in
which it is located. Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of
cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
   C.   For purposes of determining required parking, adult-use cannabis
transporting organization shall be classified as "manufacturing and processing
plants, laboratories and warehouses" per
11-15-4F, provided however, that the Village may require that more or less
parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed hereunder.
   D.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with all requirements as provided herein and all other provisions
and requirements of the Act. (Ord. 679, 12-10-2019)
11-17-10: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
Petitioner shall install building enhancements, such as security cameras,
lighting or other improvements, as set forth in the special use permit, to
ensure the safety of employees and customers of the adult-use cannabis business
establishment(s), as well as its environs. Said improvements shall be
determined based on the specific characteristics of the floor plan for an
adult-use cannabis business establishment and the site on which it is located,
consistent with the requirements of the Act and this title. (Ord. 679, 12-10-
2019)
11-17-11: CO-LOCATION OF CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS:
The Village may approve the co-location of adult-use cannabis businesses,
subject to the provisions of the Act and the special use criteria within
11-18-7 and this chapter. In a co-location, the floor space requirements
specified hereinabove need not apply, but the co-located establishments shall
be the sole use of the space. (Ord. 679, 12-10-2019)
CHAPTER 18
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-18-1: Organization
11-18-2: Zoning Administrator
11-18-3: Zoning Board Of Appeals
11-18-4: Administrative Appeals
11-18-5: Variations
11-18-6: Amendments
11-18-7: Special Use Permits
11-18-8: Permits And Certificates
11-18-9: Fees
11-18-10: Enforcement
11-18-1: ORGANIZATION:
The administration of this title is hereby vested in the following:
   A.   Zoning administrator.
   B.   Zoning board of appeals. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-18-2: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The zoning administrator is hereby designated to enforce this title, and in
furtherance of such authority shall receive and review applications for permits
to erect buildings or structures, or to alter or remodel existing buildings or
structures, and shall have the power to make orders, requirements, decisions
and determinations with respect to the enforcement of the terms of this title
and to:
   A.   Administration Of Procedures: Administer all procedures concerning
permits when such permits are required by this title, and in connection
therewith shall:
      1.   Review all applications for construction permits required herein;
issue such permits for application conforming with the regulations of this
title; and make such periodic inspections during construction as may be
necessary to ensure compliance with this title;
      2.   Upon completion of construction, or upon application for an
occupancy permit for a change of use, inspect the premises and issue an
occupancy permit if such construction or change of use complies with the
regulations of this title;
      3.   Review applications for temporary occupancy permits and issue such
temporary occupancy permits for applications conforming to the regulations of
this title;
      4.   Maintain records of all applications and permits;
      5.   Make such investigations, decisions, determinations and
requirements; and issue such violation notices and compliance orders as are
necessary to enforce this title, and keep records of such notices and orders;
      6.   Decide or make recommendations on all other matters under this title
upon which the zoning administrator is required to act;
      7.   Receive petitions for variations, amendments, and special use
permits that are to be referred to the zoning board of appeals or other
appropriate reviewing body;
      8.   Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including, but
not limited to, all maps, amendments, special uses, variations, appeals and
applications therefor; revise the zoning district map to show all amendments
thereto; and maintain for public inspection a record of all special uses
granted indicating the nature of the special use, conditions of approval, and
the date of the hearing on such special use;
      9.   Maintain and provide public information relative to all matters
arising out of this title; and
      10.   Collect fees as authorized by the village board.
   B.   Delegation Of Duties: The zoning administrator may delegate the duties
set forth in this chapter to persons under his/her supervision. (Ord., 10-14-
2008)
11-18-3: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
   A.   Creation: The zoning board of appeals of the village of Stockton
("zoning board") is hereby created in accordance with Illinois law, including
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-3.
   B.   Membership And Term Of Office:
      1.   Appointment Of Zoning Board: The village president, with advice and
consent of the village board shall appoint a zoning board of appeals consisting
of seven (7) members. One of the members so appointed shall be named as
chairman at the time of his appointment, and in case of vacancy the village
president shall designate a chairman.
      2.   Terms Of Membership On Zoning Board: The zoning board shall consist
of seven (7) members to serve, respectively, for the following initial terms:
         a.   One member for one year;
         b.   One member for two (2) years;
         c.   One member for three (3) years;
         d.   One member for four (4) years;
         e.   One member for five (5) years;
         f.   One member for six (6) years; and
         g.   One member for seven (7) years.
         h.   Thereafter, each member of the zoning board shall serve for a
term of five (5) years.
   C.   Residency Of Members Of Zoning Board: All members of the zoning board
shall be residents of the village of Stockton or shall own property in the
village of Stockton.
   D.   Alternate Members Of The Zoning Board:
      1.   The village president may appoint two (2) persons to the zoning
board, subject to confirmation by majority vote of the members of the village
board, who shall serve as alternates for the other seven (7) members of the
board. Such alternates shall serve respectively, for the following initial
terms:
         a.   One alternate for four (4) years;
         b.   One alternate for five (5) years.
         c.   Thereafter each alternate member of the zoning board shall serve
a term of five (5) years.
      2.   Alternate members, if appointed, shall serve as members of the board
only in the absence of regular members, with the alternate member who has the
greatest amount of time remaining in his or her term to have priority over the
other alternate members in determining which alternate member shall serve in
the absence of a regular member.
   E.   Removal: The village president shall have the power to remove any
member of the zoning board for cause, after a public hearing.
   F.   Vacancies On Zoning Board: Vacancies shall be filled by the village
president for the unexpired term of any member whose place has become vacant.
   G.   Jurisdiction And Authority: The zoning board is hereby vested with the
following jurisdiction and authority:
      1.   Appeals Of An Administrative Decision Interpreting/Enforcing The
Ordinance: Hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the zoning administrator. See section
11-18-4 of this chapter.
      2.   Variation: To hear applications for variations from strict
application of this title, and, after the public hearing, report its finding(s)
and make its recommendation(s) to the village board. See section
11-18-5 of this chapter.
      3.   Special Use Permits: To hear applications for special use permits,
and, after the public hearing, report its finding(s) and make its
recommendation(s) to the village board. See section
11-18-7 of this chapter.
      4.   Amendments: To hear applications for amendment(s) to this title, in
the manner set forth and under the standards established in section
11-18-6 of this chapter and, after the public hearing, report its finding(s)
and make its recommendation(s) to the village board. The village board may
accept or reject, in whole or in part, the finding(s) and/or recommendation(s)
of the zoning board on such applications for amendment(s), and may refer any
such application back to the zoning board for further hearing(s), finding(s),
and/or recommendation(s).
      5.   Other Matters: To hear and decide, or to hear and make
recommendations to the village board, on all matters referred to it or upon
which it is required to pass under this title, and in accordance with Illinois
law.
   H.   Meetings And Rules:
      1.   All meetings of the zoning board shall be held at the call of the
chairperson, and at such times and places within the village as the zoning
board may determine.
      2.   All meetings of the zoning board shall be open to the public.
      3.   The zoning board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the
vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other
official actions.
      4.   Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and
order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning board shall
immediately be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
      5.   The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
   I.   Notice Of Hearing: Where a public hearing before the zoning board of
appeals is required by this title, unless otherwise specified to the contrary
elsewhere in this title, notice of each hearing shall be published at least
fifteen (15) days in advance thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in
the village.
   J.   Zoning Board Expenses: In the performance of its duties, the zoning
board may incur such expenses as are authorized by the village board.
   K.   Compensation Of The Zoning Board: The members of the zoning board shall
be compensated on a per diem basis, the amounts to be determined by the village
board. The per diem funds are to be generated through zoning fees.
   L.   Decisions Of The Zoning Board: The concurring vote of four (4) members
of the board is necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the zoning administrator, or to decide in favor of the
applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance
or resolution, or to effect any variation in such ordinance or resolution to
the village board. All final administrative decisions of the zoning board
hereunder shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the
administrative review law 1 and all amendments and modifications thereof, and
the rules adopted pursuant thereto. The term "administrative decision" is
defined as in section 3-101 of the code of civil procedure 2 . (Ord., 10-14-
2008; amd. Ord. 693, 8-11-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
2 2. 735 ILCS 5/3-101.
11-18-4: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
   A.   Persons Who May Appeal: An appeal may be taken to the zoning board of
appeals by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau
of the village of Stockton affected by any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the zoning administrator relative to the interpretation of
this title.
   B.   Request For Consideration: Prior to taking of an appeal, the aggrieved
person may file, within thirty (30) days of the decision, a request for
reconsideration with the office of the zoning administrator. The request for
reconsideration shall specify the grounds for the request. Upon receipt of the
request for reconsideration, the zoning administrator shall, within thirty (30)
days, prepare a written answer to the aggrieved person's request. Such answer
shall include findings of fact, conclusions, and a final decision. This
document shall be signed by the zoning administrator and thereafter forwarded
to the aggrieved person.
   C.   Procedure For Appeals:
      1.   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the zoning board,
after the notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of the facts stated
in the certificate, a stay would, in the zoning administrator's opinion, cause
an imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the zoning
board or by a court on application, on notice to the zoning administrator and
on due cause shown.
      2.   The zoning board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal.
   D.   Decision Of Appeals: The zoning board may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as in
its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all
the powers of the zoning administrator.
   E.   Finality Of Zoning Decisions For Administrative Appeals: All
administrative decisions of the zoning board hereunder may be appealed to the
village board. The decision of the village board shall be final.
   F.   Records Of Appeals: The zoning administrator shall maintain complete
records of all actions of the zoning board with respect to appeals, and shall
keep the village board informed on a current basis of the disposition of each
case. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-18-5: VARIATIONS:
The village board may determine and vary the application of the regulations
imposed by this title in harmony with their general purpose and intent and in
accordance with general or specific rules therein contained in cases where
there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of any of such regulations relating to the use,
construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land.
   A.   Administrative Variation As To Location Or Bulk Of Structures: If an
application is made for a variation of ten percent (10%) or less of the
regulations of this title governing the location of structures or as to the
bulk requirements under this title, such variation may be granted by the zoning
administrator without a public hearing, provided that, before such variation is
granted, a notice of intent to grant such is sent by certified mail to all
adjoining landowners, and no adjoining landowner files a written objection with
the zoning administrator within fifteen (15) days of receipt of such notice of
intent. If within fifteen (15) days after receiving such notice of intent, an
adjoining landowner files a written objection to such variation with the zoning
administrator, then the requested variation shall be heard at a public hearing
by the board of appeals and decided by the village board in accordance with
this chapter.
   B.   Procedure For Variations:
      1.   Authority To Grant Variations: All variations, except for
administrative variations as described herein, shall be made only by the
village board and only following a public hearing before the board of appeals.
      2.   Applications For Variations:
         a.   Filing Of Application: An application for a variation shall be
filed with the zoning inspector on a form prescribed by the village.
         b.   Application Information: Applications for variations shall be
made in duplicate to the zoning inspector on forms furnished by the zoning
inspector and shall include the following:
            (1)   Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site,
architect, professional engineer, contractor, and all opposite and abutting
property owners of record.
            (2)   Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded
subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type of
structure; proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of
employees; and the zoning district within which the subject site lies.
            (3)   Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing
the actual dimensions of the lot or lots to be built upon, the size of the
building or structure to be erected or structurally altered, and its location
on the lot or lots.
            (4)   A site plan showing information as may be necessary to
determine and provide for an enforcement of this title, including a plan
showing contours and vegetative cover, specifications for areas of proposed
filling, grading, and lagooning; location of buildings, parking areas, traffic
access, driveways, walkways, open spaces and landscaping; plans of buildings,
sewage disposal facilities, water supply systems and arrangements of
operations.
            (5)   Additional information as may be required by the board of
appeals, village engineer, zoning, building, plumbing, or health inspectors.
      3.   Public Hearing: The zoning administrator shall deliver the
application to the zoning board who shall hold a public hearing on each
application for a variation at such time and place as shall be established by
the zoning board.
      4.   Standards For Variations: The zoning board of appeals shall make
findings of fact based upon the evidence presented to it specifying the reason
for making such variation including findings with respect to the following
standards:
         a.   The physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of
the specific property will cause practical difficulties or a particular
hardship to the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the
strict letter of the regulations were carried out.
         b.   The conditions upon which a petition for a variation is based are
unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property within the same zoning classification.
         c.   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property.
         d.   The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this title and
has not been created by persons presently having an interest in the property.
         e.   The granting of the variation will not alter the essential
character of the locality, and will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the
property is located.
         f.   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion of
the public street, or increase the danger of fire or flooding, or endanger the
public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood.
         g.   The variation requested is the minimum variation that will make
possible the reasonable use of the land or structure.
      5.   Notice Of Hearings: There shall be at least fifteen (15) days'
notice of the date, time, and place of such public hearing published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village. Costs or charges for
publication of such notice shall be paid by the petitioner or applicant.
      6.   Notice Contents: The notice of public hearing for a variation shall
contain:
         a.   The particular location of the real estate for which the
variation is requested by legal description and street address, and if no
street address then by locating such real estate with reference to any well
known landmark, highway, road, thoroughfare or intersection;
         b.   Whether or not the petitioner or applicant is acting for himself
or in the capacity of agent, alter ego, or representative of a principal, and
stating the name and address of the actual and true principal;
         c.   Whether petitioner or applicant is a corporation, and if a
corporation, the correct names and addresses of all officers and directors, and
of all stockholders or shareholders owning any interest in excess of twenty
percent (20%) of all outstanding stock of such corporation;
         d.   Whether the petitioner or applicant, or his principal if other
than the applicant, is a business or entity doing business under an assumed
name, and if so, the name and residence of all true and actual owners of such
business or entity;
         e.   Whether the petitioner for application is a partnership, joint
venture, syndicate or an unincorporated voluntary association, and if so, the
names and addresses of all partners, joint ventures, syndicate members or
members of the unincorporated voluntary association; and
         f.   A brief statement of what the proposed variation consists.
      7.   Conditions And Restrictions: The village board may impose such
conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may
be necessary to comply with the standards set out in this title to reduce or
minimize the effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood
and to better carry out the general intent of this title.
      8.   Finality Of Zoning Decisions For Variations: The decision and
findings of the village board on an application for variation, after a public
hearing, shall, in all instances, be final. (Ord., 10-14-2008; amd. Ord. 694,
8-11-2020)
11-18-6: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Types Of Amendments: For purposes of this section, the term "text
amendment" means an amendment to the text of a zoning ordinance, which affects
the whole village, and the term "map amendment" means an amendment to the map
of a zoning ordinance, which affects an individual parcel or parcels of land.
   B.   Authority To Amend/Who May File: The regulations imposed and the
districts created under the authority of this title may be amended from time to
time by ordinance or resolution, after the ordinance or resolution establishing
same has gone into effect. Amendments may be proposed by the village board,
zoning board, any property owner, or a person or organization with a property
interest in the subject property. An application for an amendment shall be
filed with the zoning administrator, who after ascertaining it contains the
information required by this title shall forward the application to the zoning
board.
      1.   Filing Of Application: An application for a zoning amendment shall
be filed with the zoning inspector on a form prescribed by the zoning
administrator.
      2.   Text Amendment Application Information: Applications for text
amendments shall be made on forms furnished by the zoning inspector and shall
address the following:
         a.   How the proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive
plan.
         b.   How the public health, safety, and general welfare are served by
the proposed amendment.
         c.   Additional information as may be required by the board of
appeals, village engineer, zoning, building, plumbing, or health inspectors.
      3.   Map Amendment Application Information: Applications for map
amendments shall be made on forms furnished by the zoning inspector and shall
address the following:
         a.   How the proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive
plan.
         b.   How the public health, safety, and general welfare are served by
the proposed amendment.
         c.   Provide a map, at an appropriate scale, fully dimensioned and
accurately drawn, identifying the current and proposed zoning; and adjacent
properties' zoning within a minimum three hundred feet (300') of the project
site.
         d.   Additional information as may be required by the board of
appeals, village engineer, zoning, building, plumbing, or health inspectors.
   C.   Hearing Requirement: No such amendments shall be made without a hearing
before the zoning board of appeals. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the
time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village.
   D.   Action Of Board: The zoning board upon receipt of the application from
the zoning administrator shall:
      1.   Conduct a hearing as required by this title within a reasonable
period of time, and
      2.   Consider the following factors for zoning map amendments:
         a.   The preferred use of the property as indicated in the future land
use map in the village of Stockton comprehensive plan. This is the primary
determining factor for all rezone requests.
         b.   When a preferred land use is not designated in the comprehensive
plan, or when the requested amendment is not consistent with the comprehensive
plan, the following factors should be considered:
            (1)   Existing uses and zoning of nearby property;
            (2)   Extent to which property values are diminished by particular
zoning restrictions;
            (3)   Extent to which destruction of value of plaintiffs' property
promotes the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the public;
            (4)   Relative gain to public compared to hardship imposed upon
individual property owner;
            (5)   Suitability of subject property for zoned purposes;
            (6)   Length of time the property has been vacant as zoned,
considered in context of land development in vicinity; and
            (7)   Community need for the proposed use.
      3.   Consider the following factors for zoning text amendments:
         a.   The consistency of the proposed amendment with the purpose of
this code and the comprehensive plan,
         b.   The community need for the proposed amendment and for the uses
and development it would allow.
      4.   Make a recommendation to the village board based upon its
consideration of the factors listed in this section which may include terms and
conditions of approval.
   E.   Village Board Voting Requirements To Amend:
      1.   Text Amendments: Text amendments may be passed at a village board
meeting by a simple majority of the elected village board members, unless
written protests against the proposed text amendment are signed by five percent
(5%) of the landowners of the village, in which case such amendment shall not
be passed except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the
members of the village board.
      2.   Map Amendments: Map amendments may be passed at a village board
meeting by a simple majority of the elected village board members, unless a
valid written protest is filed as provided in subsections E2a and E2b of this
section, in which case such amendment shall not be passed except by the
favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the village board.
         a.   In case of written protest against any proposed map amendment
that is either:
            (1)   Signed by the owner or owners of at least twenty percent
(20%) of the land to be rezoned, or
            (2)   Signed by the owner or owners of land immediately touching,
or immediately across a street, alley, or public right of way from, at least
twenty percent (20%) of the perimeter of the land to be rezoned.
         b.   In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be served by
the protester or protesters on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a
copy upon the applicant's attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of
such applicant and attorney shown in the application for the proposed
amendment. (Ord., 10-14-2008; amd. Ord. 695, 8-11-2020)
11-18-7: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   Purpose: The development and execution of this chapter is based upon
the division of the village into districts, within which districts the use of
land and buildings, and bulk and location of buildings and structures in
relation to the land, are mutually compatible and substantially uniform.
However, there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics,
cannot be properly classified as unrestricted permitted uses in any particular
district or districts, without consideration, in each case, of the impact of
those uses upon neighboring land or public facilities, and of the public need
for the particular use at a particular location. Such uses, nevertheless, may
be necessary or desirable to be allowed in a particular district provided that
due consideration is given to location, development and operation of such uses.
Such uses are classified as special uses.
   B.   Authority Of The Board Of Appeals And Village Board; Requirements:
      1.   The board of appeals shall conduct hearings and investigate
applications as necessary to make recommendations to the village board. Special
use permits may be granted, modified or revoked only by the village board.
      2.   The board of appeals, after a public hearing shall, within a
reasonable time, make a recommendation to the village board regarding the
application for a special use. Prior to making a recommendation, the board of
appeals shall make findings based upon the evidence presented that the
standards herein prescribed are being complied with.
      3.   Any development within five hundred feet (500') of the existing or
proposed rights of way of freeways, expressways, interstate and controlled
access trafficways, and within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of their
existing or proposed interchange or turning lane rights of way shall be
specifically reviewed by the highway agency that has jurisdiction over the
trafficway. The board of appeals shall request such review and await the
highway agency's recommendation for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days
before taking final action.
      4.   Conditions such as landscaping, architectural design, type of
construction, construction commencement and completion dates, sureties,
lighting, fencing, planting screens, operation control, hours of operation,
improved traffic circulation, deed restrictions, highway access restrictions,
increased yards, or parking requirements, may be required by the board of
appeals upon its finding that these are necessary to fulfill the purpose and
intent of this title.
      5.   Compliance with all other provisions of this title, such as lot
width and area, yards, height, parking, loading, traffic, highway access, and
performance standards, shall be required of all special uses.
   C.   Application For Special Use:
      1.   Filing Of Application: An application for a special use shall be
filed with the zoning inspector on a form prescribed by the village.
      2.   Application Information: Applications for special use shall be made
in duplicate to the zoning inspector on forms furnished by the zoning inspector
and shall include the following:
         a.   Names and addresses of the applicant, owner of the site,
architect, professional engineer, contractor, and all opposite and abutting
property owners of record.
         b.   Description of the subject site by lot, block, and recorded
subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type of
structure; proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of
employees; and the zoning district within which the subject site lies.
         c.   Plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing the
actual dimensions of the lot or lots to be built upon, the size of the building
or structure to be erected or structurally altered, and its location on the lot
or lots.
         d.   A site plan showing information as may be necessary to determine
and provide for an enforcement of this title, including a plan showing contours
and vegetative cover, specifications for areas of proposed filling, grading,
and lagooning; location of buildings, parking areas, traffic access, driveways,
walkways, open spaces and landscaping; plans of buildings, sewage disposal
facilities, water supply systems and arrangements of operations.
         e.   Additional information as may be required by the board of
appeals, village engineer, zoning, building, plumbing, or health inspectors.
   D.   Hearing On Application: A special use may be granted only after a
public hearing conducted by the board of appeals. There must be at least
fifteen (15) days' notice before the hearing. The notice must include the time,
place, and date of the hearing and must be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village. The notice must also contain:
      1.   The particular location of the property for which the special use is
requested by legal description and by street address, or if there is no street
address, by locating the property with reference to any well known landmark,
highway, road, thoroughfare, or intersection;
      2.   Whether the petitioner or applicant is acting for himself or herself
or as an agent, alter ego, or representative of a principal and the name and
address of the principal;
      3.   Whether the petitioner or applicant is a corporation, and if so, the
correct names and addresses of all officers and directors of the corporation
and of all stockholders or shareholders owning any interest in excess of twenty
percent (20%) of all of the outstanding stock or shares of the corporation;
      4.   Whether the petitioner or applicant, or his or her principal, is a
business or entity doing business under an assumed name, and if so, the name
and residence of all actual owners of the business or entity;
      5.   Whether the petitioner or applicant, or his or her principal, is a
partnership, joint venture, syndicate, or an unincorporated voluntary
association, and if so, the names and addresses of all partners or members of
the partnership, joint venture, syndicate, or unincorporated voluntary
association; and
      6.   A brief statement of the proposed special use.
   E.   Notice To Neighbors: In addition to any other notice required by this
section, the board of appeals must give at least fifteen (15) days' notice
before the hearing to the owner or owners of any land adjacent to or
immediately across any street, alley, or public right of way from the property
proposed as a special use.
   F.   Payment Of Publication Costs: The petitioner or applicant must pay the
cost of the publication of the notice required by this section.
   G.   Denial Of Application For Special Use Permit: When a special use
application is recommended for denial, the board of appeals shall furnish in
writing to the village board, and to the applicant, those standards that are
not met and enumerate reasons the board of appeals has used in determining that
each standard was not met.
   H.   Validity Of Special Use Permit: Where the village board has approved an
application for a special use, such approval shall become null and void within
twelve (12) months of the date of the village board action unless the use is
commenced, construction is underway or the current owner possesses a valid
zoning permit under which construction is commenced within six (6) months of
the date of issuance and which shall not be renewed unless construction has
commenced and is being diligently prosecuted.
   I.   Complaints Regarding Special Uses: The village board shall retain
continuing jurisdiction over all special uses for the purpose of resolving
complaints against all previously approved special uses. Such authority shall
be in addition to the enforcement authority of the zoning inspector to order
the removal or discontinuance of any unauthorized alterations of an approved
special use, and the elimination, removal or discontinuance of any violation of
a condition imposed prior to or after approval or violation of any other
provision of this code. Upon written complaint by any citizen or official, the
board of appeals shall initially determine whether said complaint indicates a
reasonable probability that the subject special use is in violation of either
one or more of the standards set forth in subsection K of this section, a
condition of approval or other requirement imposed hereunder. Upon reaching a
positive initial determination, a hearing shall be held upon notice as provided
in subsection D of this section. Any person may appear at such hearing and
testify in person or be represented by an agent or attorney. The board of
appeals may, in order to bring the subject special use into compliance with the
standards set forth in subsection K of this section or conditions previously
imposed by the village board, recommend modifications of the existing
conditions upon such use and recommend additional reasonable conditions upon
the subject special use. In the event that no reasonable modification of such
special use can be made in order to assure that standards in subsections K1 and
K2 of this section will be met, the village board may revoke the subject
special approval and direct the zoning inspector and the village attorney to
seek elimination of the subject use. Following any such hearing, the decision
of the village board shall be furnished the current owner of the special use in
writing stating the reasons therefor.
   J.   Standards; Special Uses:
      1.   No application for a special use shall be recommended for approval
by the board of appeals or granted by the village board unless such boards
shall find all of the following conditions are present:
         a.   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or
general welfare.
         b.   The uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the
neighborhood for purposes already permitted shall be in no foreseeable manner
substantially impaired or diminished by the establishment, maintenance or
operation of the special use and the proposed use is compatible with the use of
adjacent land.
         c.   The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district.
         d.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary
site improvements have been or are being provided.
         e.   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
         f.   The special use shall, except for yard requirements, conform to
all applicable regulations of the district in which it is located.
         g.   The proposed use does not violate floodplain regulations
governing the site.
         h.   When applying the above standards to any new construction of a
building or an addition to an existing building the board of appeals shall bear
in mind the statement of purpose for the zoning district such that the proposed
building or addition at its location does not defeat the purposes and objective
of the zoning district.
      2.   The board of appeals shall also evaluate the effect of the proposed
use upon:
         a.   The maintenance of safe and healthful conditions.
         b.   The prevention and control of water pollution including
sedimentation.
         c.   Existing topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover
on the site.
         d.   The location of the site with respect to floodplains and
floodways of rivers and streams.
         e.   The erosion potential of the site based upon degree and direction
of slope, soil type and vegetative cover.
         f.   The location of the site with respect to existing or future
access roads.
         g.   The need of the proposed use for a shoreland location.
         h.   Its compatibility with uses on adjacent land.
         i.   The amount of liquid wastes to be generated and the adequacy of
the proposed disposal systems.
   K.   Conditions And Guarantees: The following conditions shall apply to all
special uses:
      1.   Prior to the granting of any special use, the village board may
stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location,
construction, maintenance and operation of the special use as deemed necessary
to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community, and
to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in
subsection J of this section. In all cases in which special uses are granted,
the board shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary
as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and
will be complied with. Such conditions may include specifications for, without
limitation, because of specific enumeration:
         a.   Landscaping,
         b.   Type of construction,
         c.   Construction commencement and completion dates,
         d.   Sureties,
         e.   Lighting,
         f.   Fencing,
         g.   Operational control,
         h.   Hours of operation,
         i.   Traffic circulation,
         j.   Deed restrictions,
         k.   Access restrictions,
         l.   Setbacks and yards,
         m.   Specified sewage disposal and water supply systems,
         n.   Planting screens,
         o.   Increased parking,
         p.   Or any other requirements necessary to fulfill the purpose and
intent of this title.
      2.   The board of appeals shall evaluate each application and may request
assistance from any source, which can provide technical assistance. The board
of appeals shall review the site, existing and proposed structures,
architectural plans, neighboring uses, parking areas, driveway locations,
highway access, traffic generation and circulation, drainage, sewerage and
water systems and the proposed operation/use.
      3.   No alteration of a special use shall be permitted unless approved by
the village board. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-18-8: PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES:
   A.   Zoning Permit:
      1.   Permit Required: No building or structure shall hereafter be erected
or structurally altered until a zoning permit has been issued by the zoning
administrator stating that the building or structure and use of land comply
with the regulations of this zoning ordinance.
      2.   Application For Permit: All applications for a zoning permit shall
be accompanied by the required fee and a scale drawing showing the actual
dimensions of the lot or lots to be built upon, the size of the building or
structure to be erected or structurally altered, its location on the lot or
lots, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of these regulations. A careful record of such applications and
drawings shall be kept in the office of the zoning administrator.
      3.   Permit Application Review: The zoning administrator shall review all
permit applications for compliance with this title and shall issue the permit
or a written denial of permit within ten (10) days of receiving the application
and required fee. When the request for a permit is denied, the zoning
administrator shall provide the reasons for rejection and may recommend
alternative actions to comply with the relevant requirements of this zoning
ordinance.
      4.   Permit Placement: Zoning permits shall be displayed in a window or
protective plastic sleeve in a location visible from the street.
      5.   Permit Validity: Zoning permits shall be valid for a period of one
year from the date of issuance.
   B.   Certificate Of Occupancy:
      1.   Certificate Required: No building or structure hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be occupied and used until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the zoning administrator. The certificate of
occupancy shall be issued only after the zoning administrator makes a finding
that the building or structure has been erected or structurally altered in
conformance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance.
      2.   Issuance And Record Of Certificates: Certificates of occupancy shall
be issued within ten (10) days after the erection and alterations of such
building shall have been satisfactorily completed. A record of all certificates
shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator, and copies
shall be available to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the
building affected. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-18-9: FEES:
   A.   Fee Required: Any application for a zoning permit, amendment, special
use, variance, or any other type of request, shall be accompanied by a fee as
established by the village board. Fees are to be established in accordance with
the costs incurred to administer this zoning ordinance.
   B.   Work Without Permit: When construction starts before a zoning permit is
issued, the fee will be increased by fifty percent (50%).
   C.   Fee Refund: No fee shall be refunded unless written notice of
cancellation of application is received by the zoning administrator. Fees for
actions that require a public hearing will be refunded only if notice of
cancellation is received prior to public notice publication.
   D.   Fee Schedule: The fee schedule will be established by the village
board. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
11-18-10: ENFORCEMENT:
Individuals wishing to report or inquire about a perceived violation of this
zoning ordinance may contact the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator
will investigate reported violations in a timely manner and act as authorized
by section
11-18-2 of this chapter to enforce this title. (Ord., 10-14-2008)
CHAPTER 19
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-19-1: Definitions Of Words And Terms
11-19-1: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS:
For the purposes of this title, the following definitions shall be used. Words
used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the
plural number; and the plural number includes the singular number. The word
"shall" is mandatory and not optional.
ABUTTING: Having a common property line or district line.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure subordinate to the principal structure and
located on the same lot or parcel, including garages, storage sheds, decks, and
pools and pool buildings. Accessory structures may not occupy more than thirty
percent (30%) of the required rear yard.
ACCESSORY USE: A use subordinate to the principal use of a parcel of land and
located on the same lot or parcel.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment which for monetary
consideration is used for presentations or service distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on exposure to view human genitals, pubic area,
buttocks or anus; or female's vulva or breasts below the top of the areola; or
male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if opaquely covered; or on
acts of or acts which simulate erotic touching, sexual intercourse,
masturbation, flagellation, sodomy, bestiality, necrophilia, sadomasochistic
abuse, fellatio, cunnilingus, or any sexual act prohibited by Illinois
statutes.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: An adult-use cannabis cultivation
center, craft grower, processing organization (processor), infuser organization
(infuser), dispensing organization (dispensary) or transporting organization
(transporter).
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Act, as it may be amended from time
to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Act, as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION OR DISPENSARY: A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Act, as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Act, as it
may be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR: A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Act, as it may be
amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER: An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Act, as it may be amended from time to time,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
AGRICULTURAL BYPRODUCTS: Plant material remaining after the harvesting and/or
processing of the primary agricultural crop, such as straw, corncobs, seed
hulls, or fruit pulp.
ALLEY: A special public right of way affording only secondary access to
abutting properties.
APARTMENT: A portion of a multiple dwelling used as a separate housing unit and
having cooking facilities and a private bath.
ARTERIAL STREET: A public street or highway used or intended to be used
primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. Arterial streets and highways
shall include freeways and expressways as well as arterial streets, highways,
and parkways.
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half (1/2)
of its height is above the established curb level or above the average level of
the adjoining ground where the curb level has not been established, a basement
shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: An owner occupied dwelling providing not more
than five (5) rooms for overnight accommodations to the public and, if so
desired, breakfast may be served to the guests thereof. Rental is on a
transient basis and for a charge, meaning any form of remuneration such as
cash, goods, services, barter, donations, forgiveness of indebtedness, or other
like payment. In the agricultural district, a guesthouse/bed and breakfast may
incorporate the use of accessory buildings detached from the main house
providing such are suitable for human habitation. For purposes of this
definition, "guestroom" shall mean a sleeping room intended to serve not more
than two (2) guests per night.
BILLBOARD: An advertising device, either freestanding or attached to a
building, which is used to display information not related to the use or
ownership of the establishment or the property upon which it is located.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and
public parks, or other recognized lines of demarcation.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals or
lodging are regularly furnished by prearrangement for compensation for four (4)
or more persons not members of a family, but not exceeding six (6) persons and
not open to transient customers.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or
intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
equipment, machinery or materials.
BUILDING AREA: The total living area bounded by the exterior walls of a
building at the floor levels, but not including basement, utility rooms,
garages, porches, breezeways, and unfinished attics.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the mean elevation of the
finished lot grade along the street yard face of the structure to the highest
point of flat roofs; to the mean height level between the eaves and ridges of
gable, gambrel, hip, and pitch roofs; or to the deck line of mansard roofs.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The employee of the village of Stockton, Illinois,
officially designated to administer the building and zoning ordinances. The
building inspector is also referred to as the zoning inspector or zoning
administrator.
BUILDING LINE, FRONT: A line parallel to the street, intersecting the foremost
point of the building, excluding uncovered steps.
BUILDING PERMIT: Written permission issued by the village of Stockton through
the zoning administrator for the construction, repair, alteration or addition
to a structure. This term is often used interchangeably with "zoning permit",
but whereas a zoning permit addresses only those things regulated by the zoning
ordinance, "building permit" is the preferred term to be used in the
administration of the building code to ensure that structures are built to
accepted safety standards.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main use of the lot
on which said building is located.
BUSINESS: A commercial establishment engaged in the purchase and sale of goods
and services for a profit (not including manufacturing or industrial
establishments).
CANOPY OR MARQUEE: A rooflike structure, of a permanent nature, which projects
from the wall of a building.
CARPORT: A structure attached or made a part of the principal structure, and
which is open to the weather on at least two (2) sides, intended for the use of
sheltering not more than two (2) motor driven vehicles. For purposes of this
title, carports shall comply with the setback requirements for the principal
structure.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A written statement issued by the zoning inspector
which permits the use of a building or lot or a portion of a building or lot,
and which certifies compliance with the provisions of this title for the
specified use and occupancy.
CLINIC: A building used by a group of doctors or dentists for the examination
or treatment of persons on an outpatient or nonboarding basis only.
CLUB: A building owned, leased or hired by a nonprofit association of persons,
who are bona fide members paying dues, the use of which is restricted to said
members and their guests.
CONFORMING USE: Any lawful use of a building or lot which complies with the
provisions of this title.
CORNER LOT: A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection
provided that the corner of such intersection shall have an angle of one
hundred thirty five degrees (135°) or less, measured on the lot side.
CURB GRADE: The level of the established curb in the front of the building,
measured at the center of such front. Where no curb has been established, the
Village Board shall authorize and approve the establishment of such curb level
or its equivalent for the purpose of this title.
DEVELOPER: Any person whose concern and intent it is to improve land in
accordance with the development regulations of the Village of Stockton.
DEVELOPMENT: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels; the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or
enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land
disturbance, and any use or extension of the use of land.
DWELLING: A detached building designed or used exclusively as a residence or
sleeping place, but does not include boarding or lodging houses, motels,
hotels, tents, or cabins.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building or portion thereof used or designated as a
residence for three (3) or more families as separate housekeeping units,
including apartments, apartment hotels and group houses.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A detached building designed, arranged or used for, and
occupied exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed, arranged or used for, or occupied
exclusively by two (2) families, living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed as a unit for occupancy by not more
than one family for living and sleeping purposes.
EXPORT OF ENERGY: The onsite generation of wholesale electricity that is
delivered to the utility distribution network as allowed under contract with
the electrical utility as defined by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-102.
EXPRESSWAY: A divided principal or primary arterial highway with full or
partial control of access and with or without grade separated intersections.
FAMILY: Any number of persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage, or not
to exceed four (4) persons not so related, living together in one dwelling as a
single housekeeping entity.
FARM: Land consisting of two (2) or more acres on which produce, crops,
livestock or flowers are grown primarily for off premises consumption or use.
FLOOR AREA:
   A.   For residential uses, the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a dwelling unit, exclusive of porches, balconies, garages and
basements, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
centerlines of walls or partitions separating dwelling units.
   B.   For uses other than residential, the area measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls, or from the centerline of walls or partitions
separating such uses, including all floors, lofts, balconies, mezzanines,
basements, and similar areas devoted to such uses.
FREEWAY: An expressway with full control of access and with fully graded
separated intersections.
FRONT YARD: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the existing or proposed
street or highway line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of
the principal structure. Corner lots shall have two (2) such yards.
FRONTAGE: The smallest dimension of a lot abutting a public street measured
along the street line.
FRONTAGE, LOT: The smallest dimension of a lot abutting a public street,
measured along the street line.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or portion of the principal building
used for vehicular storage only, and having a capacity of not more than three
(3) automobiles, or not more than one automobile per family housed in the
building to which such garage is accessory, whichever is the greater, and in
which space may be used for not more than one commercial vehicle, and in which
space may be rented for not more than three (3) vehicles of others not
occupants of the building to which such garage is accessory. The term also
includes carport and, when related to the context, shall relate to the storage
of one or more vehicles.
GIFT STORES: Retail stores where items such as art, antiques, jewelry, books,
and notions are sold.
HARDWARE STORES: Retail stores where items such as plumbing, heating, and
electrical supplies, sporting goods, and paints are sold.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation, profession, activity, or use that is clearly a
customary, incidental, and secondary use of a residential dwelling unit and
which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential
character of the neighborhood. Such secondary uses shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the habitable floor area of the dwelling or six hundred (600)
square feet, whichever is smaller, nor include the display of goods visible
from outside the premises, nor employ more than one on site employee that is
not a full time resident of the home.
HOTEL: An establishment for transient guests having more than six (6) sleeping
rooms without individual cooking facilities.
IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC: Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water
main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, planting strip, off street
parking area, or other facility for which the village may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation.
IMPROVEMENTS: Any structure, grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, bikeways, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
drainage ditches, culverts, bridges, trees, and other additions or deletions
from the natural state of land which increase its utility or habitability.
INTERCHANGE: A grade separated intersection with one or more turning lanes for
travel between intersection legs.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which any dog or other
domestic animals are boarded for compensation or kept for sale.
LOADING AREA: A complete off street space or berth on the same lot for the
loading or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and egress to
a public street or alley.
LOT: A parcel of land having frontage on a public street, occupied or intended
to be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size to meet
the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, yard, parking area, and other open space
provisions of this title.
LOT AREA: The total area in a horizontal plane within the peripheral boundaries
of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting intersecting streets at their intersection.
LOT COVERAGE: The percent of the area of a lot occupied by buildings or
structures, including accessory buildings or structures.
LOT LINES AND AREA: The peripheral boundaries of a parcel of land and the total
area lying within such boundaries.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been
recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Jo Daviess County prior to
the adoption of these provisions, or lot which is part of an unrecorded plat or
subdivision which is dated prior to the adoption of these provisions.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot which is oriented such that it has its rear
lot line coincident with or parallel to the side lot line of the interior lot
immediately to its rear.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or
less parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot. On a "through lot",
both public streets shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The width of a parcel of land measured at the rear of the specified
street yard.
LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land located within a single block, which at
time of filing for a zoning permit is designated by its owner or developer as a
tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or
control.
MOBILE HOME: A one-family dwelling unit of vehicular design, built on a chassis
and originally designed to be moved from one site to another, and used without
permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any lot not less than ten (10) contiguous acres on which two
(2) or more mobile homes are parked for the purpose of temporary or permanent
habitation.
MOTEL: A series of attached, semiattached, or detached sleeping units for the
accommodation of transient guests.
MURAL: A painting on the side of a building, wall, or structure; or a painting
on the ground or the ceiling of a building or structure. A mural that does not
function as a sign is not regulated by the zoning ordinance. Murals that
function as signs are regulated in the zoning ordinance as wall signs.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: Any building or structure lawfully established which:
a) does not comply with all the regulations of this title or any amendment
hereto governing bulk of the district in which such building or structure is
located; or b) is designed or intended for a nonconforming use.
NONCONFORMING RECORDED LOT: A lot of record which does not meet the dimensional
requirements of the particular district in which it is located solely because
of the enactment or amendment of this title after the lawful creation of the
lot of record or because of the acquisition of a portion of the lot by a
governmental agency for public purposes.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any use of land, buildings, or structures, lawful at the
time of the enactment of this title or any amendment thereto but which does not
comply with all the regulations of this title as amended governing use for the
zoning district in which such use is located.
NURSERY SCHOOL/CHILDCARE CENTER: Any building used routinely for the daytime
care and education of preschool age children and including all accessory
buildings and play areas, other than the child's own home or the homes of
relatives or guardians.
NURSING HOME: Any building used for the continuous care, on a commercial or
charitable basis, of persons who are physically incapable of caring for their
own personal needs.
PARCEL: A lot or tract of land.
PARKING FACILITY/LOT: A structure or an open space other than a street or alley
used for temporary parking of more than four (4) self-propelled vehicles and
available for public uses, whether free, for compensation, or as an
accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: A graded and surfaced area of not less than one hundred eighty
(180) square feet in area either enclosed or open for the parking of a motor
vehicle, having adequate ingress and egress to a public street or alley.
PERSON: Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other
organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, agent,
officer or volunteer.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land of
size sufficient to create its own environment, controlled by a single landowner
or by a group of landowners in common agreement as to control, to be developed
as a single entity, the environment of which is compatible with adjacent
parcels, and the intent of the zoning district or districts in which it is
located.
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT: Any installed or constructed facility for which the
responsibility of maintenance and ownership will be retained by the owner or a
private association.
PRIVATE STREET: Any road that is used for access and circulation and the
ownership and maintenance responsibility of which is borne by the owner or
homeowners' association.
PROFESSIONAL HOME OFFICES: Residences of doctors of medicine, practitioners,
dentists, clergymen, architects, landscape architects, professional engineers,
registered land surveyors, lawyers, artists, teachers, authors, musicians, or
other recognized professions where the office does not exceed one-half (1/2)
the area of only one floor of the residence and only one nonresident person is
employed.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for
track operation, but not including freight depots or stations, loading
platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
REAR YARD: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a
line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure.
This yard shall be opposite the front yard or one of the front yards on a
corner lot.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle or piece of equipment intended for recreational
use, including, but not limited to, airplanes, boats, floats, camping or travel
trailers, motor homes, detachable travel equipment of a type adaptable to light
duty trucks, boat trailers, racing vehicles, snowmobiles, and other equipment
or vehicles of a similar nature.
RETAIL: The sale of relatively small quantities of commodities and services
directly to customers.
SCREENING: A structure erected or vegetation planted for the purpose of
concealing from view the area behind it.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and a structure.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of stores planned and designed for the site on which
it is built, functioning as a unit, with off street parking provided on the
property as an integral part of the unit. (See definition of Planned Unit
Development.)
SIDE YARD: A yard extending from the street yard to the rear yard of the lot,
the width of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the side
lot line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal
street.
SIGN AREA: The gross surface area within a single continuous perimeter composed
of a single rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of characters, lettering,
illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures, together with any material, or
color forming an integral part of the display or to differentiate the sign from
the background to which it is placed. Structural supports bearing no sign copy
shall not be included in gross surface area. For computing the area of any sign
which consists of individual letters or separate graphic elements, the area
shall be deemed to be the area of the smallest rectangular figure which can
encompass all of the letters or elements.
SIGNS: Any words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems,
devices, designs, trade names, or trademarks by which anything is made known
and which are used to advertise or promote an individual, firm, association,
corporation, profession, business, commodity or product and which is visible
from any public street or highway.
STANDARD ARTERIAL HIGHWAY: Serves long trips with good mobility. Has
intraregional and intercommunity connections. Serves communities with over one
thousand (1,000) population. Is a generally continuous system in combination
with principal and primary arterials. Provides good level of service under
varying operating conditions.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no floor above it, then
the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF: A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of
which, on at least two (2) exterior walls, are not more than two feet (2')
above the floor of such story.
STREET: A public or private thoroughfare which may either provide the principal
means of pedestrian and/or vehicular access to abutting property or may provide
for the movement of pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic, or both. The following
street types are based on the functional classification for the village:
   A.   Principal Arterial: Any highway designated by the federal, state and/or
county governments for purposes of cross country traffic (i.e., U.S. Highway
20).
   B.   Minor Arterial: Streets used primarily to carry the heavier traffic
pattern providing continuity throughout the county (i.e., State Highway 78).
   C.   Local Street: Streets designed for local traffic use.
   D.   Cul-De-Sac Street: A minor street having one end open to traffic and
being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround.
STREET YARD: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the existing or proposed
street or highway line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of
the principal structure. Corner lots shall have two (2) such yards.
STRUCTURE: Any erection or construction, such as buildings, towers, masts,
poles, booms, signs, decorations, carports, machinery and equipment.
TERRACE: The portion of public right of way between the curb or edge of
pavement and the sidewalk. Also known as the boulevard strip or tree lawn.
TURNING LANES: An existing or proposed connecting roadway between two (2)
arterial highways or between an arterial highway and any other highway. Turning
lanes include grade separated interchange ramps.
USE: The "use" of a property is the purpose or activity for which the land or
building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied
or maintained, and shall include any manner of standards of this title.
USE, SPECIAL: A use, either public or private, which because of its unique
characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a
particular district or districts. After due consideration, in each case, of the
impact of such use upon neighboring land and of the public need for the
particular use at the particular location, such special use may or may not be
granted, subject to the terms of this title.
UTILITIES: Public and private facilities such as water wells, water and sewage
pumping stations, water storage tanks, power and communication transmission
lines, electrical power substations, static transformer stations, telephone and
telegraph exchanges, microwave radio relays, and gas regulation stations, but
not including sewage disposal plants, Municipal incinerators, warehouses,
shops, and storage yards.
VACATION RENTALS: Short term rentals of fully furnished residential
accommodations for a period of less than 30 days where guests can use the
kitchen, bedrooms, bathrooms and common areas as an alternative to traditional
hotel stays.
VARIANCE (Also Known As A VARIATION): A relaxation of the terms of this title
where such variances will not be contrary to the public interest and where,
owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the results of the actions
of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this title would result in
unnecessary and undue hardship.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a structure, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except for vegetation. The street and rear
yards extend the full width of the lot.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The Zoning Administrator appointed by the Village Board
and such deputies or assistants as have been or shall be duly appointed.
ZONING BOARD: The Village of Stockton Zoning Board of Appeals.
ZONING DISTRICT: An area or areas within the corporate limits for which the
regulations and requirements governing use, lot and bulk of buildings and
premises are uniform.
ZONING PERMIT: A permit stating that the uses and structures proposed for a
parcel are in conformity with the uses and structures permitted and all other
requirements under the chapter for the zone in which it is to be located. This
term is often used interchangeably with "building permit", but whereas a zoning
permit addresses only those things regulated by this title, "building permit"
is the preferred term to be used in the administration of the Building Code to
ensure that structures are built to accepted safety standards. (Ord., 10-14-
2008; amd. Ord. 663, 11-13-2018; Ord. 679, 12-10-2019; Ord. 759, 1-9-2024)
CHAPTER 20
VACATION RENTALS
SECTION:
11-20-1: Definition of Vacation Rental
11-20-2: License Required
11-20-3: Requirements To Obtain License
11-20-4: Owner Or Vacation Rental Manager To Be Present During Inspection
11-20-5: Property And Liability Insurance
11-20-6: Initial License And Annual License And Fees
11-20-7: Display And Form Of License
11-20-1: DEFINITION OF VACATION RENTAL:
Vacation rentals are short term rentals of fully furnished residential
accommodations for a period of less than 30 days where guests can use the
kitchen, bedrooms, bathrooms and common areas as an alternative to traditional
hotel stays. (Ord. 764, 2-13-2024)
11-20-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate VACATION RENTALS without the property owner first
having obtained a license from the village. A license may not be issued until
the owner has obtained a special use permit from the village and complied with
all other village requirements contained herein. (Ord. 764, 2-13-2024)
11-20-3: REQUIREMENTS TO OBTAIN LICENSE:
No license shall be issued until verification of the following with the
village:
   A.   A health inspection report from the Jo Daviess County Health Department
stating that the vacation rental complies with state and county public health
regulations.
   B.   An inspection report from an authorized Village of Stockton Official
stating that the vacation rental complies with the following requirements:
         Smoke Detectors/Carbon Monoxide Detectors.
   C.   Every vacation rental unit must have one (1) bathroom for every four
(4) guests.
   D.   Applicant must provide proof of being current in property taxes
   E.   Applicant must provide proof of being current in the payment of village
sewer, water and garbage fees.
   F.   Applicant must provide proof of being current in the payment of Hotel/
Motel Tax.
   G.   Applicant must sign up and stay current on BDD tax paid directly to the
village if the vacation rental is located within the BDD District.
   H.   Applicant or vacation rental manager must have a permanent residence
within twenty-five (25) miles of the Village of Stockton that is available by
phone 24 hours, seven days a week, during the Period of Operation
   I.   No structure regardless of size shall have more than two vacation
rentals contained within it.
   J.   Vacation rentals are only authorized by Special Use Permit in the
following zoning districts:
         R-l Residential District.
         R-2 Residential District.
         R-M Multi-Family Residential District.
         B-C Central Business District.
         A Agriculture District. (Ord. 764, 2-13-2024; amd. Ord. 765, 3-12-
2024)
11-20-4: OWNER OR VACATION RENTAL MANAGER TO BE PRESENT DURING INSPECTION:
No license shall be issued unless the owner or vacation rental manager is
present during the initial and annual license inspection by the authorized
Village of Stockton Official. (Ord. 764, 2-13-2024)
11-20-5: PROPERTY AND LIABILITY INSURANCE:
Prior to obtaining a vacation rental license, the owner shall provide the
village with proof of valid property insurance and liability insurance coverage
in an amount of not less than $500,000 per occurrence with respect to such
establishment and property. (Ord. 764, 2-13-2024)
11-20-6: INITIAL LICENSE AND ANNUAL LICENSE AND FEES:
   A.   Each applicant for a vacation rental license shall pay an initial
license fee of $ 150. Said fee shall be paid prior to the inspections being
made. Said fee shall be non-refundable, even if the license is not issued.
   B.   Prior to March 1 of each year, each vacation rental owner who wishes to
renew their license for the next fiscal year beginning May 1, shall pay an
annual license fee of $130 and provide proof of compliance with all provisions
of section
11-20-3. An annual license shall be issued upon payment of the license fee and
proof of compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 764, 2-13-2024)
11-20-7: DISPLAY AND FORM OF LICENSE:
The vacation rentals license shall be conspicuously displayed within the
establishment. The license shall be in such form and shall include such
information as may be prescribed from time to time by the village. (Ord. 764,
2-13-2024)
